Report No: AUS17767




Africa
AMLA Guiding Template
Full Document



June 26, 2017




LEGKL

AFRICA
Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.



All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
 African Mining Legislation Atlas



AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
        Full Document
         (Part A – E)
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               Introductory Note

 I.   What is the AMLA Guiding Template?

      The AMLA Guiding Template IS a mining law drafting and reference tool that provides guidance on the elements of a mining law covering
      all potential issues that could be covered in such mining law based on Africa’s present realities. It presents an enhanced starting point f or its
      users by providing a clear and practical foundation on which they can thoroughly consider topical issues supported by sample drafting
      language as they develop, modify or simply assess mining legislative frameworks that fit each country's unique context. Each topic is
      described with some indication of its elements and broadly associated issues, followed generally by two sample provisions, each of which is
      accompanied by an annotation explaining the context, issues, and useful features of the presented language. Most of the examples are drawn or
      inspired by current mining laws within Africa and where such examples do not exist are sourced from mining laws outside of Africa or drafted
      de novo. The Guiding Template aims to be responsive rather prescriptive, in order to provide a resource that is sensitive to the distinct
      character of each African country, its existing legal framework and the specific context in which each mining sector is situated. Consequently,
      it is crucial to read Section V below on How to Use the Guiding Template. The primary objective of the Guiding Template is informed and
      transparent legislative reform and completeness and adequacy of the law.

      The AMLA Guiding Template IS NOT a model mining law. A model mining law is a proposed set of legislative provisions addressing a
      specified and cross-referenced set of subjects pre-determined to be both desirable and adequate, and which states who seek uniformity may
      choose to adopt, in whole or in part. The objective of a model mining law would be to create identical or similar law among a group of
      sovereign states.

II.   What does the AMLA Guiding Template consist of?

      The Guiding Template consists of 212 topics that can be addressed in a mining law. The topics consist of matters commonly addressed in a
      mining law as well as matters that are the subject of current and salient discourse in the sector. The topics are divided into 5 parts (A through
      E) as shown in the table below.

      Part A: General Topics          Part B: Mineral Rights              Part C: Fiscal Terms    Part D: Environment        Part E: Local Development;
                                                                                                                             Labour; Health and Safety
      Preamble                        B-1. Prospecting                    State Equity            Environmental Laws         Local Employment/Training
      Table of Contents               B-2. Exploration                    Royalties               Impact Assessments         Local Goods and Services
      Definitions/Interpretations     B-3. Large Scale                    Income Tax              Archaeological Objects     Infrastructure


                                                                                                                                             4|Page
                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        Introductory Note

Title of the Law                 B-4. Small Scale; Artisanal          Withholding Taxes       Waste Management           Community Engagement
Scope of the Law                 B-5. Development Minerals            Customs Duties          Conservation               Applying Labour Laws
Repeal/Amendment/Savings         B-6.      [Processing;      Trade;   Property Tax            Accidents                  Specific Prohibitions
                                 Transport]
Reference to other Laws                                               VAT                     Remediation of Damage      Mine Workers Rights
Ownership of Resources                                                Tax Deductions          Reclamation                Occupational Health/Safety
Ownership of Geological Data                                          Capital Gains Tax       Enforcement/Compliance     Inspection of Mines
Prohibited Areas                                                      Windfall Profits        Wasteful Mining            On-Site Regulations
Research/Non-Commercial                                               Tax Exemptions          Land                       Health/Safety Accidents
Transparency/Confidentiality                                          Tax Holiday             Forestry/Timber            Insurance Coverage
Anti-Bribery/Corruption                                               Fiscal Stability        Water                      Housing/Living Standards
Use of Security Forces                                                Rents
Implementing Regulations                                              Bonuses
Regulating Bodies                                                     Other Fees
Cadastral System                                                      Other Fee Exemptions
License Procedure/Timeline                                            Foreign Exchange
Records and Reporting                                                 Transfer Pricing
Dispute Resolution                                                    Non-Fiscal Incentives
Expropriation
Force Majeure
Treatment of Other Minerals
General Offenses and Penalties

Topics
Each topic is approached in the same format: a brief introduction to the topic, including a definition and key big picture issues for
consideration; two conceptually distinct examples; and two accompanying annotations. In few cases, only one example is proffered, largely on
the basis of a common approach to the topic. The topic list of the Guiding Template is designed to be exhaustive and therefore cannot be
adopted blindly wholesale by any country. Rather it should, primarily serve as a checklist for issues that are applicable to the local context and
users must carry out the due diligence necessary to identify the topics that are responsive to the local context. Each of the 5 sub-parts of Part B
of the Guiding Template consists of a list of nearly identical topics that apply to the associated mineral right (e.g. eligibility provisions, rights
and obligations of the license holder, specific violations and penalties that attach to mineral right). It is noteworthy to mention that the
Development Minerals sections (B-5 and B-6) were developed based on field research that was presented at a symposium in October 2016 at
the Africa Union Commission (see Section VI on Who Developed the Guiding Template?).

                                                                                                                                         5|Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              Introductory Note

       Sample Provisions
       Generally, each topic has two distinct examples that are drawn from or inspired by current African mining laws as well as other country
       mining laws or drafted de novo. Examples are edited for clarity and utility, so as to present the reader with a provision that can be understood
       and replicated or easily tailored for the local country context. These examples are not proffered as the only possibilities to address any given
       topic, but are simply a small sample of some ways that legislative drafters have incorporated principles and contemporary issues into current
       legislation. This point cannot be over-emphasized – similar to each topic, it is crucial that each example is understood as an indicative
       provision and the necessary due diligence be carried out to confirm its applicability or its adaptability in order to achieve responsiveness to the
       local context.

       Annotations
       Each example is accompanied by an annotation, written by an expert member of the Guiding Template Review Committee. Unlike the
       introduction which discusses the topic broadly, the annotation focuses specifically on explaining its companion example, often highlighting
       the individual strengths and any potential trade-offs in the approach reflected in the example. The annotation is designed to support readers in
       assessing each example’s value, helping the reader to determine which factors may be the most salient for a country’s particular mining
       context.

III.   Why was the Guiding Template Developed?
       Proper management of natural resources remains one of the most critical development issues for the African continent and a crucial
       component of natural resource management is the legal framework under which the mining sector is regulated. The core of this framework is
       the legislation governing the mining sector (often referred to as the mining law or the mining code). Too often, inadequate preparation and
       obsolete approaches to reform which focus primarily on resources predominantly mined for global exports (PMGEs) has led to legal
       frameworks that are unresponsive to the realities that are unique to the local context, thus contributing to a climate in which African countries
       have been unable to reap the benefits of their resources. This concern has led to heightened government focus on devising more appropriate
       legislation for managing the mining sector. To support the development of context appropriate legislation, it becomes necessary to support the
       governments and citizens of mineral rich countries with tools to (a) debate and develop legislation as well as reframe the global discourse
       around their mineral resources and (b) through the passing of informed legislation, derived from broad citizen participation, create the right
       environment for the sustainable use of mineral resources for shared prosperity.

       Additionally, factors including the reframing of the discourse around natural resource exploitation in Africa by African governments and
       intergovernmental institutions such as the Africa Union, the trend towards transparency and the growing focus of natural resource investors on
       investing in countries with more stable, clearly defined legal frameworks, have led to increased numbers of African countries adopting new

                                                                                                                                              6|Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              Introductory Note

        mining laws since 2000. With more revisions and new enactments expected, particularly in light of the operationalization of continent wide
        harmonization initiatives such as the Africa Mining Vision, the need for guidelines to assist in addressing gaps in mining legislation continues
        to be a necessity for African governments seeking to strengthen laws governing their natural resources. The Guiding Template responds to this
        need.

IV.     How is the Guiding Template Different from Other Existing Tools for Africa’s Mining Sector?

        Foremost, the Guiding Template is distinct from the African Mining Legislative Framework of the AMLA Platform. The Legislative
        Framework provides user friendly access to all 53 existing mining codes of the African continent in an easily readable and searchable format
        with a feature that allows for the comparison of the provisions of the law on a country to country basis. Therefore, it presents the laws as they
        exist and can support the use of the Guiding Template by serving as a research resource for regional benchmarking exercises and knowledge
        sharing. The Legislative Framework also includes amendments to the mining codes, mining regulations, other related laws and regulations as
        well as a cross-linkage to resourcecontracts.org for access to publicly available mining contracts.

        Complementing the essential work of the African Mining Vision, its Country Mining Vision and other policy harmonization initiatives across
        the continent,1 the focus of the Guiding Template is fairly narrow in that it concentrates on providing a list from which a country can choose
        applicable topics based on an adopted set of policies, structural elements of a law as well as mechanics of how the provisions of the law are
        written. It is not a policy preparation tool but a law drafting tool.

        The African Mining Vision has already identified, increased intra-regional harmonization of laws, regulations and regimes as critical to
        strengthening governance within the mining sector across in Africa. The Guiding Template seeks to meet this challenge by concretizing a
        common template of legislative provisions that countries could adapt to achieve both national and regional objectives.

V.      How to Use the Guiding Template?

        Use of Experts




  1
      For example: the ECOWAS Harmonization of Guiding Principles and Polices in the Mining Sector; UEMOA Code Minier; and SADC Protocol on Mining.

                                                                                                                                             7|Page
                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       Introductory Note

The Guiding Template is a guidance tool. Consequently, it is important that a country intending to use the Guiding Template identify the
appropriate technical experts who can best employ the tool to achieve the best outcome. These technical experts should include but are not
limited to lawyers, technical sector experts, fiscal experts, environmental and social experts, and regional harmonization specialists.

Furthermore, the Guiding Template as an online tool, is a living document. It will be periodically updated to ensure responsiveness to realities
on the ground. Therefore, the use of experts ensures the best interaction with the most current version of the tool.

Essential Cross-Cutting Issues

While the Guiding Template aims to introduce each topic within an individualized, issue specific context, some crucial issues are cross-cutting
in their impact across several topics areas. As a result, it is strongly recommended that the following issues be considered for each topic within
the Guiding Template:

       Reference to other controlling pieces of national legislation and best practice regimes (other sector laws, e.g. environmental law, labor
        law, criminal law, forest law, land law, company law, customary law, health and safety standards).

       Reference to ratified multilateral conventions, executed bilateral treaties or other international best practice regimes (e.g. labor
        standards from the ILO; WTO; BIT; GATTS; EITI, Kimberly Process, RECs common mining instruments (SADC, ECOWAS,
        UEMOA etc.).

       The principle of periodic review: the mining law should consider providing for a process of updating and revision of the law at
        reasonable intervals to ensure that the primary legislation continues to be aligned with the country’s development goals.

       Fines for violations should be set at a level that is appropriately punitive for each country, acknowledging that, depending on currency
        valuation and other factors, this quantity may substantially differ from country to country. The same principle applies with any
        prescribed jail time.

       Consider ways of ensuring gender equity especially through the eligibility provisions for mineral rights, labor related provisions, and
        local content/development provisions.




                                                                                                                                      8|Page
                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      Introductory Note

      Ensure proper cross-referencing, as necessary within the law. The GT recommends, not only referencing the number for a cross
       referenced section but also the subject matter of such section. Such approach ensures that each section is clearly and precisely drafted
       to address a specific subject matter and eliminates sections that address multiple loosely related issues that are not easily captured in a
       single title (Christmas-tree provisions).

      Develop clearly defined terms and use such terms consistently throughout the law.

      Ensure proper numbering and consistent structure to all parts of the law.

      While the Guiding Template does not provide language for the dissemination of the law and related regulations, providing these
       documents to the wider public can help governments with the monitoring efforts. Therefore, making the law, its regulations and
       subsequent amendments and revisions available to the AMLA secretariat for online dissemination as well as providing hard copies to
       local governments and institutions is recommended.

Quirks of the Guiding Template

      Mineral Rights refer to any rights, licenses, and permits obtainable under the mining law and are used interchangeably.

      Prospecting refers to, what in some countries are also referred to as reconnaissance, which is the preliminary investigation into the
       existence of mineral deposits in an area, with little to no impact on the physical environment. Exploration refers to what in some
       countries are also referred to as prospecting, which is the more extensive investigation into the existence, quality and quantity of
       mineral deposits in an area and is the stage of activity that precedes the development of the mine and mining of the mineral deposits.
       The Guiding Template has adopted this approach to recommend the standardization of the stages of mining and related mineral rights
       across Africa.

      [Country] refers to instances when the language should incorporate the formal name of the country or its short forms, for example,
       “Republic of X? or “the Republic? or “X?.

      Annotations that state “drawn from? or “inspired by? a specific law simply means that elements of the language of the law wer e taken
       to draft the sample language to a large or small extent. It does not purport to carry the substantive meaning of the language in the
       existing law and may sometimes contrast with the language in the law.

                                                                                                                                      9|Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          Introductory Note


            In rare instances, The Guiding Template presents a singular sample provision such as the examples for on-site procedures requirement
             for discovery of minerals not under the license or table of contents as such topics do not prompt substantively distinguishable
             approaches to drafting.



VI.   Who developed the Guiding Template?

      The Guiding Template was created out of (a) series of desk research, design and coordination by the AMLA Team; (b) compilation of
      legislative provisions, language drafting and book sprint style review and revisions by the GTRC and the AMLA team; (c) field research from
      sector experts from across Africa who provided the knowledge base for the development minerals section of the Guiding Template in a
      symposium as Symposium Participants and (d) reviews and recommendations by Technical Reviewers. The Guiding Template is the product
      of the collaboration between the World Bank with funding from Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF), the Extractives
      Global Programmatic Support Trust Fund (EGPS), the African Legal Support Facility and the African Union Commission. The symposium on
      development minerals was held in October 2016 at the Africa Union Commission in Addis Ababa and was co-sponsored by the AMLA
      project, the ACP-EU Development Minerals Program and the Africa Union Commission. The research papers of the Symposium Participants
      will be published in a volume by the ACP-EU Development Minerals Program. All contributors made of the AMLA Team, The GTRC, the
      Symposium Participants and the Technical Reviewers are listed below.

      AMLA Team
      Nneoma Nwogu, AMLA Project Architect and Team Lead, World Bank
      John Williams, Senior Legal Consultant for the Guiding Template, Duncan & Allen,
      Beverley Mbu, AMLA Project Junior Legal Consultant for the Guiding Template, World Bank
      Alexandra Manea, AMLA Project Legal Consultant, World Bank
      Matteo Mazzoni, AMLA Project Legal Analyst, World Bank
      Nchimunya Ndulo, AMLA Team, African Legal Support Facility
      Abdoul Camara, AMLA Coordinator, African Legal Support Facility

      Guiding Template Review Committee
      The Guiding Template Review Committee is made of global experts with representation from across the mining sector as listed below:


                                                                                                                                    10 | P a g e
                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     Introductory Note


Nicola Woodroffe, Natural Resource Governance Institute (NRGI)
Sarah Orr, Latham & Watkins
Ben Lawless, Latham & Watkins
Scot Anderson, Hogan Lovells representing International Senior Lawyers Program (ISLP)
Charles Afeku, Ghana Minerals Commission
Leonardo Sempertegui, Sempertegui LLC representing the American Bar Association-UNDP International Legal Resource Center
Julio Guity, independent consultant representing the American Bar Association-UNDP International Legal Resource Center
Salli Swartz, Artus Wise LLC representing the American Bar Association-UNDP International Legal Resource Center
Nellie Mutemeri, University of Witwatersrand Department of Geology, South Africa
Hanri Mostert, University of Cape Town Faculty of Law, South Africa
Lisa Sachs, Columbia Center for Sustainable Investment (CCSI)
Perrine Toledano, Columbia Center for Sustainable Investment (CCSI)
Sophie Thomashausen, Columbia Center for Sustainable Investment (CCSI)

Development Minerals Symposium Participants
Symposium Participants are African sector experts in government, academia and private practice as listed below

Dr Daniel Franks, ACP-EU Development Minerals Programme
Charles Afeku, Minerals Commission, Ghana
Dr Mike Akaegbobi, University of Ibadan, Nigeria
Charles Akong, Africa Minerals Development Center, Ethiopia
Oladiran Ayodele, North West University, South Africa
Juanita Ceesay, Sciences Po, Paris/University of Sierra Leone
Dr Abdulrasaq Garba, Nigerian Geological Survey/Ministry of Solid Mineral Development, Nigeria
Amir Lebdioui, University of Cambridge, England
Pontsho Ledwaba, University of Witswatersrand, South Africa
Felix Lilakako, Juristes pour l’Environnement au Congo, DRC
Fiona Magona, MMAKS Advocates, Uganda
Tabitha Maro, ENS Africa, Tanzania
Jean Mballa Mballa, Centre Régional Africain pour le Développement Endogène et Communautaire, Cameroon

                                                                                                                           11 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              Introductory Note

       Salvador Mondlane, Eduardo Mondlane University, Mozambique
       Alexis Muhima, l’Observatoire de la Société Civile Congolaise pour les Minerais de Paix, DRC
       Nellie Mutemeri, University of Witswatersrand, South Africa
       Paskalia Neingo, University of Witswatersrand, South Africa
       Victor Ojakorotu, North West University, South Africa
       Alhassan Atta-Quayson, University of Winneba, Ghana
       Samuel Tetsopgang, University of Bamenda, Cameroon
       Florian Wassenberg, GIZ-BGR, Germany

       Technical Reviewers

       Lex Africa-Werksmans Attorneys
       International Bar Association, Mining Law Committee
       Nightingale Rukuba-Ngaiza, Senior Counsel, Legal Vice President, The World Bank
       Christopher Bryan Land, Lead Extractives Specialist, Energy and Extractives Global Practice, The World Bank
       Boubacar Bocoum, Lead Mining Specialist, Energy and Extractives Global Practice, The World Bank

VII.   Disclaimer

       The Guiding Template is a tool that legislative drafters may utilise in developing legislation, or may serve as an educational device for
       parliamentarians, mining sector regulatory bodies, and civil society to better understand some of the possible legal arrangements or
       architecture for the mining sector. Using these materials to develop an actual mining law without the necessary level of skill and experience,
       deep knowledge of the sector and overall legal architecture of the country concerned as well as its international obligations, would create very
       serious risks for which the contributors to this Guiding Template are not liable.

       Users of this Guiding Template should consult with mining, taxation, public revenue management, environmental, land and other relevant
       expert lawyers in the applicable country to advise on the appropriateness of suggested provisions. Any suggested provision must be adapted to
       the specific facts and circumstances of the particular country and its mining sector. In the cases where the country chooses to address a specific
       topic by drafting its own provision (as provided for in the Template), such country should ensure that its own provisions are well harmonized
       with the rest of the Guiding Template suggested provisions that are incorporated into its legislation.

                                                                                                                                            12 | P a g e
                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     Introductory Note


While use of the Template is encouraged for the purpose of achieving a clear legal framework for the mining sector, nothing in the Template is
sanctioned by the authors or the sponsors of this tool. No party associated with the development of this Guiding Template shall be liable for
losses or damages that may result from the use of this document or any portion or variation thereof, or any other materials presented in
conjunction with the Guiding Template.




                                                                                                                                 13 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        PART A: General Topics
                                                                      1. Preamble
A Preamble or, in francophone countries, Exposition of Motives provides a summary of the primary legislative intent underlying the new law that
is useful in interpreting its provisions. The preamble or exposition of motives may or may not be part of the law. In the latter case, it is approved
together with the new law and both are printed together in the Official Journal. The length may vary considerably from a very succinct sentence or
paragraph immediately following the title of the new act to a very detailed separate exposition of motives espousing the intent behind each chapter
or provision of the act. Additionally, a preamble may reference the country’s constitution, treaties, or other significant le gal resources from which
it draws authority (such as jurisdictional sources in federal states). The preamble can also reference a national policy or charter that has guided the
design of the mining law.

Alternatively, a mining law may contain a section on fundamental principles and rules of interpretation of the law. If it contains both, care must be
taken to ensure consistency and avoid duplicative pronouncements in different languages that may inadvertently create ambiguity and provoke
litigation.

1. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Uganda’s mining act (2003) and Mozambique’s mining act (2014),
The purpose of this Act is to:                                                the provisions convey in very succinct language that the act should be read as
                                                                              giving effect to the provisions of the Constitution of the country in effect at the
(a) repeal and replace the [Old Mining Law], with a new legislation on        time of enactment and confirms that ownership and control of all minerals in the
mining and mineral development, which conforms, and otherwise gives effect,   country are vested in the state and therefore the procedure for obtaining mineral
to the relevant provisions of the Constitution;                               rights from the state is as provided in the mining act (paragraphs (a), (b), and
(b) vest the ownership and control of all minerals in [Country Name] in the   (c)). It also provides insight into the legislative intent for making the law that is
State;                                                                        relevant to the interpretation of the law (paragraphs (d) and (e)). While
(c) provide for the acquisition of mineral rights;                            paragraph (e) is a catch all phrase which may be deemed overbroad and imbued
(d) adapt the mining law to the country’s present economic situation and to   with discretion, paragraph (d) is more clearly articulated with parameters to the
the recent developments in the mining sector, with a view to ensure           legislative intent.
competitiveness, transparency, protection of rights, and definition of the
obligations of the mining holders, as well as to safeguard the national
interest; and
(e) provide for other related matters.

1. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                     14 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        PART A: General Topics
RECOGNIZING that minerals are non-renewable natural resources;                Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this preamble vests the
ACKNOWLEDGING that [Country]’s mineral resources belong to the nation         ownership of the minerals in the nation while the state is only a custodian. It
and that the State is the custodian thereof;                                  also refers to environmental and social goals common to most mining countries,
AFFIRMING the State’s obligation to protect the environment for the benefit   other social goals that are specific to the country, and goals considered
of present and future generations, to ensure ecologically sustainable         important by the mining industry. The law also contains a chapter on
development of mineral resources and to promote economic and social           fundamental principles which states with greater specificity the key basic
development;                                                                  concepts underlying the legislation.
RECOGNISING the need to promote local and rural development and the
social upliftment of communities affected by mining;                          This preamble provides a more extensive approach with respect to legislative
REAFFIRMING the State’s commitment to reform to bring about equitable         intent, going beyond the traditional objectives of mining, such as clarity of
access to [Country]’s mineral resources;                                      ownership, processing and investment attractiveness objectives, to include
BEING COMMITTED to eradicating all forms of discriminatory practices in       indication of a commitment to a regional mining framework, general
the mineral industries;                                                       environmental and social goals as well as societal aspirations that are specific to
CONSIDERING the State’s obligation under the Constitution to take             the country.
legislative and other measures to redress the results of past racial
discrimination;
CONSIDERING the State’s commitment to take legislative and other
measures to implement the [Africa Mining Vision];
REAFFIRMING the State’s commitment to guaranteeing security of tenure in
respect of prospecting and mining operations; and
EMPHASISING the need to create an internationally competitive and efficient
administrative and regulatory regime;
BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the [Legislative Authority], as follows:

                                                                 2. Table of Contents

A detailed table of contents, at the beginning or the end of the law, enables readers to quickly identify where in the law to find provisions on
specific matters of interest, and is highly valued. It can also be a useful drafting tool by serving as an organizational chart for the law.
Alternatively, some laws omit a table of contents but this is not advisable especially where the law contains many sections and runs into several
pages.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                   15 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART A: General Topics
2. Example:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_] Arrangement of Act                                                 Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this example is common in
CHAPTER 1:DEFINITIONS                                                          many mining laws and provides at the beginning of the law a serial arrangement
1. Definitions                                                                 of the sections of the mining law, divided into various parts and sub-parts
CHAPTER 2:FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES                                               according to subject matter. While some laws such as is shown in this example
2. Objects of Act                                                              number each provision progressively irrespective of what chapter or section the
3. Custodianship of nation's mineral resources                                 provisions fall under, others restart the numbering of the provisions that fall
4. Interpretation of Act                                                       under distinct parts of the law.
5. Legal nature of Minerals Rights, and rights of holders thereof
6. Principles of administrative justice
CHAPTER 3:ADMINISTRATION
7. Division of Republic, territorial waters, continental shelf and exclusive
economic zone into regions
8. Designation and functions of officer
CHAPTER 4:MINERAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION
9. Order of processing of applications
10. Consultation with interested and affected parties
11. Transferability and encumbrance of Mineral Rights (…)

                                                           3. Definitions/Interpretations
A key to clear and consistent drafting is the precise definition of terms and the consistent use of those defined terms. Most good mining laws
contain in the initial or final chapter, extensive provisions setting out the precise definitions of important words or terms (which are usually
capitalized), used in the law and the principles applicable in interpretation of the provisions of the law. Defined terms are particularly important
where terms which might be employed in other relevant legislation may be used in the mining law but with a different meaning. For clarity, it is
critical that words or terms, once capitalized and defined, be used consistently in their capitalized form throughout the law.

The definitions and interpretation chapter is normally the last part to be drafted as it seeks to explain and provide context for those words or terms
as used in the law. Apart from the defined words and terms, the definitions and interpretation section may contain language that serve as guides to
interpreting the mining law, especially where a country has no applicable interpretation laws or seeks to apply different rules of interpretation to
the mining law.

3. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                16 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics

Article [_] Definitions                                                         This suggested examples of a defined word/term demonstrate that defined words
(…)                                                                             or terms should seek to be as precise as possible and should not use the definite
“Development Minerals? means a subset of Minerals mined, beneficiated and       word/term itself in the definition. Defined terms can be numbered but should
consumed principally in domestic and regional markets as identified in the      definitely be alphabetically categorized.
[Directive of the African Union Commission].
(…)
“"Mineral" means any substance, whether in solid, liquid o r gaseous form,
occurring naturally in or on the earth, formed by or subject to a geological
process, but excluding petroleum as defined in the [Petroleum Act], and
water as defined in the [Water Act].
(…)

3. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), Namibia’s mining act (1992),
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—                         Equatorial Guinea’s mining law (2006), South Africa’s mining act (2002), this
                                                                                is an example of an Interpretations section of the law which means that a word
(a) If for purposes of any provision of this Act any dispute arises as to the   or term used in the law will have the meaning provided in the definitions unless
     question                                                                   the context in which the word or term is used requires that a different meaning
whether any mineral falls within any group of minerals, the Minister shall      is assumed. E.g. “mine? may be construed as a verb or noun depending on the
     have the                                                                   context. Usually, it is clearer to indicate when the word or term has a defined
power to determine in which group of minerals such mineral shall fall for       meaning by capitalizing the word or term.
     such
purposes, and any such determination shall be final.                            Paragraph (2) is also an interpretation clause that can provide further
                                                                                clarification on who may serve as an arbiter of right meaning should a dispute
(b) A word or term that is not defined in this [Law][Act][Code] and which is    arise. Minerals are categorized into various groups according to definitions in
a word or term that is common in the international mining industry shall have   the mining law. Defined categories include precious minerals, precious metals,
the meaning that is attributed to it by the industry.                           industrial minerals, construction materials, etc. This    example provides an
                                                                                arbiter in case a dispute arises regarding the categorization of a mineral and
(c) When interpreting a provision of this Act, any reasonable interpretation    consequently proposes to resolve the issue without requiring an amendment of
    which is                                                                    the law.
consistent with the objects of this Act must be preferred over any other
    interpretation                                                              Paragraph (3) recognizes mining as an international activity and provides
which is inconsistent with such objects.                                        international industry norms as a general source than can serve as the arbiter for
                                                                                undefined terms and paragraph (4) seeks to promote interpretation of the law in

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                    17 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART A: General Topics
                                                                           accordance with the objects of the law. Thus, any interpretation of the mining
                                                                           law which is inconsistent with the objects (preamble or purpose in some laws)
                                                                           of the law is to be disregarded in favour of interpretations that are in accord with
                                                                           its objects.

                                                                4. Title of the Law
In civil law jurisdictions, the mining law is typically entitled the “Mining Code? and is generally a comprehensive document dealing with
substantive and procedural law as well as sanctions for possible offences. It is expected to be continuously updated, without any change in the title,
except for the year. Titles of laws in Common Law jurisdictions are based on the particular issues being addressed by the legislature at each point
in time and therefore the laws dealing with various subjects may be found in separate enactments, unless or until they are codified or consolidated
in one enactment, e.g. a mining act, mines act, minerals act, minerals and mining act, etc. Ideally, the title of the law should be simple and clearly
signify that it is the primary mining law of the country.

4. Example 1:                                                              Annotation

The Mining Act, 2010                                                       Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this title is clear and
                                                                           straightforward.

4. Example 2:                                                              Annotation

The Mining and Minerals Act, 2006                                          Drawn from Ghana’s mining act (2006), this example seeks to cover the gamut
                                                                           of issues relating to minerals (i.e. classification, land, geology, ownership,
                                                                           processing, sale, etc.) and their development (exploration, exploitation, etc.) in a
                                                                           succinct manner.

                                                               5. Scope of the Law

Scope of law provisions generally specify the types of minerals over which the present mining law is applicable, as well as what activities are
allowed in relation to the minerals, and how the activities are to be conducted. Typically, such provisions also clarify whether oil and gas deposits
are covered or excluded from the application of the law. Scope provisions are more common in Francophone jurisdictions than Anglophone
jurisdictions in Africa.
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                 18 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics

5. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Inspired by language from DRC’s mining code (2002), this provision
This [Law][Act][Code] shall apply to all activities or transactions related to   categorically states the subject matter and range of activities to which the code
the prospecting, exploration, exploitation, research, processing,                applies as well as the areas not covered by the code.
transportation and trading of mineral substances; but shall not apply to
matters related to oil and gas water, and radioactive materials.

5. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Eritrea’s mining code (1995) and Burkina Faso’s mining code
(1) This [Law][Act][Code] shall apply to and govern the conduct of all           (2003), this provision defines the parameters of the mining law’s applicability
mining operations and related activities within the territory of [Country].      and then limits the application of the mining law in relation to typical issues
                                                                                 which intersect with mining and are covered by other primary laws on
(2) The provisions of this [Law][Act][Code] shall apply without prejudice to     environment, tax, forests, water, etc. as they are more comprehensively dealt
the [Water Resources Act, Forest Act, Tax Code, Customs Code, Investment         with in those laws.
Code, Labour Code, etc.]

                                         6. Repeal/Amendment of Prior Law & Savings Provisions

This topic may be addressed in the preliminary sections or the concluding sections of the law. Either way, it is critical that a new law is clear on
the status of its provisions in relation to the preceding law and the impact of the current law on any obligations undertaken or rights obtained under
the preceding law. Any guarantee of stability of provisions included in the prior law must be taken into account in addressing this topic.

When a new law only modifies a few provisions of an existing mining law, care must be taken to preserve the internal consistency of the law as
modified, including the numbering of articles. The mining law as modified should be published in the Official Journal. And when a new law
modifies an existing mining law extensively, it is advisable to incorporate both the unchanged provisions and the new provisions in the new law so
that a single, internally cohesive text with consistently numbered articles replaces the prior law in its entirety, in order to facilitate understanding
of the law as modified.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                    19 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics
6. Example 1:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision provides for the
(1) The following enactments are repealed- (a) [Old Mining Law]; and (b)            repeal of the old mining law and some related enactments, but retains in force,
[Specified Related Enactments to Old Mining Law].                                   regulations made and other actions executed under the repealed laws provided
                                                                                    they are not inconsistent with the new law. This is typically the case until new
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments referred to in subsection (1),     regulations are made to replace existing ones in order not to create a vacuum in
any regulations made under the repealed enactments shall in so far as they          administration of the law and ensure continuity.
are consistent with this [Law][Act][Code] continue in force as if they were
regulations made under this [Law][Act][Code] until such time as they are            Enactments related to the previous law which are not repealed, are preserved to
revoked by the [Regulating Authority].                                              the extent that they are consistent with the new law. Also typically, transitional
                                                                                    provisions preserve the rights of existing mineral rights holders under the
(3) Subject to subsections (4) of this Article, notwithstanding the repeal of the   repealed law until the expiry of the rights or until they opt for similar rights
enactments referred to in subsection (1), any Mineral Right granted under           under the new law. Such conversion applications are to be treated as priority
any of those enactments and subsisting immediately before the                       cases.
commencement of this [Law][Act][Code] shall continue in force until
expiration by passage of time.

(4) No Mineral Right granted prior to this [Law][Act][Code] shall be
extended or renewed but where the prior granted Mineral Right provided a
right to apply for a renewal or extension of the right, the holder of that
Mineral Right may apply, subject to this [Law][Act][Code], for a similar type
of license as provided for under this [Law][Act][Code] on a priority basis.

(5) Any act done, executed or issued under the repealed Law and in force and
operative before the commencement of this [Law][Act][Code] shall, so far as
it could have been done, executed or issued under this [Law][Act][Code]
have effect as if done, executed or issued under this [Law][Act][Code].

(6) Any fund kept under the repealed Law shall be deemed to be part of a fund
kept under the corresponding provision of this [Code][Act][Law].

6. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision repeals the old law in
(1) The [Old Mining Law] and all the amendments thereto are hereby                  totality. However, to ensure continuity it also requires that a state-designated

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                        20 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
repealed, and there is hereby enacted in lieu thereof, a [New Mining Law].        entity conduct a review of previous mineral rights granted to bring them in
                                                                                  conformity with the new law. This is justified under the review clause in
(2) Any regulations made under such repealed or amended laws shall apply          existing mining agreements, or under theories of law that defend the right of the
only until such a time and to such extent as they are revoked by the              State to modify the legal environment of contracts if required for the public
[Regulating Authority].                                                           interest. When using a provision such as this, it is important to ensure that, if
                                                                                  needed, the regulations are updated very quickly following the enactment of the
(3) Upon the passage of this [Law][Act][Code] all existing agreements             new law. The legal regime is clearer when the new law states the legal status of
regarding Mineral Rights and related activities pursuant to the periodic          regulations made under the repealed mining.
review provisions of said agreements shall be subject to review by the
[Relevant Authority] within a period of twelve (12) months so as to bring said
agreements in compliance with the provisions of this [Law][Act][Code].

                                                              7. Reference to other Laws
This topic is often utilized to bring together all other laws that are implicated by the current law even when they are individually referred to, as
applicable, in different sections of the law. This is important because it quickly alerts the law users to other laws that should be read in conjunction
with the mining law. Examples of possible applicable laws to be referenced include company law, tax law, investment law, environmental law,
labour law, land law and water law. Note that there are jurisdictions where court decisions may have binding effect similar to that of a legislative
provision. However, such decisions are usually interpretations of existing law.

7. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This example demonstrates a simple and straightforward identification of other
Unless otherwise specified in the applicable provision of this                   relevant laws. It also allows for thoroughness and clarity on what other laws are
[Law][Act][Code], this [Law][Act][Code] shall be read and applied in             applicable to mining companies and any persons that are subject to the mining
conjunction with the following laws:                                             law. Investors find such references to relevant laws useful.
[Investment Law];
[Company Law];
[Regional Directive];
[Environmental Law];
[Land Use Law];

7. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      When this language is added to example 1, it seeks to enforce a stricter

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                     21 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
Without limitations upon [the preceding section] and unless specified in the   compliance environment that could result in the multiplication of violations
applicable provision of this [Law][Act][Code], all laws or provisions of       under distinct laws. This language may be seen as good practice for promoting
laws referred to in this [Law][Act][Code], shall constitute an integral part   good conduct in the environment, labour, health and safety sectors as well as dis-
of this [Law][Act][Code] and any violations of such laws or provisions of      incentivizing negligent, fraudulent or corrupt practices in the mining sector.
laws shall be independently deemed a violation of this [Law][Act][Code].

                                                        8. Ownership of Mineral Resources

A mining law typically states at the outset (a) whether ownership of mineral resources (i.e. the mineral estate) is separate and distinct from
ownership of land (i.e. the surface estate), and (b) who owns the mineral estate. The owner of the mineral resources is the entity, person or
institution that has the authority to explore for and exploit those resources, or to grant to others the rights to do so. The mining law must be
consistent with the Constitution as to ownership of the mineral resources.

In most cases, the Constitution states who owns the mineral resources. Some Constitutions may make a further distinction between different types
of minerals. In such cases, ownership of minerals such as platinum, gold, diamonds, copper, etc. is separate from ownership of the land and is
typically vested in the State or Republic or a province of the State, or in the President or the Government in trust for or on behalf of the people. By
contrast, ownership of the development minerals may or may not be separate from ownership of the land on which they are located. In the latter
case, the landowner may have the right to dispose of such minerals located on or under the land. However, there are cases in which all minerals
including development minerals such as clay, sand, limestone, etc., may be deemed vested in the State on behalf of the people, especially if such
minerals are discovered in large quantities and are expected to be exploited on a commercial basis.

In cases where the Constitution is silent as to the ownership of the mineral resources, the mining law can establish who owns the minerals if the
Constitution recognizes or contemplates that matter as within the realm of legislative authority.

In some Common Law jurisdictions, the Constitution is silent as to the ownership of mineral resources. By tradition and jurisprudence in some
such jurisdictions, the landowner is the owner of all mineral resources located on, in or under the land. This is however rare and more so non-
existent in Africa.

Where applicable, tribal or customary law may include rules as to the ownership of mineral resources. In such cases, an agreement or consensus
with the tribal or customary authorities may need to be reached before modifying such rules in the mining law (e.g., Botswana, South Australia), in
order to avoid subsequent conflict.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                   22 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
If the Constitutional provisions on mineral ownership are not compatible with national goals of mineral resource development, it may be necessary
to amend the Constitution prior to passing a mining law which may be inconsistent with the Constitution.

Some ownership provisions further obligate the President, Government or Minister, as actors of the State, to ensure that the minerals are developed
in a sustainable manner and in the public interest.

8. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Botswana’s mining act (1999), this provision vests ownership of
Ownership of minerals and acquisition of mineral rights.                         minerals in the Republic and mandates the Minister to act in the public interest in
(1) Subject to the provision of the mining rights in [Tribal Territories Act],   the management of the minerals. An exception is however made for tribal
all rights of ownership in minerals are vested in the [Country] and the          mineral rights which are guaranteed under a separate enactment as well as under
[Regulating Authority] shall ensure, in the public interest, that the mineral    a provision of the mining act (section 5(2)), which recognizes the right of tribes
resources of the [Country] are investigated and exploited in the most            under customary law to take minerals from their land.
efficient, beneficial and timely manner.

(2) Nothing in this [Act][Code][Law] shall prevent a member of any tribe
from taking, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be
prescribed, minerals from any land from which it has been the custom of
members of that tribe to take minerals and to the extent that this is
permissible under the customary law of that tribe.

8. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Namibia’s mining law (1992), this provisions vests ownership of all
Subject to any right conferred under any provision of this                       minerals in the State as custodian on behalf of the people of the country.
[Act][Law][Code], any right in relation to the reconnaissance or
prospecting for, and the mining and sale or disposal of, and the exercise of
control over, any mineral or group of minerals vests, notwithstanding any
right of ownership of any person in relation to any land in, on or under
which any such mineral or group of minerals is found, in the State as
custodian on behalf of the people of [Country].

                                                           9. Ownership of Geological Data

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      23 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
Ownership of minerals is deemed to be distinct from ownership of mineral geological information. While mining laws generally allow mining
licence holders to collect geological data under the terms of their license, they generally do not explicitly detail who owns the generated geological
data. Liberia specifies that when the Minister of Mines authorizes a scientific or geological investigation, all ensuing data will be provided to the
Ministry who will keep the data confidential for up to 3 years at the request of the entity who conducted the research. Congo-Brazzaville also
specifically obliges exploration license holders to turn over all geological data to the State upon the termination of the license. While these
instances can be deemed to infer government ownership of the data, it is not clear. Generally, the discussion of geological data revolves around
the obligation of licence holders to maintain geological data records (Namibia, Sierra Leone, Ghana, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Rwanda, Botswana, and
Nigeria), the right to obtain data from government agencies (Mozambique, Tanzania) and in some cases the reciprocal responsibility of licence
holders to provide geological data to government entities (Ghana). To promote clarity in the law, it is helpful for the mining law to explicitly
address the ownership of geological data collected by companies and mineral rights holders given that it is valued and monetizable information.
Some laws (petroleum or mining) provide for government ownership of geological data collected by companies but may include rights for
companies to use the data in relation to a specific project.

9. Example:                                                                        Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        This suggested example vests ownership of geological data in the State and
Subject to any right conferred under any provision of this [Act][Law][Code]:       provides for procedures that support ownership of the data by the State,
                                                                                   including clear requirements on data transfer to the State. The example also
(1) All geological data and its supports belongs to the [State]. The mining        applies strict confidentiality to geological data, only available on a need to
rights holder shall submit, every year during the first 90 days of the year, all   know basis for advisers of the State, Mineral Right holders and their related
data generated during its (exploration/exploitation) activity and the required     third parties. The issue of level of confidentially applicable to geological data
supports (stones, samples, etc.).                                                  continues to be a debated area and each locality may need to grapple with the
                                                                                   issue in the wider context of transparency and its relationship to marketable
(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall issue regulations specifying the format of    information.
the information delivered. In any case, such information shall be delivered in
technological support and in a format internationally accepted by the mining
industry.

(3) Geological information shall remain confidential. Neither the [State] nor
the mining rights holder shall share this information with third parties, except
when they require technical advice. In such case, the third party shall commit
to keep the confidentiality.

(4) The mining rights holder shall take appropriate legal, technical and
security measures to prevent its directors, agents and employees to share the

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      24 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART A: General Topics
information with third parties.

(5) At the issuance of the mining right, the [State] shall provide the mining
rights holder all the geological data available referred to the area of the
mining right. The mining rights holder may use such information as well as
any other information generated during the (exploration/exploitation) phase.


                                                                  10. Prohibited Areas

Prohibited Areas or Protected Zones refers to provisions that prohibit exploration and/or mining activities in certain areas or outline special
procedures that apply to certain areas. Often, these provisions safeguard environmentally, culturally or historically significant sites, particular
buildings, burial sites, coastal areas, flora, fauna, or other nature reserves. The mining law should either specify those areas or state how such areas
are determined and notified to interested parties. For example, some mining laws specify that mineral development activities are prohibited within
a certain distance from buildings, cemeteries, railroad tracks, airports, roads, power stations, military facilities or restricted zones, national parks or
natural reserves, and certain other sites. Some mining laws provide for such prohibited areas to be specified by an executive or regulatory
authority. Since prohibited areas may be designated in the future, the question of whether and how existing operations in areas so designated will
be grandfathered or compensated should be addressed in the law.

This could be included as a separate provision of the mining law and titled “decision to open an area for mining activities? or “designation of
mining areas?. The provisions under this title should require that a decision to open an area up for mining related activity should be preceded by an
analysis conducted by the government of the social, environmental, and economic costs and benefits of mining projects. These assessments are
typically known as Strategic Impact Assessments and provide for public consultation to ensure that potentially affected communities are involved
in the process for determining mining areas.

It is important that provisions also clearly address whether the prohibition extends to reference exploration as well as mining activities in the
designated area. Lastly, to prevent potential disputes, provisions should also highlight where prohibitions exist under other laws that specify
prohibited areas, if they exist and ensure consistency with such laws. relevant legislation.

10. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (1999), this provision contains specific
(1) (Subject to possible special circumstances) no prospecting or mining        rules designating prohibited areas that require the consent of specified authorities
work may, be conducted within 80m of:                                           before mineral exploration or exploitation activities may take place there. The
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      25 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART A: General Topics
                                                                                    Code also authorizes the regulating entity responsible for mines to designate
(a) walled properties, or properties enclosed in a similar manner or by any         additional protected areas, after an investigation, where minerals exploration and
demarcation which is in common use in the region concerned, any village,            mining may be subjected to certain conditions. Article 106 provides for the
collection of dwellings, water sources, religious buildings, burial sites and       indemnification of miners whose rights are impaired by such designations.
places considered sacred or forbidden, without the prior written consent
from the owner or the authorities for the Provinces concerned, as the case          Finally, the Code assumes that the environmental legislation makes certain
may be;                                                                             protected areas off limits to mining; and authorizes the creation of buffer zones
                                                                                    around such areas in environmental regulations for the mining sector, subject to
(b) on either side of transportation routes, watercourses, and generally            prior advice of the regulating entity.
around any work sites which are beneficial to the public at large including
archaeological sites, cultural sites, listed cultural and tourist sites and works
of art, without authorisation from the [regulatory authority] after the
relevant authorities have given their approval.

Article [_]
(1) Additional protected areas may be declared, by order of [the regulatory
authority], to protect buildings and towns, water sources, transportation
routes, works of art and work sites which are beneficial to the public at
large, at any point where it may be deemed necessary in the general interest,
at the request of interested parties and after an investigation has been
carried out. Within these areas, prospecting and mining may be subject to
certain conditions.

(2) Mining licence holders who can prove loss with regard to their
prospecting or operating rights being reduced due to an additional
protection area being declared, have the right to compensation, and the
value of said compensation shall be the fair value of the rights which were
lost. The onus of proving the loss and the value of such loss lies with the
holder. Compensation shall be payable by the [the regulatory authority],
within six (6) months of a decision in favour of the holder.

Article [_]
In the event that the regulations do not adequately provide for protected
areas or sensitive areas, the demarcation of additional safety areas to be
added shall be set by sectoral regulations on environmental protection, in
accordance with the opinion of [the regulatory authority].

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                        26 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
10. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_] Restrictions on exercise of rights by holders of mineral licences     Drawn from Namibia’s mining law (1992), this language is protective of the
(1) The holder of a mineral licence shall not exercise any rights conferred       typical public places such as roads, railways, ports, aerodromes, cemeteries,
upon such holder by this [Act][Code][Law] or under any terms and                  townships, water bodies, etc. It does not specifically refer to national parks or
conditions of such mineral licence:                                               nature reserves as off limits to mining, but it includes, less typically, land which
                                                                                  is being cultivated or used as a garden, orchard, vineyard, nursery or plantation
(a) in, on or under any private land until such time as such holder-              and land under a petroleum exploration or production. Rights are also restricted
 (i) has entered into an agreement in writing with the owner of such land         on private lands unless the landowner agrees in writing that compensation and
containing terms and conditions relating to the payment of compensation, or       other terms have been satisfied or waived. In contrast, other mining laws
the owner of such land has in writing waived any right to such compensation       authorize entry onto private lands but subject to negotiation and payment of
and has submitted a copy of such agreement or waiver to the [Regulating           compensation to the landowner.
Authority]; or
 (ii) has been granted an ancillary right as provided in [relevant section] to
exercise such rights on such land;

(b) in, on or under any-
 (i) town or village;
 (ii) land comprising a proclaimed road, including such parts adjoining
such road as may in terms of any law governing such road be regarded as
the road reserve, aerodrome, harbour, railway or cemetery; or
 (iii) land used or reserved for any governmental or public purpose,  and
otherwise in conflict with any law, if any, in terms of which such town,
village, road, aerodrome, harbour, railway, cemetery or land has been
established, erected, constructed or is otherwise regulated, without the prior
permission of the [Regulating Authority] granted, upon an application to the
[Regulating Authority] in such form as may be determined in writing by the
[Regulating Authority], by notice in writing and subject to such conditions
as may be specified in such notice;

(c) in, on or under any land in respect of which no person other than the
holder of a reconnaissance licence is, by virtue of a notice issued in terms of
[relevant section] entitled to carry on any prospecting operations or mining
operations;

(d) in, on or under any private or State land-
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                        27 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics
  (i) used as a garden, orchard, vineyard, nursery, plantation or which is
otherwise under cultivation;
  (ii) within a horizontal distance of [100] meters of any spring, well,
borehole, reservoir, dam, dipping-tank, waterworks, perennial stream or
pan, artificially constructed watercourse, kraal, building or any structure of
whatever nature;
  (iii) within a horizontal distance of 300 meters from any point on the
nearest boundary of any land, as defined in [Relevant Related Legislation] if
such land has been surveyed for the purpose of inclusion in a township as
defined in that section; or
  (iv) on which accessory works were erected or constructed under this Act
and which existed at the time of the issue of the mineral licence in question,
without the prior permission in writing of the owner of such land, and, in the
case of land referred to in subparagraph (iv), of the holder of a mineral
licence who has erected or constructed such accessory works on which it is
proposed to exercise such right;

(e) in, on or under any land subject to a production licence, as defined in
[relevant section] of the [Petroleum Legislation], which existed at the time
of the issue of the licence in question, without the prior permission in writing
of the holder of the production licence concerned; and

(f) which in any way will interfere with fishing or marine navigation, without
prior permission of the [Regulating Authority] granted, upon an application
to the [Regulating Authority] in such form as may be determined in writing
by the [Regulating Authority], by notice in writing and subject to such
conditions as may be specified in such notice.

                                                11. Resource Research/Non-Commercial Activities
A mining law, due to public interest or other reason, may allow an individual, a university, or a research institute to study the geological structure
and mineral resources of a defined area as long as no deposits are used for financial gain. Research/non-commercial activities typically are not
treated as a separate form of license, but may require authorization from the regulating body or government official who over sees the country’s
mining sector. If not provided elsewhere in the national legislation, the responsibility for or the creation of a government agency or department for
collection and management of geological data should be included.
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                        28 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics

It is desirable to provide in the mining law terms for non-commercial geological and related research activities by the national geological service
or department, domestic and foreign universities and/or technical schools, often in collaboration with bilateral, regional or international
institutions, for the purposes of increasing knowledge of and data on the country’s geology, seismology, hydrology, etc. The issues to be
addressed in this regard include:

    ?    Establishing the authority to reserve or assign areas for such purposes;
    ?    The procedures for reserving areas for such purposes;
    ?    The terms and conditions for maintaining such reserves or assignments and for their eventual release; and
    ?    Whether and under what conditions non-commercial research may be conducted within areas subject to prospecting, exploration or mining
         licences.

11. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Madagascar’s mining codes (1999 and 2005), these provisions
The prospecting and reconnaissance activities as well as the discovery or        address non-commercial research in the following detail:
retrieval of fossils, for scientific purposes, from the second-order             ? A special authorization for the extraction of a certain class of fossils by
fossiliferous beds referred to in [the relevant article] of the present [Code]       scientific organizations;
[Act] [Law], shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant permit         ? Government authority to reserve certain areas for specified purposes,
issued in accordance with the provisions of the present [Code] [Act] [Law].          including areas subject to mining licence provided that the holder gives
                                                                                     written consent.
Article [_]                                                                      ? Authority of the regulating entity to reserve areas for up to 18 months
Authorisation to remove fossils, for scientific purposes, from second-order          (extendable for an additional 6 months) for geological studies.
fossiliferous beds, shall be granted, on an individual basis, to scientific      ? The release of the reserved areas once the reservation is no longer justified.
organisations which may appoint natural persons as their representatives.        ? Requirements for the delivery and publication of reports on the scientific
                                                                                     studies undertaken in the reserved areas.
Article [_]
The Government may declare that certain areas are restricted and
reconnaissance, prospecting and archaeology are prohibited for the
reasons, and following the procedures, set out in the present chapter and
may be, subject either to the availability of the relevant area, or to written
agreement from the rights holder for the area. Areas may be declared
temporarily restricted in the cases provided for in Articles [_] below.

Article [_]

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                   29 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
(1) For geological studies, [the regulatory authority] may, on request from
the department in charge of geological studies, issue an order declaring that
the area relating to the studies is reserved, subject to the reservations
provided for in [the relevant article] above.

(2) Said declaration must include: an identification square meters and
cadastral markers which constitute the reserved area; details of the
programme for the studies to be carried out inside the reserved area, and the
period of time required for said studies.

(3) The initial period of the area reservation may not exceed eighteen (18)
months, which may be extended only once, for a maximum period of six (6)
months.

(4) The report on the geological studies carried out must be provided to [the
regulatory authority] to be published and made available to the public, at
least fifteen (15) days before the reservation of the area lapses.

Article [_]
(1) Where it has been found that the reasons for which an area was
classified as reserved are no longer valid, the relevant authorities may at
any time issue a decree cancelling the reservation.

(2) Areas which are released once work, studies or training have been
completed shall be returned to the initial rights holders of the formerly
reserved areas.

Article [_]
(1) Where second-order fossil beds containing rare species are found in
various geological strata, such fossil beds may be the subject of permits for
scientific studies and sampling.

(2) Once the studies have been completed, the permit holders are required to
send technical reports on the work carried out to the Authority which
granted the permit.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   30 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART A: General Topics
11. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision in contrast with
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, the [Regulating Authority] may,   Example 1 contains a general mandate for the regulating entity to authorize “any
in the public interest and subject to such conditions as he may determine,    person? to conduct non-commercial geological research. As the law does not
authorize any person to undertake non-commercial investigations into the      provide any further detail this provides for broad discretion on the part of the
geological resources of [Country].                                            regulating entity which may lead to inconsistent use of the authority or at worst,
                                                                              imposition of inappropriate terms and conditions.

                                                         12. Transparency/Confidentiality
                                                                    12.1 General

There is growing international consensus on the importance of transparency in promoting good governance of the mining sector and the efficient
management of natural resource revenues. The fundamental idea behind transparency is that the more information the public has about the sector
in terms of the legal framework, the mining activities and the revenues such activities generate, the more the public can hold governments and
companies accountable for their respective actions related to the sector. From another perspective, transparency also plays an important role in
ensuring fair and non-arbitrary processes by the sector regulating authorities ensures a level playing field which in turn instils, which is essential to
instil confidence among investors. In other words, in that a level playing field exists. In broad terms, transparency is necessary for accountability,
which in turn is necessary for good governance of the sector. Narrowly defined however, transparency provisions focus on information to be
disclosed in a relevant, widely accessible, timely and accurate manner, and where possible, in open data format.

Transparency provisions in mining laws may explicitly list the categories of information and various documents that will be made available to the
public; or may broadly provide for adherence to global transparency norms and standards such as the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI), which requires implementing countries to annually disclose information on tax payments, licenses, contracts, beneficial ownership,
production and other key elements around resource extraction (some countries such as the Central African Republic and Liberia have separate
legislation implementing the EITI standard).

Transparency is a cross-cutting topic, relevant for all segments of the EI value chain. It is essential for a mining law to provide for robust
transparency provisions in the context of (a) the decision to extract; (b) competitive procedures for issuing licenses and allocating mineral
exploration or production rights; (c) deciding the mandate of the institutions to regulate and monitor the operations; (d) the status of non-payment
obligations surrounding mining activities (e.g., health and safety, environment, and local content; (e) the fiscal regime, reporting of payments and
collection of taxes, and publication of deals; (f) revenue management.

A mining law should also provide for disclosures related to information required to assist communities and other stakeholders in monitoring
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                  31 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART A: General Topics
companies’ environmental and social obligations so as to supplement its own monitoring capacity through public engagement (a democratic
approach to monitoring activities). Document where such information may be explicitly required include bidding materials and bid evaluation
reports, mineral development agreements, environmental and social impact assessments and management plans, local content plans and
community development agreements.

Confidentiality provisions may provide for limits on transparency, for example, to protect company commercially sensitive information. It is
important, however, that these limitations are used on an exceptional basis, only where there is a valid justification for sensitivity. When allowed,
confidentiality should be provided for a period of years with respect to geological, engineering, and other process related information acquired by
mineral right holders in the course of exploration, development or exploitation. However, even in this case, exceptions to exception are necessary
in order to permit the publication of statistics in the aggregate and to safeguard against potential frauds on the market by mineral right holders.

While some companies have resisted contract transparency on the grounds of commercial sensitivity, executives of some leading mining
companies have spoken out in favour of contract disclosure principle. The International Council on Minerals and Metals, whose members are 17 of
the largest global mining companies, requires that its members engage constructively in appropriate forums to improve the transparency of
contractual provisions on a level-playing field basis.

The mining industry, civil society and mining administration staff favour provisions that require transparency in the application of mining law, as a
safeguard against manipulation, corruption and abuse of discretion. Terms that promote transparency in the application of the mining law include:

    ?   Public access to current information as to the availability of areas for mineral rights, the existence of mineral rights and pending
        applications for mineral rights and transactions, and the status of processing of applications for mineral rights and transactions;
    ?   Objective, nondiscretionary criteria as to eligibility and conditions for the grant of mineral rights;
    ?   Objective, nondiscretionary procedures for the submission and processing of applications for mineral rights and transactions;
    ?   Clear, objective criteria for maintaining the validity of mineral rights;
    ?   Clear, objective grounds for the denial of mineral rights or transactions and the cancellation or extinction of mineral rights, together with
        procedures requiring notice and publication of a written statement of the grounds for the decision, and an appropriate opportunity for
        challenge of the decision or cure of the failure;
    ?   Clear, objective grounds for the imposition of sanctions and penalties, together with procedures requiring notice and publication of a
        written statement of the grounds for the sanctions or penalties, together with an appropriate opportunity for challenge of the decision or
        cure of the infraction;
    ?   Clear, updated information on the ‘beneficial ownership’ of the companies that have obtained rights to extract minerals;
    ?   Clear reporting requirements on mining activities, such as reports on exploited minerals quantity and mineral valuation, accident reports
        and other relevant information including audit reports.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                       32 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics
    ?    Clear annual reporting requirements on local development obligations.
    ?    In contract regimes, the use of standard model agreements as the basis for limited negotiation of terms, subject to an objective review and
         approval procedure prior to signature, and published on the Mining Administration’s website. Ultimately, applying the rule of contracts,
         mineral development agreements negotiated under the mining law should be consistent with the provisions of the mining law.
    ?    Clear publication requirements for payments made to governments and allowances provided to companies.

12.1 Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Ivory Coast’s mining code (2014), this provision focuses on EITI
(1) All holders of mining titles shall be required to respect the principles and   requirements and requires compliance with the EITI standards and procedures by
requirements of the EITI Standard. In particular, the mining right holder          both mining companies and public authorities. While the provision best serves
must, as part of the EITI reports which they compile, make proper                  the legal frameworks of EITI member states, non EITI member states may still
declarations based on audited data by the relevant bodies with the relevant        use a similar provision by referring to the EITI principles and standards as the
expertise.                                                                         objective yardstick for evaluating obligations (South Sudan).

(2) The mining right holder must declare all information relating to
payments it makes to the State, including social investment which is carried
out, to the national EITI bodies.

Article [_]
Any mining revenue due to the State and collected by the State, including
social investment which is carried out by mining companies, is to be
declared to the national EITI bodies.

12.1 Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        This suggested provision establishes an expansive approach to transparency,
(1) All information and contracts required, submitted or signed under this         requiring non-confidentiality in all information, data and reports related to the
[Law][Act][Code] shall be considered non-confidential. Confidentiality             mining activity. Emphasis is placed on the quality of the information, namely,
clauses or other clauses in a mining contract that prevent disclosure of           that it should be updated and widely accessible to the public. In cases where
information shall be void.                                                         confidentiality is deemed necessary, the motivation behind should be clear,
                                                                                   justified and limited in time.
(2) The information shall be made available to the public in a timely, widely
accessible and accurate manner, including on a public website or newspaper
of wide circulation.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      33 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART A: General Topics

(3) Subject to Section (1) above, if any information is deemed sensitive on
the basis of national interest or commercial purposes, a request may be
made for confidentiality on an exceptional basis and the Minister shall
determine the scope of such exception and provide a duration after which
such information will be made available to the general public.

                                                            12. Transparency/Confidentiality
                                                                12.2 Beneficial Ownership

The momentum for enacting beneficial ownership legislation is gathering pace around the world, with a growing number of countries adopting
principles on disclosure of beneficial ownership. The objective of such initiatives is to shed light on secret ownership structures that enables some
extractive companies to evade tax payments or hide inappropriate relationships with relevant public officials. Mineral development benefits
depend to a great extent on effective tax collection and extractives companies can evade by using complex ownership structures. While a complex
and opaque ownership structure does not automatically mean that an extractives company is engaging in wrongdoing, the disclosure of beneficial
ownership information helps to deter improper practices or facilitates their detection.

A mining law should define the meaning of “beneficial ownership? in detail, or include explicit reference to the definition provided in related
laws. Defining the concept to cover all cases is challenging, but in most cases “beneficial ownership? means ownership which is enjoyed by any
natural person who, directly or indirectly, has any significant control or economic interest in a given legal entity or receives significant economic
benefit from such a legal entity, even where formal ownership (title) may be in the name of another entity. Preferably, each country’s choice of
definition would be based on a clear understanding of what problems it most wants to address through the disclosure of beneficial ownership
information, how companies operating in the country tend to structure their ownership, and whom the country anticipates to use the information.

Under the 2016 EITI standard, countries are required to adopt legislation that prompts the disclosure of beneficial ownership of entities that bid
for, operate or invest in extractive assets. Such disclosure should include the identity of the owner, i.e. the name, nationality and country of
residence; best practices indicate that the information should be made available through public registers.

With regards to a specific threshold of ownership at which beneficial owners must be declared, a ceiling of five percent or lower is recommended
by international best practice. It is critical that countries pick thresholds with care, given that for large extractive projects even a 1 or 5 percent
interest can generate substantial rents. Finally, legislation should provide for penalty for false, incomplete or misleading disclosures, such as
revoking a company’s license or contract, or barring it from competing for contracts.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                         34 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics

12.2 Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        This suggested example requires that companies provide beneficial ownership
(1) All companies applying or bidding for a license are required to provide        information to the State and inform the regulating authority of any changes to
accurate information on their Beneficial Ownership as part of their                beneficial ownership structures throughout the duration of a license, for
application or bid documents and throughout the duration of a license, license     purpose of maintaining current and accurate information. It obligates the
holders will inform the [Regulating Authority] of any changes to this              regulating authority to make such information public. It also sanctions the lack
information, within one month of the change occurring.                             of compliance by extractives companies for failure to provide relevant
                                                                                   information.
(2) The [Regulating Authority] will promptly publish and maintain all
Beneficial Ownership information in a publicly accessible format on its            The example also provides a definition of the “beneficial ownership?, setting
website.                                                                           the threshold of ownership at 5%, the minimum required by international best
                                                                                   practice. It is recommended that the definition of beneficial ownership, while
(3) Failure to provide the information required in subsection (1) above, in        useful at the site of the applicable provision, is best defined in the Definitions
good faith and in conformity with the regulations to this [Law][Act][Code]         section of the mining law in order to allow for the definition to apply to the
shall invalidate a license application, and be grounds for revocation where a      term no matter the site of occurrence in the law.
license has been granted.

(4) For the purposes of this Article [_] (Beneficial Ownership), “Beneficial
Ownership? means the control, possession, custody or enjoyment by any
natural person, directly or indirectly, of a reasonably significant economic
interest in a given legal entity or receives significant economic benefit from
such a legal entity, even where formal ownership (title) may be in the name of
another person or entity. In addition to any other qualifying criteria, a person
is automatically considered to be a beneficial owner if such person owns 5%
or more of the legal entity in question.

12.2 Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        While the first subsection is similar to the first example, this example goes
(1) All companies applying or bidding for a license are required to provide        further with the disclosure requirements, by soliciting the disclosure of
accurate information on their Beneficial Ownership as part of their                beneficial ownership of subcontractors of the mineral rights holder.
application or bid documents and throughout the duration of a Mineral Right
and all Mineral Rights holders will inform the [Regulating Authority] of any

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       35 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
changes to this information, within one month of the change occurring.

(2) The [Regulating Authority] will promptly publish and maintain all
Beneficial Ownership information in a publicly accessible format on its
website.

(3) Failure to provide the information required in subsection (1) above, in
good faith and in conformity with the regulations to this [Law][Act][Code]
shall invalidate a mining right application, and be grounds for revocation
where a mining right has been granted.

(4) The holder of a mining right shall provide to the [Regulating Authority] a
trimestral report on the beneficial ownership of subcontractors hired for a
value higher than [Minimum Contract Amount Allowed].

(5) For the purposes of this Article [_] (Beneficial Ownership), “Beneficial
Ownership? means the control, possession, custody or enjoyment by any
natural person, directly or indirectly, of a reasonably significant economic
interest in a given legal entity or receives significant economic benefit from
such a legal entity, even where formal ownership (title) may be in the name of
another person or entity. In addition to any other qualifying criteria, a person
is automatically considered to be a beneficial owner if such person owns 5%
or more of the legal entity in question.


                                               13. Anti-Bribery/Anti-Corruption/Conflict of Interest

Anti-bribery/Anti-corruption/conflict of interest often refer to provisions that prohibit license holders and government officials from engaging in
fraud and corruption as it applies specifically to all activities related to mining operations. The inclusion of anti-bribery and anti-corruption
provisions in mining laws, focusing on both the demand side (officials) and the supply side (companies or individual intermediaries), is a recent
innovation that reflects a strong commitment to deter corruption in the administration of the sector. These provisions may also lay out processes
that further discourage both license holders and government officials from engaging in corrupt and fraudulent activities such as language
prohibiting government officials from individually owning a stake in mining operations. To the extent that economic penalties and sanctions are
provided for in the mining code the sanctions should be meaningful for deterrence.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     36 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
Although anti-corruption and anti-bribery provisions usually belong to the realm of criminal law, international best practice promotes the
reinforcement of such prohibitions in mining laws, given high corruption risks in the sector. To the extent that economic penalties and other
sanctions are provided for in the mining code, these should be meaningful for deterrence.

The inclusion of anti-bribery and anti-corruption provisions in mining laws is a recent innovation that reflects a strong commitment to deter
corruption in the administration of the law. The more traditional provisions (see Example 3) focus on conflict of interest. This subject may be
sufficiently treated in general laws sanctioning bribery and corruption and not necessitate specific sectoral measures in the mining law.

13. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), this provision seeks to establish a
(1) It is a prosecutable offence for any company which is active in the mining     balanced framework for dealing with bribery and corruption. Supply side
sector or has any interest in it, including any director, shareholder, employee,   measures include prohibition of mining companies from inducement of public
representative or subcontractor of such a company to make offers or                officials in relation to decisions on mineral rights, requirement of mineral right
promises, or offer donations, gifts or benefits of any kind whatsoever:            holders to sign a code of conduct to respect anti-bribery laws, to submit to anti-
                                                                                   bribery investigations where necessary, and to uphold the EITI principles.
(a) a government official or an elected representative so as to influence a        Additionally, mineral right holders must prepare and submit an anti-corruption
decision or an action taken as part of the carrying out of their public            monitoring plan to be published annually setting out among other things the
functions, including those which relate to the mining sector;                      holder’s compliance with anti-corruption provisions, control measures instituted
(b) any other individual, association, company, natural person or legal entity     to prevent corruption and how bribery allegations have been dealt with. Demand
so as to use their imputed or actual influence over any action or decision by      side measures include prohibition against solicitation and acceptance of bribes
any government official or an elected representative as part of the carrying       by public officials in relation to any decision making concerning mineral rights.
out of their public function, including those which relate to the mining sector.
Article [_]
Should a mining rights holder or one of their officials, directors, employees,
representatives, subcontractors or shareholders, duly acting in the name of
said mining right holder, violate the provisions of the present
[Code][Act][Law] relating to the prohibition of corrupt activities, this may
lead to penalties including, without limitation, revoking the relevant mining
right. The penalty shall be applied once there has been an investigation into
the severity of the offence, the time which has lapsed since the offence was
committed, the actions implemented by the rights holder in order to report the
offence and inform the government, the level of investment which the rights


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       37 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics
holder has already expended to develop the project.
Article [_]
It is a prosecutable offence for any civil servant in the judiciary or
administration, or any other representative of the Civil Service of [Country],
or any elected representative responsible for deciding on an administrative
action in the mining sector to solicit or accept offers, promises, donations,
gifts or benefits of any kind whatsoever, to perform, refrain from performing,
or to abuse their influence in the carrying out of their functions, in particular
in the context of allocating mining rights, overseeing activities and payments,
and approving applications, or decisions relating to the extension,
subleasing, assignment, transfer or cancellation of a mining right.

13. Example 2:                                                                      Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Adapted from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision, in contrast with
(1) No public officer shall directly or indirectly, acquire any right or interest   Example 1, is focused on conflict of interest and abuse of office situations. It
in any mineral right and any document or transaction purporting to confer           requires public officials responsible for administering the mining law not to
any right or interest in any such officer shall be null and void.                   hold any interest in any mineral operations. This provision will affect persons
                                                                                    who own a direct interest in mineral operations.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), no public officer shall own or retain any shares
in a company carrying on reconnaissance, exploration or mining operations,
or the import, export or marketing of minerals in the country.

(3) Where an officer is at the assumption of the functions of his office, the
holder of shares in such company as is mentioned in subsection (2), the
officer shall divest himself from such right or interest or dispose of the shares
within ninety calendar days after assumption of office.

(4) An officer who contravenes this section commits an offence and shall be
liable on conviction to a fine not less than [insert appropriate amount that
would be sufficient for deterrence] United States Dollars or its equivalent in
[national currency] or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve
months or to both such fine and imprisonment.

(5) For the purposes of this section, “officer? means a public officer for the
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      38 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
time being engaged in the administration of this [Act][Code][Law].

                                                                   14. Use of Security Forces
License holders are often required under mining laws to secure the people and goods within and around mining sites, which may be provided by
private security, local police forces, national/army police forces or a combination of all three. Historically, the securing of mine sites has
sometimes led to human rights abuses and other violations of the law in Africa, which have interrupted site production, endangered workers and
local community residents, and in the extreme, generated civil conflict. There are also assessments on the correlation between poor regulation of
private security forces and the increase in illegal arms trafficking further contributing to perennial conflict in resource rich countries.

While security is necessary to ensure the safety of people, goods and other features of mine sites, it is critical that the use of security is governed
by a detailed legislative framework and is carefully monitored by relevant agencies within a State government. Over 20 African countries have
legislation addressing the use and management of private security.2 At minimum a mining law should make reference to existing, topic-specific
legislation as well as additional related legislation.

Overall, provisions addressing the use of security should seek to address the following points either in the mining law and/or in comprehensive
related legislation:
    - Process for approval as a private security firms
    - Process of continuous evaluation for approved firms
    - A code of conduct for all security forces including duties compliant with international law (for example prohibitions against sexual
         exploitation, child labour, inhuman or degrading treatment etc.)
    - Regulations regarding the use of force, the scope, purchase, possession, storage and use of firearms/discharge of weapons and
         apprehension and detention of persons
    - Clearly elaborated grievance procedures
    - Requirement of incorporation of the code of conduct into company policies
    - Requirement for training (initial and continuous) for all security forces
    - Requirement for clear demarcation of the secured area around the mining site

In addition to the above issues, where private security legislation does not address security of mining sites specifically, provisions in the mining


2
    Private Security Monitor, Sie Cheou-Kang Center, the University of Denver http://psm.du.edu/national_regulation/.
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                         39 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
law may note in particular:
    - The setting of a reasonable perimeter in which security forces may operate outside the mining site by the government in collaboration with
       the company
    - In surrounding communities, publication/advertisement of the agreed upon security perimeter
    - Visible demarcation of area to be covered by security forces
    - Notification to all security forces, prior to the commencement of activity, of the limits of the secured perimeter

In most countries, several regulating authorities will govern the use of force (the ministries dealing with natural resources, private sector/industry,
police, army etc.). It is therefore essential that these provisions mention relevant entities by name and highlight the need for collaboration and
agreement across the entities, reinforcing effective management of security forces. Finally, provisions should also be in harmony with international
best practice, in particular the International Code of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers (ICoC), the Voluntary Principles on Security
and Human Rights, as well as general principles of human rights under international law.

14. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_] The Use of Security Forces                                            Inspired by Tanzania’s mining act (2010) and Mali’s mining code (2012), this
The employment, management and use of security forces within and around           example references relevant legislation but also provides broader regulatory
mining sites, for all mining licenses under this [Act][Code][Law], are            provisions which mainly addresses transparent establishment, amendment or
regulated by the following provisions and [relevant related legislation].         cancellation of areas controlled by such security forces so as to give notice of
                                                                                  their existence to the public. It also requires a streamlining of oversight by
Article [_] Area Secured for Mining Operations                                    the relevant regulating entities.
(1) The [Regulating Authorities] may, at the request of a license holder and by
notice in national newspapers, establish a controlled area for any reasonable
perimeter which is subject to mining operations.

(2) The [Regulating Authorities] may, by notice published in national
newspapers, amend or cancel any area declared to be a controlled area or any
notice declaring to do so under Article [_].

Article [_]: Modalities of Controlled Areas
A joint agreement between the [Regulating Authorities] will define the terms of
movement of people, goods and security forces within the controlled area.

14. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                    40 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics

Article [_] People and assets control bodies                                        Adapted from Angola’s mining code (2011), this provision addresses the use
(1) Security and control of people and assets in restricted zones and protection    of security forces in more detail in two key areas: the scope of activities
zones, as well as the security of the respective deposits and mining production     permitted as part of securing mining sites; and the relationship between the
activity, are carried out by the respective mining rights title holders, using      licence holder, private security companies, and relevant government agencies.
their own means and personnel contracted by the same, in a self-defence
system, or by means of contracting specialized security companies, within the       Some of the key distinctive features of the provision include:
terms permitted by the law.                                                            - The right of the State to demarcate restricted zones for goods and
                                                                                            persons around artisanal mining sites.
(2) Security and control of people and assets in the areas demarcated for              - The right of the State, in collaboration with the licence holder, to
handicraft production are carried out by the State. Whenever the areas are                  demarcate security zones where zones are near industrial production
included in the proximity of industrial production zones, security shall be                 areas.
carried out in co-operation with the respective mining rights title holders.
                                                                                       - The powers given to security forces do not prejudice the competency
(3) The people and assets security and control powers assigned to the entities              of the national police and/or other state security agencies with the
mentioned in the previous numbers do not prejudice the generic competency                   responsibility for managing national security.
attributed by law to the National Police and security bodies.                          - The scope of activities licence holders/private security firms may
                                                                                            engage in under the context of securing persons and goods around the
Article [_] Duties of the mining rights title holders regarding security                    mining site (for example defining what weapons, materials and other
(1) In the exercise of the surveillance, security, and people and assets                    paraphernalia can be considered “instruments of a crime? and which
circulation control duties assigned to them by this Code, the mining rights title           security forces may legally confiscate).
holders and security companies must:                                                   - The duty of licence holders/private security firms to immediately
                                                                                            hand over detained persons and goods to the national police and/or the
a) keep under constant surveillance all zones under their control and monitor               public prosecutor.
the movement of people and assets;                                                     - The duty of licence holders to publish internal regulations governing
b) prevent unauthorised residence, movement, exercise of economic activities
                                                                                            surveillance and safety protocol for employees and any other persons
and access by people within the mining activity areas;
                                                                                            authorized to secure restricted areas.
c) prevent the performance of any and all unauthorised mineral prospecting,
search, recognisance and exploration activities;                                       - The barring of licence holders/private security firms from conducting
d) ensure the protection of deposits and events, opposing any and all activities            criminal investigations.
that infringe their security;                                                          - The requirement of licence holders/private security firms to
e) ensure the security of people, facilities, assets and services associated with           collaborate with the police, public prosecutor and judiciary,
the exercise of mining activities.                                                          particularly in combatting illegal trafficking of minerals.

2) In the performance of their duties, the entities and persons in charge of        Finally, this provision addresses issues of registration, evaluation, training and
security and the control of people and assets movements may carry out the           code of conduct for security forces by referencing the related legislation, in this

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                         41 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics
following acts:                                                                      case Angola’s Law on Private Security Companies (1992).

a) identify and perform routine searches of the workers and, in a general
manner, all people that enter or exit the restricted areas or circulate or are
present in further areas under their control, as well as the objects and goods
which they carry or are under their responsibility;
b) demand the presentation of access permits, credentials or goods or assets
waybills, whenever access to the area legally requires those authorisations;
c) preventively hold the perpetrators of crimes as prescribed in the present
Code, whenever caught committing an offence, and immediately deliver them
to the competent police authorities, and apprehend the crime instruments
carried by them.

3) For the purposes of the provisions of paragraph c) of the previous number,
any means of transport, weapons and materials and camping accessories
found in the possession of the perpetrators are deemed to constitute crime
instruments.
4) Any persons held and the goods apprehended must be immediately delivered
to the magistrate of the Public Ministry or the National Police station situated
nearest to the detention or apprehension site, in terms of the law.

5) The mining rights title holders must publish internal regulations regarding
surveillance, security and control, applicable to the restricted zones, aimed at
their workers and all persons authorised by the law or invited to enter those
zones.

6) The regulations mentioned in the previous number must be previously
submitted to the competent ministry who, following favourable opinion, will
submit them for approval by the National Police.

Article [_] Responsibilities of the bodies
The provisions of the previous article do not prejudice the exercise of the
duties which, regarding surveillance, security, and control of persons and
assets, are assigned to the public security bodies and private security specialist
companies in the restricted zones, protection zones and areas demarcated for
handicraft exploration, within the terms of the present Code.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              42 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
Article [_] Prohibition of prosecution
The mining rights title holders or private security agents mentioned in the
previous articles may not carry out criminal prosecution proceedings.

Article [_] Obligation to co-operate with authorities
The personnel from the concession companies or private security specialist
companies in charge of the control of persons and assets within the strategic
minerals production areas must, in the prevention of, and fight against, illegal
trafficking of strategic minerals and further illegal activities as prescribed in
the present Code, act in close co-operation with the police, prosecution and
judiciary authorities.

Article [_] Further considerations
All further provisions regarding licensing and use of security forces may be
found in [related legislation].

                                                                15. Implementing Regulations

In most jurisdictions, the mining law is not fully self-executing and requires the adoption and publication of implementing regulations. In cases
where the law establishes principles to be fleshed out in the regulations, the latter may be quite extensive. In cases where the law itself is very
detailed and largely self-executing, the scope of the implementing regulations may be limited to establishing forms for applications, reports, etc.

The Constitution may specify which matters can be established by regulation and which matters must be established by law. For example, usually
taxes must be established by law rather than by regulation. Such restrictions must be respected.

As a general matter, it is desirable to set by regulation rules that may need to be changed in the foreseeable future, so that it is not necessary to
seek an amendment of the law itself for that purpose. Laws that delegate extensive authority to the executive to establish the rules for mineral
rights by regulation are often indicative of a lack of stability of the law. Mining investors have a strong preference for stable laws because of the
long gestation period before mining investments become profitable, and the immobility of the assets. Furthermore, monitoring of the mining
activities requires a stable regime as it takes time for the law to be comprehensively understood by the impacted communities and other
stakeholders.

If regulations to implement the law will be necessary (as is the usual case), then the law should so state and authorize the executive power to enact

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                       43 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
those regulations, while limiting their scope. Regulations cannot legally contradict the provisions of the law or regulate matters outside the scope
of the authority delegated in the law.

Ideally, regulations should be passed together with the law to ensure effective implementation of the law. Otherwise, a reasonable timeframe may
be provided for issuing regulations to prevent significant delays that could affect effective implementation of the law.

15. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision provides the scope of the
Related matters which are not expressly provided for, defined or regulated       regulation. The provision sets the scope of the regulation by stating in numerous
by the provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law] shall be deemed to fall        articles of the law what additional details are to be established by regulation. The
under the Mining Regulations.                                                    mining code of DRC defines the mining regulation as the group of measures for
                                                                                 the execution of the provisions of the mining code, established by decree of the
                                                                                 President of the Republic.

15. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this example specifies the scope
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may, by notice in the [Gazette], make             of regulations that the regulating authority is authorized to adopt. Significant
regulations regarding –                                                          aspects of this authorizing provision include:
                                                                                 1) The authority to make regulations is delegated to the regulating entity – not
(a)                                                                                   to the Government as a whole, or the Prime Minister or the President, which
 (i) the conservation of the environment at or in the vicinity of any mine or         assures the predominance of sectoral considerations;
works;                                                                           2) The primary focus of the regulations is to be environmental protection;
 (ii) the management of the impact of any mining operations on the               3) General catchall provisions in subsections (k) and (l) expand the authority of
environment at or in the vicinity of any mine or works;                               the regulating entity considerably; and
 (iii) the rehabilitation of disturbances of the surface of land where such      4) Any regulation relating to State revenues or expenses requires the
disturbances are connected to prospecting or mining operations;                       concurrence of the finance regulating authority.
 (iv) the prevention, control and combating of pollution of the air, land, sea
or other water, including ground water, where such pollution is connected to
prospecting or mining operations;
 (v) pecuniary provision by the holder of any right, permit or permission for
the carrying out of an environmental management programme;
 (vi) the establishment of accounts in connection with the carrying out of an
environmental management programme and the control of such accounts by
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       44 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
the [Regulating Authority];
  (vii) the assumption by the State of responsibility or co-responsibility for
obligations originating from regulations made under subparagraphs (i), (ii),
(iii) and (iv) of this paragraph; and
  (viii) the monitoring and auditing of environmental management programs;

(b) the exploitation, processing, utilization or use of or the disposal of any
mineral;

(c) procedures in respect of appeals lodged under this [Act][Code][Law];

(d) fees payable in relation to any right, permit or permission issued or
granted in terms of this [Act][Code][Law];

(e) fees payable in relation to any appeal contemplated in this
[Act][Code][Law];

(f) the form of any application which may or have to be done in terms of this
Act and of any consent or document required to be submitted with such
application, and the information or details which must accompany any such
application;

(g) the form, conditions, issuing, renewal, abandonment, suspension or
cancellation of any environmental management programme, permit, licence,
certificate, permission, receipt or other document which may or have to be
issued, granted, approved, required or renewed in terms of this
[Act][Code][Law];

(h) the form of any register, record, notice, sketch plan or information which
may or shall be kept, given, published or submitted in terms of or for the
purposes of this [Act][Code][Law];

(i) the prohibition on the disposal of any mineral or the use thereof for any
specified purpose or in any specified manner or for any other purpose or in
any other manner than a specified purpose or manner;

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   45 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics

(j) the restriction or regulation in respect of the disposal or use of any
mineral in general;

(k) any matter which may or must be prescribed for in terms of this
[Act][Code][Law]; and

(l) any other matter the regulation of which may be necessary or expedient
in order to achieve the objects of this [Act][Code][Law].

(2) No regulation relating to State revenue or expenditure may be made by
the [Regulating Authority] except with the concurrence of the [Finance
Regulating Authority].

(3) Any regulation made under this section may provide that any person
contravening such regulation or failing to comply therewith, is guilty of an
offence and liable on conviction to a fine or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding [six] months.

                                                                      16. Regulating Bodies

Provisions which address what government agencies will issue licences, manage the license application process, provide oversight of issued
licenses, and ensure license holders exploit minerals in ways that are consistent with a country’s laws, oversee the utilizat ion of the mineral
development-generated resources and other benefits or conduct research and manage knowledge and information on the sector are collectively
referred to as ‘regulating bodies’ provisions. Mining codes may spell out the composition, function, and responsibility of ea ch relevant bodies,
including how they coordinate with one another to manage a country’s mining sector. The respective authority at the national, provincial and local
bodies should also be made clear.

Also important to consider is provisions that allow for inter-ministerial or inter-agency coordination by all the bodies implicated in management of
the sector to avoid inconsistencies, information silos and conflicts among the government bodies and agencies.

A key trend/consideration is separation of regulatory scope, i.e. those that grant the rights, those that monitor or enforce the obligations attached to
licenses or rights granted, and those responsible for collection of revenues. The role of state-owned entities should be clearly defined. Good
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                          46 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
practice dictates against blending of regulatory, enforcement and commercial responsibilities in one entity to avoid any conflict of interest that
may result. Good practice would be to restrict the role of state-owned companies to commercial responsibilities.

16. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision sets forth the respective
Chapter II of the First Title of the [Code][Act][Law] sets forth the           duties of the regulatory authorities in 8 articles and then states in Article 16 that
respective authority of the regulating bodies in articles [_], covering the    no other public or state institution has authority to administer the provisions of
following:                                                                     the Mining Code and the related Regulations.
Article 8: Of the Role of the State and its organs
Article 9: Of the President of the Republic                                    Within this framework, the Mining Cadastre is established as a semi-
Article 10: Of the [Regulating Authority]                                      autonomous, self-financing entity under the supervisory authority of the
Article 11: Of the Provincial Governor and the Provincial Division Chief of    regulating entity, responsible for administering the cadastral maps and registries
Mines                                                                          and the intake and processing of all applications concerning mineral rights and
Article 12: Of the Mining Cadastre                                             related transactions.
Article 13: Of the Directorate of Geology
Article 14: Of the Directorate of Mines
Article 15: Of the Service Responsible for Protection of the Mining
Environment
Article 16: Of the Restriction of Authority

16. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision, though too
Part [relevant section] of the [Act][Code][Law] of [Country], sets forth the   lengthy to be reproduced here, provides a good example of a chapter that sets
duties and functions of the authorities responsible for administering the      forth the responsibilities of an Advisory Board and the key departments of the
mining law of [Country] in the following 18 articles:                          regulating body. However, the status and functions of the Mining Cadastre
3. [Regulating Authority] to be responsible for administration of              Office are set forth in another part of the Act.
[Act][Code][Law]
4. Director to be responsible for implementation of [Act][Code][Law]
5. Duties of the Director
6. Powers of Director and authorised officers
7. Execution and delegation of functions of the Director
8. The Duties of the Director of Geological Survey
9. Execution and delegation of functions of the Director of Geological
Survey
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      47 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART A: General Topics
10. Authorised officers
11. Establishment of Minerals Advisory Board
12. Responsibilities of the Board
13. Meetings of the Board
14. Power to co-opt
15. Disclosure of interest
16. Annual Report
17. Obstruction of Directors or authorised officers
18. Indemnity of officers
19. [Regulating Authority] and officers prohibited from acquiring mineral
rights, etc.
20. Prohibition against the disclosure of information

                                                         17. Cadastral System/Registration

A well-conceived and established cadastral system can maximize transparency, clarity and efficiency in the management of mineral rights, and
minimize disputes among licence holders, thereby enhancing the security of mineral licence.

The cadastral system provides the framework of basic rules for the identification of mineral licence area boundaries on maps and in the field. At a
minimum, a cadastral system requires that all mineral licence areas be polygonal in shape with all borders aligned north-south or east-west based
on the most accurate official geographical/topographical maps available for the jurisdiction. At best, a cadastral system requires that all mineral
licence areas be composed of contiguous square area units identified on official maps maintained and made available by the mining cadastre. The
size of those units is a technical issue that depends on the quality of the jurisdiction’s maps and geodesic network.

A well-functioning cadastral system provides for the maintenance and updating of cadastral maps to show all areas that are either off limits to
mineral activity, or subject to restrictions, or occupied by existing mineral rights, or subject to pending applications - in as close to real time as
possible.

In best practice, the cadastral system for mineral licences is linked with the function of maintaining a current and accurate registry of mineral
licences and transactions, as well as a registry of applications for mineral licences.

The cadastral system and registry may be maintained in hard copy or electronic versions available on a closed network or online.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                        48 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
In best practice, the cadastral system for mineral licences is linked with the function of maintaining a current and accurate registry of mineral
licences and transactions, as well as a registry of applications for mineral licences.

The cadastral system and registry may be maintained in hard copy or electronic versions available on a closed network or online.

Technical details may be specified in regulations, provided that the basic principles of the cadastral system and registry are stated in the mining
law.

The cadastral system for mineral rights is often separate and apart from the cadastral systems for surface land rights, forest rights, water rights,
petroleum rights, etc., but may be integrated into a generalized cadastral system showing all such rights.

17. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this example contains extensive and
(1) The Ministry of Mines (Cadastre Minier) is a public office with juristic      comprehensive provisions establishing a cadastral system and registry for
personality and financial autonomy. It shall fall under [the regulatory           mineral rights and applications.
authority]. Its articles of association, organisational structure and mandate
shall be determined by a Decree of the [President] of [Country]. To cover its     Article 12 of the law establishes the Mining Cadastre as an institution, defines its
operating costs, the Ministry of Mines shall be authorised to collect and         functions, and provides a financing mechanism for its services.
manage fees for the filing of applications and annual surface area fees per
square meter.                                                                     The functions of the Mining Cadastre include the registration of: applications for
                                                                                  mineral rights, issued mineral rights, withdrawals and cancellation of mineral
(2) The Ministry of Mines shall be responsible for registering:                   rights, transfers and sub-leases of mineral rights, and security interests in mineral
a) applications for mining and/or quarrying rights to be granted;                 rights.
b) the mining and/or quarrying rights accordingly granted as well as
decisions to refuse applications;
                                                                                  Article 12 also assigns to the Mining Cadastre the functions of performing the
c) the revocation, cancellation or withdrawal of mining rights;
                                                                                  cadastral (or spatial) evaluation of applications regarding mineral licences and
d) the transfer and subleasing of mining rights;
                                                                                  coordinating the technical and environmental evaluations by the responsible
e) mining financial guarantees.
                                                                                  authorities.
(3) In addition, it shall be responsible for cadastral surveys for applications
for mining and/or quarrying rights, extensions of mining or quarrying rights      The article lists in full all functions assigned to the Mining Cadastre, which
to other minerals, coordinating technical and environmental assessments for       include the conservation of all mining and quarrying licences and maintaining on
applications for mining or quarrying rights as well as issuing Prospecting        a regular basis the registries and cadastral maps in accordance with a specific
rights.                                                                           national cadastral system. Such registries and maps are available for public

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                         49 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
                                                                                  consultation.
(4) The Ministry of Mines shall certify the minimum financial requirements
of those applying for mining, quarrying and prospecting rights.                   Article 12 provides that the Mining Regulation will set the details for the
                                                                                  maintenance of the registries, the coordination of processing of applications, etc.
(5) In addition, the Mining Cadastre shall:
                                                                                  Articles 28 and 29 of the same code specify the principle rules for the shape and
(a) Keep a register of mining and quarrying titles.                               location of mineral licence areas. They are based on the concept of a national
(b) Regularly maintain its registers and mining rights maps in accordance         grid system using mapping coordinates and a basic geographical square unit to be
with a specific national cadastral system which is open for public inspection.    defined in the Mining Regulation and oriented North-South and East-West. All
(c) Record renewals of mining and/or quarrying rights in accordance with          mining licence areas must be composed of available, contiguous square units as
the provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law].                                   defined. They are identified and plotted on the cadastral map by the coordinates
(d) Give the applicants concerned written reasons for the findings of the         of the centre of each such square unit on maps of 1:200,000 accuracy. The
relevant mining appraisals and issue them with mining and quarrying rights        Mining Regulation provides the technical details.
according to the scope of authority of the relevant authority.
(e) Record in writing views with regard to the classification, declassification
                                                                                  Other articles from the law specify the role of the Mining Cadastre in connection
or reclassification of a prohibited area.
                                                                                  with the processing of applications for, and administrative or judicial decisions
(f) Be the decision-making authority in all matters relating to the transfer
                                                                                  affecting, mineral rights.
and subleasing of mining and quarrying rights and thereafter registering the
said decisions.
(g) Remove the registration of the Mining or Quarrying Area on the
cadastral map.
(h) Have the powers of a notary public with regard to certifying the
authenticity of legal instruments relating to mortgaging, subleasing, and
transferring of mining and quarrying rights.
(6) The Mining Regulations shall lay down detailed conditions for
registering the legal instruments provided for in the present
[Code][Act][Law], for the coordination of, and the technical and
environmental assessments relating to applications, for notifying interested
parties of the findings from mining appraisals, and models for mining or
quarrying titles.

Article [_] The shape of Mining and Quarrying Areas
(1) Mining or quarrying rights shall be granted for mineral substances
within a specific Area.

(2) An Area shall be in the shape of a polygon made up of whole, adjoining
areas, subject to the limitations imposed by the borders of the National
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       50 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
Territory and those relating to reserved prohibited and protected areas as
specified in the Mining Regulations.

(3) The National Territory has been divided into cadastral mining areas
according to the system specified in the Mining Regulations for the
appropriate coordinates. These divisions define uniform and indivisible
areas, the sides of which are oriented north-south and east-west.

(4) An Area shall not include squares which do not form part of the internal
area which is the subject of a mining or quarrying right.

Article [_] The location of Mining and Quarrying Areas
(1) The geographical location of an Area shall be identified by the
coordinates for the centre of each of the squares which make up the Area.

(2) Areas shall be indicated on maps using a scale of 1/200,000, held by the
Ministry of Mines.

(3) The Mining Regulations shall lay down the terms for the division of the
national territory into cadastral mining areas, as well as the rules governing
the identification of Mining and Quarrying Areas.

17. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation
Article 1. Establishment of the Mining Cadastre Office
                                                                                 Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision provides for the creation
(1) There shall be established within six (6) months of the coming into effect
                                                                                 of the Mining Cadastre as an agency with sole responsibility for administration of
of this [Act][Code][Law] a Mining Cadastre Office with the responsibility
                                                                                 mining rights. The provision specifies the functions of the cadastre and, in
for the administration of mining rights and the maintenance of the cadastral
                                                                                 particular, the registries of mining rights that the agency is to maintain. The Act
registers.
                                                                                 does not, however, establish principles for the shape, and alignment of mining
                                                                                 right areas, providing only in section 145 that their boundaries will be planes
(2) The Mining Cadastre Office-                                                  extending downward into the earth to unlimited depth. Presumably, such issues
                                                                                 may be clarified in regulations made by the Minister under section 21 to [give]
(a)shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal;        full effect to the provisions of [the] Act?.
(b)may sue and be sued in its corporate name; and
(c) may acquire, hold and dispose of property, whether movable or
immovable.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      51 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics

(3) The Mining Cadastre Office shall be administered by a [Regulating
Authority] who shall be assisted by such officers as shall be required for the
efficient functioning of the cadastre system.

(4) In order to fulfil its functions under this [Act][Code][Law] the Mining
Cadastre Office shall operate as the sole agency responsible for the
administration of mining rights.

(5) The Mining Cadastre Office shall in addition to any other functions
prescribed                                                           by
or under this [Act][Code][Law] perform the following-

(a)consider applications for mining rights and permits, issue, suspend and
upon
the written approval of the [Regulating Authority], revoke any mining right;

(b)receive and dispose of applications for the transfer, renewal,
modification, relinquishment of mining rights or extension of areas;

(c)maintain a chronological record of all applications for mining rights in-
 (i)a priority book which is to be specifically used to ascertain the priority
and registration of applications for exclusive rights on vacant areas;
 (ii)a general registry book which is to be used for all other types of
applications where registration of the priority is not required;

(d) undertake such other activities reasonably necessary for the purpose of
carrying out its duties and responsibilities under the provisions of this
[Act][Code][Law].
Article [_] Central and Zonal Offices of the Mining Cadastre Office
A Central Mining Cadastre Office with exclusive authority and jurisdiction
over the whole of the country shall be established in [city] as the
headquarters of the Mining Cadastre Office. The Mining Cadastre Office
shall, according to administrative convenience, maintain an appropriate
number of Zonal offices.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   52 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
Article [_] Mining Cadastre Registers
(1) The Mining Cadastre Office shall open a series of files to be known as
Mining Cadastre Office Registers for the purposes of this
[Act][Code][Law], comprising of-

(a)a register of Reconnaissance Permits;
(b)a register of Exploration Licences;
(c)a register of Mining Leases;
(d)a register of Small-scale Mining Leases;
(e)a register of the Water Use Permits; and
(f) a register of Quarry Leases.


Article [_] Boundary
Every mining right, temporary right or mining lease shall be bounded by
vertical planes from the surface boundary lines drawn downwards to an
unlimited depth from surface.

                                                 18. License Acquisition Procedures and Timelines

By setting forth in the mining law the procedures by which mining rights are acquired, the legislature establishes a basis for holding the issuing
authority accountable for the process of issuing mining rights. This avoids the use of unchecked discretion and the related opportunities for
corruption in the issuance of mineral rights.

The inclusion of timelines for compliance with license acquisition procedures is similarly important in holding the administrative authority
accountable and in ensuring that efficient processing procedures are adopted in order to comply with the timelines. While the examples below
indicate a “first come first served? rule, a “tender system? rule is equally valid for license issuance. See Part B for a mor e detailed discussion on
mineral licensing regime.

18. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation
Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (1999), this example provides clarity as to
In general, mining licences shall be granted according to a principle of "1st   the procedures and timeline for the issuance of mineral rights by establishing:
come, 1st served".                                                              ? The general rule for issuance of mining rights: “first come, first served?;
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                 53 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
Article [_]                                                                      ?   The authority who issues each type of mining right;
(1) Prospecting and operating licences shall be granted by [the regulatory       ?   The availability of application forms from the Office of the Mining Cadastre;
authority], which may delegate these powers.                                     ?   Where the completed application is to be filed (the Office of the Mining
                                                                                     Cadastre);
 (2) Small-scale mining licences shall be granted by the relevant authority      ?   The timeline for processing and decisions by the issuing authority;
for the Province concerned, which may delegate this power.                       ?   The criteria for the decision to issue each type of mining right; and
                                                                                 ?   The requirement to pay the first year’s administrative fees for the mining
Article [_]                                                                          right area as a condition for delivery of the mining right.
(1) All applications for mining licences are to be made using the prescribed
form available from the Ministry of Mines, a template of which shall be set
out in the decree implementing the present [Code][Act][Law].

(2) After correctly completing the form, the applicant is to file their
application at the relevant office, and retain the acknowledgement of receipt
which indicates the date and time, to the hour and minute, that the
application was filed, and is evidence of filing.

Article [_]
(1) Prospecting licences relating to a defined area shall be granted by a
decision either of [the regulatory authority] or its representative, within no
more than thirty (30) working days, to the first eligible person who filed an
application which meets the conditions specified in [the relevant article]
above.

(2) In cases where the applicant is applying pursuant to an exclusive permit
to reserve an area, they are to attach said permit, duly endorsed by the
authorities for the Provinces concerned, to their application.

Article [_]
(1) An operating licence for a defined area shall be granted, by a decision of
[the regulatory authority] or its representative, to the holder of a
prospecting licence or a small-scale mining licence for said area, as the case
may be, who filed an application which meets the conditions provided for in
[the relevant article] above during the period in which their licence was
valid.

(2) All operating licence applications are to be filed together with an
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                    54 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
environmental impact assessment drawn up in accordance with the
environmental protection regulations which are in force, and said report is
to be sent by the Ministry of Mines to the department responsible for the
mining environment, for assessment and approval from the relevant
Authority.

(3) Operating licences shall be issued within no more than thirty (30)
working days.

Article [_]
(1) A small-scale mining licence for a defined area shall be granted, by a
decision of the relevant Authority for the Province concerned, or its
representative, to the first eligible person who filed an application which
meets the conditions provided for in [the relevant article] above.

(2) Where the applicant is applying pursuant to an exclusive permit to
reserve an area, they are to attach said permit, duly endorsed by the relevant
authorities concerned, to their application.

(3) All applications are to be filed together with an environmental impact
assessment drawn up in accordance with the environmental protection
regulations which are in force, and said plan is to be sent by the Ministry of
Mines to the department responsible for the Mining Environment, and
approved by the relevant Authority.
(4) Small-scale mining licences shall be issued within no more than thirty
(30) working days.

Article [_]
The Ministry of Mines shall assess all mining licence application files and,
within twenty (20) days, shall send the ones which meet the required
conditions for granting the requested licence to [the regulatory authority] or
the relevant Authority for the Province concerned.

Article [_]
The initial mining right shall be issued by the Ministry of Mines once the
holder has paid the annual mining administration fees per square metre
relating to the first year.
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   55 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics

18. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision clearly sets forth
(1) Any person who wishes to apply to the [Regulating Authority] for a            guidelines for prospecting rights:
prospecting right must lodge the application –                                    ? The Authority with whom an application must be lodged;
                                                                                  ? The criteria for acceptance of the application;
(a) at the office of the [Regulating Authority] in whose region the land is       ? The obligation of the Regional Manager to accept the application if it
situated; (b) in the prescribed manner; and                                           complies with the criteria;
(c) together with the prescribed non-refundable application fee.                  ? The timeframe within which the Regional Manager is required to notify the
                                                                                      applicant of the acceptance or rejection of the application;
(2) The [Regulating Authority] must accept an application for a prospecting       ? The subsequent steps required of the applicant in order to complete the
right if                                                                              application process;
                                                                                  ? The obligation of the Regional Manager to forward the completed
(a) the requirements contemplated in subsection (1) are met; and                      application to the [regulating entity];
(b) no other person holds a prospecting right, mining right, mining permit or     ? The criteria based on which the [regulating entity] must accept or refuse an
retention permit for the same mineral and land.                                       application; and
                                                                                  ? The timeframe within which the [regulating entity] must notify the applicant
(3) If the application does not comply with the requirements of this section,         of the basis for her decision to refuse the application, if applicable.
the [Regulating Authority] must notify the applicant in writing of that fact
within [14] days of receipt of the application and return to the application to   Similar provisions apply to the acquisition of reconnaissance licenses and mining
the applicant.                                                                    leases under other sections of the law.

(4) If the [Regulating Authority] accepts the application, the [Regulating        These provisions allow the exercise of greater discretion by the granting
Authority] must, within 14 days from the date of acceptance, notify the           authority than do those of Madagascar, but nevertheless provide a basis for
applicant in writing –                                                            holding the processing and issuing authorities accountable for the issuance or
                                                                                  refusal of mineral rights in accordance with the law.
(a) to submit an environmental management plan; and
(b) to notify in writing and consult with the land owner or lawful occupier
and any other affected party and submit the result of the consultation within
30 days from the date of the notice.

(5) Upon receipt of the information referred to in subsection (4)(a) and (b),
the [Regulating Authority] must begin consideration of the application.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                     56 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
(6) The [Regulating Authority] may by notice in the [Gazette] invite
applications for prospecting rights in respect of any land, and may specify in
such notice the period within which any application may be lodged and the
terms and conditions subject to which such rights may be granted.

(7) Subject to subsection (4), the [Regulating Authority] must grant a
prospecting right if –
(a) the applicant has access to financial resources and has the technical
ability to conduct the proposed prospecting operation optimally in
accordance with the prospecting work programme;
(b) the estimated expenditure is compatible with the proposed prospecting
operation and duration of the prospecting work programme;
(c) the prospecting will not result in unacceptable pollution, ecological
degradation or damage to the environment;
(d) the applicant has the ability to comply with the relevant provisions of the
[Relevant Health Legislation]; and
(e) the applicant is not in contravention of any relevant provision of this
[Act][Code][Law].
(8) The [Regulating Authority] must refuse to grant a prospecting right if –

(a) the application does not meet all the requirements referred to in
subsection (1);
(b) the granting of such right will –
         (i) result in an exclusionary act;
         (ii) prevent fair competition; or
         (ii) result in the concentration of the mineral resources in question
         under the control of the applicant.

(9) If the [Regulating Authority] refuses to grant a prospecting right, the
[Regulating Authority] must, within 30 days of the decision, in writing notify
the applicant of the decision with reasons.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    57 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
(10) The granting of a prospecting right in terms of subsection (1) becomes
effective on the date on which the environmental management programme is
approved in terms of [relevant section].

                                                       19. Records and Reporting Requirements
Mining laws generally impose recordkeeping and reporting requirements on mining rights holders. However, many mining laws are either silent
or lax with respect to recordkeeping and reporting requirements of the regulating authority.

Recordkeeping and reporting requirements imposed on the regulating authority by legislation can serve a variety of important purposes, such as:

?   ensuring public access to information about the existence, nature, location and ownership of mineral rights;
?   ensuring appropriate use and protection of confidentiality of competitive information provided by mineral right holders;
?   providing a record for administrative or judicial review of decisions affecting mineral rights or applications for such rights;
?   providing a record of inspection results for follow-up and enforcement purposes;
?   providing increasingly detailed geological, environmental, production, trade and fiscal revenue information about the country ’s natural
    resource endowment and industries, for purposes of investment promotion, policy-making and policy evaluation;
?   promoting transparency and accountability; and
?   enabling legislative oversight of the administration of natural resources.

If such requirements are left to the regulations, there is little basis for legislative oversight of the implementation of the mining law. In some
mining laws of the Africa region, recordkeeping requirements are found in articles setting forth the duties of certain officials or institutions or in
articles describing application and mining right registration procedures. Confidentiality requirements for reports submitted by mining rights
holders are also usually set forth in separate articles, as noted in topic 11.

Reporting requirements with respect to geological information and production statistics are sometimes found in articles stating the duties and
responsibilities of key departments of the regulating authority. Consideration ought to be given to inclusion in the mining law of a more
comprehensive statement of the recordkeeping and reporting requirements applicable to the regulating authority, in order to promote transparency,
knowledge base enhancement, accountability and better public understanding of the contributions and challenges of the sector.
19. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_] Public access and archiving:                                        This is an example of a record keeping and reporting requirement that seeks to
(1) The registries of mining rights applications, issuances, transactions and   accomplish the following objectives:

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                58 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
withdrawals or other extinctions shall be open to inspection by the public      1) Free public access to information as to the location, nature and ownership of
during regular business hours or online. Copies shall be made available            all mining rights;
upon request for a fee to cover the reasonable cost of reproduction.            2) Responsibility of officials for the accuracy and truth of information recorded
                                                                                   in all mining rights and transaction registries, with safeguards against
(2) All entries in the registries of mining rights applications, issuances,        manipulation;
transactions and withdrawals or other extinctions shall be signed by the        3) Indefinite archiving of all internal reports such that they are available for
agent who made the entry. The entries made on each day shall be reviewed           review in formal legislative and judicial or arbitral proceedings (for easy
by the supervisor of the office in which the entries are made, who shall sign      implementation, such archiving should probably better be maintained
the registry for that day. Any corrections shall require the signature of the      electronically);
[Regulating Authority].                                                         4) Annual legislative oversight of the performance of the minerals sector; and
                                                                                5) Transparency and public awareness of mineral sector performance and
(3) All registries of mining rights applications, issuances, transactions and      contracts.
withdrawals or other extinctions shall be archived no less often than on an
annual basis, in chronological order, and shall be maintained indefinitely in   These requirements could be either expanded or made more general in nature.
a secure environment in either hard copy or electronic format.

(4) The administrative services in charge of geology, mining, environmental
permitting of mineral activities and inspection of mineral activities shall
maintain copies of all studies, reviews, evaluations, data compilations,
investigations, inspections and reports, organized within each service by
topic and chronological order. Such records shall be archived annually and
maintained indefinitely in a secure environment in either hard copy or
electronic format. Subject to confidentiality requirements, such records
shall be subject to disclosure to the committees of the [National Legislative
Authority] with responsibility for oversight of mineral activities and to
judicial or arbitration tribunals exercising jurisdiction over a relevant
dispute, upon formal request.

Article [_] Reporting
(1) The [Regulating Authority] shall prepare each year a report on the
activity of the mineral resource sector during the preceding year, including
the following: a description of the major positive and negative developments
in the sector during the year; the number of each type of mining right in
existence at the beginning and the end of the year; the geographical areas
covered by mining rights for mines and quarries, by mining rights, by
artisanal mining authorizations or sites, and by quarrying licences; a
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                   59 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
description of significant geological information developed (subject to
confidentiality requirements); statistics of production, sales and royalty
receipts for each mineral commodity, by type of mining right or
authorization; statistics of employment by type of mining right and position,
including average wages or salaries; statistics on health, safety and the
efficacy of environmental protection measures in the sector; administrative
fee income per type; and allocation or disposition of royalty and fee income.

(2) This report shall be delivered to the commissions of each chamber of the
[National Legislative Authority] no later than [date] of each year and shall
be posted on the website of the [Regulating Authority] for public review.

Article [_] Publication
The [Regulating Authority] shall publish on its website: all mineral
exploration and/or mining contracts entered into by the [State] or state-
owned enterprises; summaries of all preliminary and final environmental
impact assessments or studies for mineral projects; the [Regulating
Authority] ’s annual report on the sector; and annual statistical summaries
of exploration and mining results, royalties and fees charged and received.

19. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this example requires the regulating
(1) The [Regulating Authority] shall maintain records of all mineral            authority to collect and make available to the public information on mineral
concessions issued under this [Act][Code][Law] in sufficient detail             rights granted under the law. It is also drafted to enable the regulating authority
[including the following]: —                                                    to collect other relevant data such as records of transactions involving mineral
                                                                                rights. Unlike example 1 which provides significant detail of record keeping
(a) the name of the holder of the mineral concession;                           requirements, this example allows for a concise provision which may be
(b) the area subject to the mineral concession;                                 interpreted to require any information concerning a mineral concession when
(c) the date of issue and duration of the mineral concession; and               needed. Also unlike example 1, the access to information element is stronger as
(d) the mineral for which the concession is granted.                            there seems to be no costs associated with public inspection of records and
                                                                                obtaining of copies of materials of interest.
(2) Records maintained under subsection (1) shall be open to inspection by
members of the public during normal Government office hours, and
members of the public shall be permitted to take copies thereof.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                     60 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART A: General Topics
                                                            20. Dispute Resolution


Generally, dispute resolution provisions lay out processes for resolving disputes related to mining activities within and outside the court system
between companies, the government, impacted communities, and others with legal standing. It is good international practice to provide in a mining
law what will happen if there is a dispute between the rights holders in the mining sector. This creates trust that any dispute that arises will be dealt
with in a clear foreseeable manner. When provided for, the provisions are often limited in scope in order to accommodate issues that may arise in
contract negotiations with investors and/or obligations undertaken by countries who are party to Bilateral Investment Treaties (?BIT?). These
provisions may include reference to arbitration or mediation for disputing parties, and will frequently designate which authorities possess the
jurisdiction to adjudicate disputes and the scope of disputes to be adjudicated. It is important to ensure consistency with other laws that may also
address this topic such as investment laws.
Jurisdiction provisions are different from governing law provisions which provide for the law which should apply to the dispute when the courts,
arbitral tribunals or other alternative dispute resolution entities have jurisdiction.
Where the mining law provides for jurisdiction (such as national courts), it should explicitly establish whether such jurisdiction is exclusive or not.
This is because when the jurisdiction provision is not exclusive, the result will be that each mining permit and concession and other contractual
documentation could have different dispute jurisdictional mechanisms, such as courts and arbitral tribunals, which could give rise to forum
shopping as well as different types of decisions in the same type of dispute. This gives flexibility to the parties but not necessarily foreseeable
results which can be relied on in future disputes, thus defeating the objective of a consistent legal regime. An exclusive jurisdiction clause could
have multiple layers such as the obligation to mediate prior to filing a claim before an arbitral body or a court.
Best international practices suggest that whatever mechanism is chosen that it be clear as to which types of disputes will be covered by the
jurisdictional provision disputes. For example, will the provision (courts or arbitrators or dispute boards or mediators etc.) cover administrative
disputes such as license and permit granting and revocation of such license and permits; third party complaints such as human rights and
environmental issues; expropriation of land; disputes between the parties to a permit or concession over taxes, revenue, royalties, mine safety etc.
For a clear and stable regime, it is also best to have a simple rule where the scope of subject-matter jurisdiction is universal, meaning it applies to
all disputes arising out of the sector. The reason for this is that parties will often waste precious time disputing which matters fall within the
jurisdiction of the body (courts, arbitration, administrative tribunals, dispute boards, mediators etc.) as a litigation strategy to avoid a decision on
the underlying dispute.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                           61 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART A: General Topics
Mining laws generally encourage alternative dispute resolution mechanisms such as amicable resolution amongst the parties followed by
mediation, a process of negotiation with the support of a neutral third party. While very similar to arbitration, mediation differs in that there is no
need to submit evidence or testimony, as is typically expected in an arbitration process. It also differs in the sense that, mediation is usually not
binding on the parties. While mediation is not binding, it does provide a mechanism for the parties to address many of the matters at issue, and in
some cases, resolve some of the matters at issue, prior to resorting to arbitration or the national courts.
Due to the instability of certain judicial systems at least as perceived by investors, many investors prefer international arbitration. Some of the
perceived advantages of arbitration are: it is private, the parties choose the arbitrators, the arbitral forum is deemed more neutral and it usually
involves sector-specialized arbitrators, arbitration may be more efficient because the deadlines are fixed by the parties with the arbitrators, the
decision is final and can only be appealed in limited circumstances. In addition, for countries who are signatory to the New York Convention,
arbitral decisions are automatically enforceable (subject to exceptions detailed under Article 5 of the Convention) making it relatively easy to get
an arbitral award executed.
It is essential for a mining law to properly outline the dispute resolution process as a key piece in building a transparent legal framework for the
country’s mining sector. Given that mineral development agreements in Africa often establish dispute resolutions forums outs ide the resource
country, it may be beneficial to consider requiring the utilization or exhaustion of local dispute resolution processes (judicial and non-judicial)
prior to seeking out international forums in order to further the local development and/or consolidation of rule of law culture for the sector.
However, this also requires that any dispute resolution structure created locally be independent, above reproach and fully equipped with the
resources and expertise necessary to effectively resolve disputes. When the national courts are neutral, fair and efficient and investors can be
convinced of their reliability, then national courts are a good choice because they promote the rule of law in the country.
Ultimately, drafters of contracts and agreements entered into in the context of the mining law are advised to be vigilant to ensure coherence
between the dispute resolution clauses in the contract and those in the mining law.

                                                            20. Dispute Resolution
                                                                20.1 Jurisdiction


A mining law may choose to address jurisdiction as a topic on its own or as part of provisions addressing the function and collaboration among
regulating bodies.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                         62 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
As noted above, jurisdiction provisions detail what forum(s) will resolve disputes arising out of activities in the sector and what matters may come
before such forums. For a clear stable regime, the mining law should seek to streamline dispute resolution processes to eliminate forum shopping
and promote consistent resolution of disputes.
20.1. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Inspired by Ghana’s mining law (2006), this provision first indicates the scope of
                                                                                 disputes justiciable under the provision, namely all disputes arising from a matter
(1) Where a dispute arises between a holder of a mineral right and               expressly covered by the law. It then creates a dual step that requires the use of
[Country] in respect of a matter expressly stated under this                     alternative dispute resolution as the primary forum before the use of an arbitral
[Act][Code][Law] as a matter which shall be referred for resolution, good        forum. The provision also distinguishes between disputes between the Government
faith efforts shall be made through mutual discussion and alternative            and nationals and disputes between the Government and foreign nationals.
dispute resolution procedures, to reach an amicable settlement.                  However, it does not clarify the definition of a national. It would be important to
(2) Where a dispute arises between a holder who is a citizen and [Country]       clarify if a mining operating company which is established subject to the national
in respect of a matter expressly stated under this Act as a matter which         laws of the country but is wholly owned by a foreign company is deemed a
shall be referred for resolution, which is not amicably resolved as provided     national or a foreign national.
in subsection (1) within thirty days of the dispute arising or a longer period   This bifurcation of forums between nationals and non-nationals is attractive to
agreed between the parties to the dispute, the dispute may be submitted by       foreign investors, who generally prefer for forum to be determined by contract.
a party to the dispute, to arbitration for settlement in accordance with the
[Domestic Arbitration Law] or any other enactment in force for resolution        Paragraph 4 is a good clarifying/streamlining element for a provision that provides
of disputes.                                                                     for several different forms of dispute resolution because it requires parties to
                                                                                 specify in the contract the specific method of dispute resolution, selected from the
(3) Where a dispute arises between a holder who is not a citizen and the         options offered by the mining law.
[Country] in respect of a matter expressly stated under this Act as a matter
which shall be referred for resolution under this section, which is not
amicably resolved as provided under subsection (1) within thirty days of
the dispute arising or a longer period agreed between the parties to the
dispute, the dispute may, by a party to the dispute giving notice to all other
parties, be submitted to arbitration:

(a) in accordance with a[n] international machinery for the resolution of
investment disputes, as agreed to by the parties, or

(b) if the parties do not reach an agreement under paragraph (a) within
thirty days, or a longer period agreed between the parties, of the matter

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       63 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
being submitted to arbitration, in accordance with

 (i) firstly, the framework of a bilateral or multilateral agreement on
investment protection to which the [Country] and the country of which the
holder is a national, are parties, or

 (ii) secondly, if no agreement contemplated by subparagraph (i) exists,
the rules of procedure for arbitration UNCITRAL Rules.

(4) Each agreement granting a mineral right shall contain provisions on
the method of resolution of disputes that may arise under the agreement.

20.1. Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [__]                                                                   Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision also provides for the
                                                                               scope of disputes justiciable under the provision (albeit more detailed to include
(1) Any dispute arising between the holder of a mining right and               terms and conditions deriving from the mining right, i.e. the contract). It also
    [Country] in respect of the interpretation and application of this Act,    provides for a multiple step forum though in this case, a three step forum,
    its Regulations and the terms and conditions of mining rights shall be     incorporating the courts as the third and final forum. Unlike in Example 1, it does
    resolved, in the first instance, on an amicable basis.                     not provide for a duration for the progression of disputes from one forum to the
                                                                               next.
(2) Where the dispute is in the nature of a bona fide investment dispute,
    and such dispute is not amicably settled as provided under subsection      As noted above, to the extent that national courts are neutral and efficient, foreign
    (1) of this section, it shall be resolved in accordance with the           investors may be persuaded to use the national courts in lieu of international
    provisions of the [Domestic Arbitration Law] [or any other enactment       arbitration. The use of national courts is also likely to contribute to building
    in force for resolution of disputes].                                      capacity within the respective national judiciary in handling mining disputes. The
                                                                               exhaustiveness of the scope which eliminates the use of contracts to multiply
(3) Any other dispute between the holder of a mining right and the             potential forums and the non-discriminatory approach to all mining rights holders
    [Country] shall be resolved in the Federal High Court, if not settled in   also promotes consistent resolution of disputes.
    accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) of this section.


                                                                20. Dispute Resolution
                                                          20.2 Guarantee of Due Process

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      64 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        PART A: General Topics

Due process, often referenced in more detail in other national laws of a country, outlines certain procedural guarantees that will protect the parties’
interests. It is valuable for a mining law to address or restate (where applicable) due process guarantees as part of ensuring a consistent, stable legal
framework for the country’s mining sector. Due process guarantees are also particularly important as a concept as it applies to the creation and
management of review boards, experts, and similar institutions or roles.
20.2. Example 1:                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2006), this provision references a relevant
(1) Subject to the [Domestic Administrative Justice Law], any              national law that regulates administrative procedures. While it does not mention
administrative process conducted or decision taken in terms of this Act    “due process? explicitly, the substance of the provision ensures pr ocedural due
must be conducted or taken, as the case may be, within a reasonable time   process.
and in accordance with the principles of lawfulness, reasonableness and
procedural fairness.

(2) Any decision contemplated in subsection (1) must be in writing and
accompanied by written reasons for such decision.

20.2. Example 2:                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Unlike example 1, this suggested provision references a constitutional guarantee
                                                                           which can be interpreted to incorporate both procedural and substantive elements
The rights provided under this [Law][Act][Code] with respect to all        of due process.
activities related to the obtaining, possession, exploitation and
commercialization of minerals are guaranteed in accordance with the due
process provisions of the Constitution.

                                                             20. Dispute Resolution
                                                        20.3 Awards and Settlements


In cases where the mining law provides for alternative dispute resolution mechanisms that do not carry enforceability powers, resolutions arrived
at in such forums are generally only enforceable if incorporated into an official court judgement. As such, where a mining law allows for such
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                              65 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
mechanisms, it should also clarify whether such decisions are enforceable by virtue of the law or whether such decisions should seek the
imprimatur of the courts in order to be enforceable.
20.3. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision explicitly provides for
(1) The [Authorized Jurisdictional Forum] other than a court, may file for      the procedural steps to be taken in order to enforce decisions made by bodies other
execution, any order made under [relevant section] (Dispute Settlement          than the courts possess inherent authority. In this case, such orders or decisions are
Jurisdiction Provisions) to a court presided over by a [Judicial Reviewer]      filed with the court with subject matter jurisdiction to render them enforceable.
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the subject matter of the order
is situated.

(2) On receiving the order under subsection (1), the court shall cause the
order to be enforced as if that order was made by the court.

(3) The fees payable upon the enforcement of an order shall be those which
would be payable upon the enforcement of the like order made by the court
concerned.


20.3. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision makes the decision of an
(1) Decisions made by the arbitrator shall be binding and an application        arbitral body enforceable and goes further to waive any sovereign immunity
regarding enforcement said decisions may be brought before any court            defence against such awards.
with jurisdiction in the National Territory according to the procedures
provided for in the [Code of Civil Procedure for the Country] or in the
mining right holder's country.

(2) Should the provisions of the above paragraph be applied; the State
shall waive any immunity relating to jurisdiction or enforcement.
                                                                 20. Dispute Resolution
                                                                   20.4 Governing Law


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                        66 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics

Governing law is a principle that is often stipulated in contracts rather than in laws. When contracts choosing which law should govern disputes,
the national law should apply. However, there are exceptions to this general principle which include instances where there is no applicable national
law or the applicable national law is insufficient.
While some investors prefer the application of foreign governing law (e.g. Chinese Law, French Law, English Law), it should be a rare case where
foreign law is chosen to govern mining disputes. Some mining laws provide for the parties to decide on the governing law in the mining contracts.
It should also be noted that choosing a foreign law to apply to investment mining disputes will have the result of nullifying any national mining
law and all national laws which generally is not a good idea if a country wants to reinforce the rule of law in its country. Consequently, a mining
law may choose to preclude choice of law provisions from contracts that derive from it and instead mandate the application of national laws.
20.4. Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Liberia’s mining code, this provision allows for the contracting parties
The resolution of any dispute arising under any of the provisions of this     to decide what law applies. As noted above, this language can effectively nullify
[Law][Act][Code] between holders of minerals rights and between another       aspects of the Liberian mining law with respect to mineral contracts that derive
holder of such rights and the [Country] shall be governed by the respective   from it.
provisions provided for in such agreements.


20.4. Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Unlike in example 1, this suggested language creates a default application of
The laws of [Country] shall govern all contracts between the holders of       national laws in mining disputes unless the application of the law is waived
mineral rights and the [Country], unless otherwise waived by the              through an open and democratic process. While this approach may not be attractive
[Country] with the consent of the [National Legislative Authority].           to foreign investors, it promotes the evolution and strengthening of rule of law
                                                                              locally.

                                                              21. Miscellaneous Topics
                                                                  21.1 Expropriation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                   67 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
Generally, legislation authorizes expropriation when it is the public interest. Fair compensation is critical to the proper functioning of the concept
of expropriation. (For discussions on land-related expropriation and the concept of eminent domain, see Part D of the Guiding Template). When a
country’s constitution provides articles concerning expropriation, the mining law should reference the Constitution.
21.1 Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drafted to reference a constitutional provision and in this case, a provision drawn
                                                                              from Liberia’s Constitution, Article 24, this provision simply refers to the relevant
Expropriation is prohibited except as provided in [relevant article] of the   article of the constitution. In this case, the constitutional provision focuses on the
Constitution.
                                                                              right to expropriation by the government, in the event of armed conflict or where
                                                                              public health and safety are endangered, or for any other public purpose.

                                                                              It provides for prompt payment of just compensation and offers the right to the
                                                                              owner of the property to freely challenge the decision before a court of law. It also
                                                                              offers to the former owner of the property the right of first refusal to reacquire the
                                                                              property in the case the property ceases to be used for public use.

                                                                              The constitutional provision is replicated below:

                                                                              a) While the inviolability of private property shall be guaranteed by the Republic,
                                                                              expropriation may be authorized for the security of the nation in the event of armed
                                                                              conflict or where the public health and safety are endangered or for any other
                                                                              public purposes, provided:

                                                                                       (a) that reasons for such expropriation are given;

                                                                                       (b) that there is prompt payment of just compensation;

                                                                                       (c) that such expropriation or the compensation offered may be
                                                                                       challenged freely by the owner of the property in a court of law with no
                                                                                       penalty for having brought such action; and

                                                                                      (d) that when property taken for public use ceases to be so used, the
                                                                              Republic shall accord the former owner or those entitled to the property through
                                                                              such owner, the right of first refusal to reacquire the property.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      68 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
21.1 Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from the mining laws of Guinea (2011) and Mozambique (2014), this
                                                                              provision allows for expropriation only if it is in the public interest, which permits
(1) The [Country] assures the safety and legal protection of the ownership    expropriation if required in the public interest and in exceptional circumstances.
of goods and rights, including industrial property rights covered by the      The provisions suggest that even if the public interest so requires, there must also
authorised and carried out investments under the mining permit issued in      be a showing of exceptional circumstances. This is important for promoting an
accordance with this [Law][Act][Code] and other applicable legislation.       investment friendly environment as the rights actions of the state is generally in the
(2) When the public interest so requires and in exceptional circumstances,    public interest.
the holder of the mining right may undertake to expropriate buildings and     It also provides for the payment of compensation for expropriation in accordance
land necessary for the mining work and the facilities essential for the       with national applicable laws, in particular by providing fair, adequate and timely
mining operation, in accordance with the conditions set forth in the          payment of compensation through an independent valuation. The law also seeks to
legislation in force.                                                         strike a balance between the mineral right holder and the owner of the expropriated
(3) The holder of the mining right must pay any lawful occupant of land       property in order to ensure that the viability of the mineral project is not affected
required for its activities, compensation for the disturbance of enjoyment    and the expropriated person receives fair compensation.
suffered by such occupants

(4) In order to calculate the compensation value, the evaluation of
expropriated goods and rights as well as financial losses caused to the
investors by the State is made within [90] days, by mutual agreement, and
undertaken by a committee constituted for that purpose or by a recognized
audit company.

(5) The compensation mentioned in the preceding paragraphs shall be paid
within [190] days, or another time period mutually agreed, from the date of
the committee’s decision or of the presentation of the report by the audit
firm, based on the evaluation made in the terms of the previous paragraph.

(6) The appreciation time for a decision on the evaluation made and
submitted to the competent State authority shall not exceed [90] days from
the date of delivery and receipt of the file.

(7) The compensation due for expropriation for public utility under this
Article shall not, under any circumstance be less than the full amount
provided for compensation relating to rights of owners set out in other
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      69 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
areas of the [Code][Act][Law].

(8) The amount of the compensation must be reasonable enough in order
not to compromise the viability of the project, and proportional to the
disturbance caused by Mining Activities, in accordance with the
procedures set out in the [Code][Act][Law].

                                                              21. Miscellaneous Topics
                                                                  21.2 Force Majeure


As a general matter, force majeure concerns unforeseeable and unavoidable conditions such as war whether declared or not, civil disturbances,
riots, blockades, sabotage, embargo, natural disasters, earthquakes, fire, floods, volcanic eruptions and the like. It does not include preventable
conditions such as but not limited to labour strikes or a building collapsing due to poor construction.
In civil law jurisdictions, the Civil Code usually has an Article which defines the concept of Force Majeure and which would normally apply to
mining activities. In Common Law countries, force majeure is typically dealt with in mining contracts. However, countries may consider providing
for force majeure in a mining law.
21.2 Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), the provision defines force majeure as
                                                                              an unforeseeable event beyond a party’s control which makes the performance of
(1) Any events, acts or circumstances which are unforeseeable, compelling,    its obligation impossible under the circumstances. The provision enumerates
beyond the control or the wishes of a Party and which prevent said Party      events which can constitute Force Majeure, including wars, natural disasters and
from performing their obligations, or which make it impossible for said       more generally, any event beyond the party’s control with the exception of
Party to perform their obligations, constitute force majeure.                 economic hardships and fluctuation in the market price.
(2) The following events may constitute force majeure:                        The provision excludes events that could have been avoided, had it been for the
(a) war (whether declared or not), armed insurrection, civil unrest,          lack of due diligence of the party. It also excludes the events which only make
blockades, riots, sabotage, embargos, and general strikes;                    performance more onerous.

(b) any natural disaster, including epidemics, earthquakes, storms, floods,   The provision provides for the procedure in case of force majeure and states that

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                 70 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
volcanic eruptions, tsunamis or other types of extreme weather, explosions      the party invoking a case of force majeure has 15 days from the occurrence of the
and fires; and                                                                  event to notify its co-contracting party including the likely consequences of its
                                                                                occurrence.
(c) any other cause which is not within the control of the Party involved, as
defined in the present article, but excluding economic hardship resulting       The party shall exercise its best efforts to minimize the impact of the force majeure
from adverse market price fluctuations.                                         event and shall make effort to ensure, as soon as possible that normal performance
                                                                                of the obligations resumes. If the suspension of the performance lasts for more than
(3) Accordingly, the following does not constitute force majeure within the     a month, the parties shall meet to review the implication of the suspension of the
meaning of the present [Code][Act][Law]: any reasonably foreseeable act         obligations and shall try to reach an agreement to adapt the performance to the new
or event that could be guarded against by exercising reasonable diligence.      circumstances. If they cannot reach an agreement within three months after the
Similarly, any act or event that would make it more difficult or onerous for    occurrence of the event, the matter can be submitted to a conciliation and an
the person liable to perform an obligation to do so does not constitute force   arbitration proceeding at the request of one of the parties.
majeure.

(4) As soon as possible after an event of force majeure has occurred or has
been discovered, and by no later than fifteen (15) days of its
commencement, the Party who invokes force majeure must notify the other
Party, by registered letter with acknowledgement of receipt, setting out the
elements of the force majeure and its probable consequences for carrying
out the obligations contained in the legal instrument which establishes the
obligations.

(5) The Party concerned must at all times take any measures necessary to
minimise the impact of the force majeure occurrence on the performance of
their obligations and to ensure that normal performance of the obligations
affected by the force majeure occurrence is resumed within the shortest
possible time.

(6) If, following the occurrence of force majeure, the performance of the
obligations is suspended for longer than one (1) month, the Parties must, at
the request of either party, meet as soon as possible to consider the
implications of said events as regards the performance of the Agreement
and, in particular, as regards any kind of financial obligation imposed on
each Party, their affiliates and their subcontractors. In this last case, the
Parties should try to find a suitable financial solution to adapt the Project
to the new situation, in particular, taking any measures which shall ensure
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       71 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
that the Parties' economic situation stabilises in such a way that they may
continue with the Project.

(7) In the event that there is disagreement regarding the measures to be
taken three months after the event force majeure has been declared, either
Party may immediately start conciliation proceedings failing which,
arbitration proceedings.

21.2 Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Cameroon’s previous oil and gas law (2002), the provision leaves the
                                                                              implementation of force majeure to the choice of the parties to a contract and thus
The…contract may provide special schemes for force majeure and stability      remains vague on its conditions of application.
of economic and fiscal conditions, especially in case of worsening
conditions for its implementation of the intervention in the [Country], to
legislation or regulation after the date of entry into force.

                                                              21. Miscellaneous Topics
                                       21.3 Treatment of Minerals/Materials Not Under License
                                                   21.3(a) On-Site Procedure Requirements


This topic relates to the immediate measures which must be taken on-site in case of discovery or appearance of other materials or minerals not
under license during the execution of the mining right. It is important to address this topic in the mining law to ensure the existence of regulation
that allows countries to decide on a case by case basis if they directly want to exercise their rights on the minerals or confer rights to the licensees.
On-site procedure requirements are focused on physically securing the site and refraining from the exploitation of the specific material, until
receiving a license, if the rules allow for the obtaining of such license. It is the step immediately before reporting the discovery to the relevant
regulating entity. This should be the single way of dealing with discovery of minerals not subject to the existing mining license as it allows the
country prerogative to conduct a national interest analysis as to whether such a mineral should be mined or not.
21.3(a) Example:                                                              Annotation

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                   72 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
Article [_]                                                                     This suggested provision is designed to specifically address the on-site procedures
                                                                                in case a mineral not covered by a valid license is found. The reporting duties are
(1) In the case of discovery of a mineral not included in the license           addressed in a different provision. The purpose of this rule is avoid the unlawful
    granted, the licensee shall:                                                appropriation of minerals from the licensee or third parties, and the preservation of
(a) Secure the area where the mineral was discovered, not allowing third        the site to facilitate the evaluation of the discovery by the relevant regulating
parties to access it without the permission of the Licensor.                    entity.

(b) Mark the area in the way established by the governing agency, to
identify the site.

(c) Immediately stop the exploitation of the mineral not covered by the
license granted.

                                                               21. Miscellaneous Topics
                                        21.3 Treatment of Minerals/Materials Not Under License
                                                          21.3(b) Reporting Requirements


This topic is used to define unified reporting requirements with which the right holders must comply when they find/discover minerals or materials
not under license. It is important to include this topic to assure the flow of information to the country as it is the rightful owner of its own materials
and minerals. It is also important to avoid confusion between notification and amendment of the license.
21.3(b) Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article[_]                                                                      Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision shows the above -
(1) If in the course of exercising his rights the holder of a mining license    named important division between notification and amendment. The licensee may
discovers any other mineral to which such license does not relate, he shall,    apply for an extension apart from the notification of the discovery itself, which
within thirty calendar days after such discovery, notify the [Regulating        shall be an obligation in all cases. If the discovering licensee does not apply for an
Entity] giving particulars of the deposits or the mineral discovered, and the   extension, a third party can apply for it, and the regulating agency can grant it, if
site and circumstances of the discovery, and may apply to the [Regulating       that is convenient for the State’s interests.
Entity] to have the mining of such deposits or such mineral included in his
mining license, giving in the application a proposed program of mining
NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                        73 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART A: General Topics
operations in respect of that discovery.

21.3(b) Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Uganda’s mining law (2003), this provision, in addition to
                                                                                  distinguishing between a notification obligation and opportunity to amend an
(1) If in the course of exercising his or her rights under a mining lease the     existing license to include the new discovery, addresses the case in which the
holder of the mining lease discovers any mineral for which the lease does         discovering licensee does not wish to develop the newly discovered mineral. In
not relate, he or she shall, within thirty days after the discovery, notify the   such case and if it is in the public interest, the mining right can be granted to a
[Regulating Entity] of the discovery, giving particulars of the mineral           third party.
discovered and the site and circumstances of the discovery; and the holder
of the lease may apply to the [Regulating Entity] to have the mining of such      Since this option could create risks of conflict arising from overlapping mining
mineral included in his or her mining lease, giving in his or her application     areas between the initial rights holder and the second rights holder, the State
a proposed program of mining operations in respect of the discovery.              should ensure reasonable accommodation for the first licensee.

(2) Where the holder of a mining lease does not wish to develop a newly
discovered mineral or minerals, and it is in the national interest to do so,
the [Regulating Entity] may grant a mineral right under this Act to a third
party subject to the reasonable rights of the holder.

                                                                 21. Miscellaneous Topics
                                           21.3 Treatment of Minerals/Materials Not Under License
                                               21.3(c) Radioactive Materials – Special Provisions


This topic is about special rules which should apply to radioactive materials which are discovered during the exercise of a mining right. It is
important to regulate this topic because radioactive materials feature unique inherent risks and dangers. These risks and dangers are not only
related to the discovery itself, but also to the following disposal, circulation and final use of such materials. These risks are further escalated by the
growing ubiquity of non-state or loosely organized radical and violent groups. Many African countries do have a specific code concerning
radioactive materials. Therefore, all actions relating to radioactive materials have to be carefully regulated or referenced in the mining law.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       74 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART A: General Topics
21.3(c) Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision indicates the
(1) The provisions of this Act relating to exploration, and mining of          inclusion of the mining of radioactive materials within the scope of the mining law
minerals shall apply to radioactive minerals with such modifications as are    but provides for higher scrutiny of mining activities as it relates to the radioactive
provided in this Part and as may be prescribed in the Regulations              materials. This includes immediate notification of such discovery, the strictly
                                                                               regulated reporting requirements of such mining operations and the restrictions of
                                                                               export and disposal of such minerals.
(2) Where any radioactive mineral is discovered in the course of exercising
any right under this Act or any authority under any other enactment, the       For a clearer regime, it is necessary to include special provisions on the process for
holder of the mineral right or such other authority shall immediately notify   obtaining a license to exploit such radioactive materials, more frequent inspection
the [Regulating Entity], but in any case, not later than seven calendar days   of the mining facilities, and restrictions to the commerce of such minerals.
after the discovery.
                                                                               Finally, it is advisable to include specific penalties for offenses and breaches
                                                                               related specifically to this activity as such offenses may potentially have greater
(3) Where any radioactive mineral is discovered on any land other than         negative impact than offenses related to non-radioactive materials.
land subject to a mineral right, the owner or lawful occupier of the land
shall as soon after he is aware of such discovery notify the [Regulating
Entity].


(4) The holder of a mineral right in respect of a radioactive mineral shall
within the first week of every month, furnish the [Regulating Entity] with a
report, in writing, of the exploration and mining operations conducted by
him in the immediately preceding month.


(5) No person shall explore for or mine or treat or possess or export or
import or otherwise dispose of any radioactive mineral except under and in
accordance with the terms and conditions of a permit granted by the
[Regulating Entity].


(6) A permit issued under subsection (5) shall be in such form and shall be
subject to the payment of such fee as the [Regulating Entity] may prescribe.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                       75 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
21.3(c) Example 2:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision creates a “reserved class? of
                                                                              minerals based on safety needs. These minerals are subject to specific rules that are
(1) If required for the safety of the public, the President of the Republic   enumerated by special decree of the President. This provision also makes a point of
may, by Decree, and on the recommendation of the [the Regulatory              naming specific minerals (uranium, thorium, and all radioactive minerals) as
Authority], in accordance with the opinion of the [Geology Division],         automatically being placed in this class of mineral substances.
declare a mineral substance to be "reserved" and hence subject to special
rules.

(2) A Decree which classifies a mineral substance as a "reserved" shall
specify the rules and provisions which the substance is subject to. The
declaration shall be published in the [Official Gazette].

(3) Thorium and uranium ores and, in general, all radioactive ores shall
fall under the rules for reserved materials provided for in the above
paragraphs of the present Article.

                                                       22. General Offenses and Penalties
                                            22.1 General Provisions on Offenses and Penalties


A mining law should seek to define general offenses that apply to all mining rights and the legal consequences imposed, in addition to ones unique
to specific mining rights. A mining law may also incorporate references to appropriate offenses and legal consequences as enumerated under other
national laws such as criminal, fraud, labour etc. Penalties need to be commensurate with the type and gravity of the offence, as well as correlated
with different applicable sanctions. If appropriate, the law should primarily provide for administrative sanctions or fines, which are generally
easier to impose/execute than criminal sanctions.
Some countries like Uganda provide for a general penalties law that specifies the fines to be paid in “currency points? or “c urrency units?. This is
to accommodate currency fluctuations and regulate severity of the fines without modification of the mining law.
22.1 Example 1:                                                               Annotation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                     76 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART A: General Topics
Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Uganda’s mining law (2003), the provision includes a difference of
                                                                                 the severity of the fines between individuals and corporations. That is based in the
(1) No person may explore or prospect for, or retain or mine or dispose of       alleged different capacity to bear a fines but more specifically as a disincentivizing
any mineral in [Country] except under, and in accordance with, a licence         measure.
issued under this [Act][Code][Law].
                                                                                 The example also established a procedure that involves courts for its execution. In
(2) Any person who contravenes subsection (1) of this section commits an         African countries with civil law systems, fines may be treated as an administrative
offence and is liable on conviction –                                            punishment, and thus be decided and enforced by administrative entities, without
(a) in the case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding twenty-five currency   need of judges, who would be in any case able to control legality and
points, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or both; and           constitutionality of the actions of the government.

(b) In the case of a body corporate, to a fine not exceeding fifty currency
points.

(3) Where a person is convicted of an offence under subsection (2) of this
section, the court before which such person is convicted may –

(a) Order the forfeiture of all minerals unlawfully obtained by such person;

(b) And in the event that the minerals cannot for any reason be forfeited,
order the forfeiture of such sums of money as the court shall assess as the
reasonable value of the minerals; and any minerals or their value so
forfeited shall become the property of the Government and shall be
disposed of as the [Regulating Authority] may direct.

22.1 Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision focuses on violations of
                                                                                 the code with criminal law implications. Depending on the harm caused by the
(1) Any person who contravenes chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 of this                   offense, governments can consider using criminal law penalties. However, officers
[Law][Act][Code] hereof shall be guilty of an offense and shall be liable        must know that the enforcement of criminal penalties requires a higher legal
upon conviction in a court of law.                                               standard of evidence, which makes them more difficult to be successfully applied.
a. In this case of an individual, to a fine not exceeding Two Thousand           The criminal procedure is usually regulated in a specific procedural code.
United States Dollars (USD$2,000:00) or its equivalent in Liberian               In all cases, including the previous example, the forfeiture of the mineral extracted
Dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding twenty –four (24)            as the result of a legal violation is part of the penalty or a mechanism to enforce the

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                          77 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
months or to both such fine and imprisonment and                                economic penalties.

b. In the case of any other Persons to a fine not exceeding twenty-five
thousand United States Dollars (USD$25,000:00) or its equivalent in
Liberian Dollars.

(2) The court before whom a Person is convicted under Section [_] hereof
may order the forfeiture of all Minerals obtained by such Person or if such
Minerals cannot be located of such sum of money as may represent the
value of such minerals. Any mineral so confiscated shall be sold or
otherwise disposed of as the Court may direct and the proceeds of such
sales shall be paid into the Mineral Development Fund.

                                                       22. General Offenses and Penalties
                                                                      22.2 Liability


Mining activity entails high risk for all the stakeholders involved. Since a substantive share of the activities are carried out by the operator (either a
private corporation or a state owned company), thus making it the better risk bearer and the liability should be clearly borne by the operator. The
operator should clearly know the extent of that liability, and if it extends to its shareholders, agents or other representatives.
Insurance and warranties can replace liability, but if they are not available or applicable for any reason, the responsibility of indemnification
resides in the operator or holder of mineral rights.
22.2 Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision places liabil ity obligations
                                                                              in the rights holder except in cases where the wrongful act was ordered or carried out
(1) The holder of a mineral right shall indemnify, defend and hold the        by the country.
[Country] harmless against all actions, claims, demands, injury, losses
or damages of any nature whatsoever, including claims for loss or
damage to property or injury or death to persons, resulting from any act
or omission in the conduct of mining operations by or on behalf of the

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                      78 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART A: General Topics
holder.

(2) Such indemnity under subsection (1) shall not apply to the extent, if
any, that any action, claim, demand, loss, damage or injury has resulted
from any direction given by, or wrongful act committed on behalf of, the
[Country].

22.2 Example 2:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision provides for joint and
                                                                            several liability to eliminate the determination of relative culpability and avoid
Holders of mining rights are liable to the State for breaches committed     compounded disputes concerning the extent of liability when multiple parties are
under this [Law][Act][Code] by themselves, their employees, agents,         involved.
contractors and/or subcontractors. When several persons jointly hold
Mineral or Quarry Rights, their liability is joint and several.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                                79 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                        PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                  23. Types of Mineral Licences

A mining code may list in one provision the different categories of rights that are offered which allow authorized mining activities to take place.
There are typically several options for mineral rights. Most (but not all) mining laws make a distinction between rights for exploration and
exploitation of metallic or processed minerals and precious stones, on the one hand, and exploitation of industrial minerals, on the other hand.

The mining laws of all countries in Africa require separate mining rights for pre-exploitation activities – such as reconnaissance, prospecting or
exploration – on the one hand, and either mining or quarrying, on the other hand. However, the mining laws of some Latin American countries
such as Mexico and Peru provide for the grant of a single concession for exploration and mining.

The earliest stage of superficial investigation of mineral occurrences is generally called “reconnaissance? in Anglophone African countries and
“prospection? in Francophone African countries. It is frequently not an exclusive right. The subsequent phase of exclusive, in-depth investigation
is called “prospecting? in many Anglophone African countries and “exploration? or “recherche? in Francophone African countries.

Some Anglophone countries provide for an “exploration? licence following the expiration of the “prospecting? licence. Other A nglophone
countries also provide for a retention licence available at the termination of the exploration licence for the purpose of maintaining an exclusive
right to a significant mineral deposit the exploitation of which is not commercially feasible due to temporary financial, commodity market or
technical conditions.

Countries that favour greater administrative control over mineral activities tend to provide for licencing of more separate phases of pre-mining
activity, whereas countries that favour an investment-friendly environment tend to provide for licencing of fewer separate phases of pre-mining
activity.

Some but not all countries provide for the licencing of prospecting or exploration for industrial minerals. Those that do not do so tend to be the
countries that grant quarrying licences only to the owner of the surface estate.

At the mining stage, there may be several types of mining rights, depending on the type of mining involved, rather than on phases of operations.
The types of mining rights may include a small-scale mining lease, a semi-industrial mining lease, an industrial mining lease, and a tailings mining
lease.

For quarrying at the exploitation stage, there may be a temporary quarrying lease (for particular infrastructure construction projects) and a
permanent quarrying lease for the long term exploitation of industrial minerals for sale.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                  80 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
23. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (1999), this example states that only
(1) Mining permits shall have the following classifications:                      three mining rights are available under the Act for operations with respect to
                                                                                  metallic or processed minerals and precious stones:
(a) "R" licences, which confer on the holder an exclusive right to carry out
prospecting and reconnaissance work within a demarcated area;                     -The R Permit for prospecting and minerals research or exploration within the
                                                                                  delineated area;
(b) "E" licences, which confer on the holder an exclusive right to undertake      -The E Permit for exploitation, as well as prospecting and research within the
operations, as well as prospecting and reconnaissance, within a demarcated        delineated area; and
area;                                                                             -The PRE Permit reserved for small producers conferring the right to undertake
                                                                                  simultaneously prospecting, research and exploitation within the delineated
(c) Small-scale mining licences which confer on small-scale mining operators      area.
the right to undertake prospecting, reconnaissance and operations within a
demarcated area.

23. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this example sets forth in a single
(1) Subject to the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law], the right to search for   article all of the different types of mining rights available under the Act, but
or exploit mineral resources is obtained through one of the following mining      does not explain the differences among the rights. This type of article should be
rights in the form of-                                                            followed by separate subsections devoted to each type of mining right,
                                                                                  commencing in each case with an article describing the type and scope of
(a) a Prospecting/Reconnaissance Permit;                                          activities authorized by the respective mining rights. For example:
(b) an Exploration Licence;
(c) a Small-scale Mining Lease;                                                   Article [_]:
(d) a Mining Lease;                                                               A Reconnaissance Permit confers on the holder the [exclusive] [non-exclusive]
(e) a Quarry Lease; and                                                           right to conduct reconnaissance activities for [specified minerals] [metallic or
(f) a Water Use Permit.                                                           processed minerals] within the specified Reconnaissance Permit area during the
                                                                                  term of the licence, subject to the conditions specified in this law.

                                                                                  In this example, “reconnaissance activities? should be a defined term.

                                                                                  Issues to be considered in drafting the corresponding language for each type of
                                                                                  mineral licence include: (i) whether the licence confers an exclusive or a non-
                                                                                  exclusive right, and (ii) whether the licence confers a right with respect to all
                                                                                  metallic or processed minerals and precious stones or only a right with respect
                                                                                  to specified minerals.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                81 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                        PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance

                                                                           If the rights conferred by the licence are for specified minerals only, then the
                                                                           law should specify whether a licence may be issued to another qualified person
                                                                           to conduct mineral activities with respect to other minerals within the same area;
                                                                           and if so, what types of mineral licences for what types of minerals. It is
                                                                           frequently the case to provide for the issuance over the same area of both (a) a
                                                                           prospecting or exploration licence for metallic or processed minerals and/or
                                                                           precious stones and (b) a quarrying licence. It is less frequent and potentially
                                                                           controversial to provide for the issuance of two or more exploration or
                                                                           exploitation licences for metallic or processed minerals and/or precious stones
                                                                           over the same area.


                                          24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing

Prospecting/reconnaissance activities typically involve the preliminary assessment of the concentration and type of minerals on or under the land
within a defined area. These activities must often be conducted with a licence or authorization from a designated regulatory body, and generally do
not permit the extraction of any minerals from the land, other than small quantities of samples taken from outcroppings for analysis.
Prospecting/reconnaissance often, but not always, serves as a precursor to follow-on work under an exploration licence if indications of significant
mineral concentration are found.

                                                 24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                                 24.1 Eligibility


A mining law may restrict what classes of individuals or legal entities can receive a permit or authorization to conduct prospecting/reconnaissance
activities, either by defining who may or may not apply for the right, or by defining prior conditions that must be met before such an entity can be
considered eligible to apply. The eligibility requirements for this type of licence should clarify whether individuals and/or corporate entities are
eligible, whether foreign and national persons are eligible, and whether any technical or financial capability is required for eligibility, as well as
any criteria for disqualification.
Because the work authorized by the licence for this preliminary phase of activity is non-intrusive and not intense, the eligibility requirements are
generally less restrictive than for other mining rights. In some jurisdictions, there is freedom to exercise this activity and there is no mineral


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         82 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
licence required for it, although registration and identification are typically required.
24.1. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), this article recognizes both individuals
(1) Any natural person or legal entity with the required technical and          and entities, regardless of nationality or place of formation, as eligible to engage
financial ability to carry out reconnaissance surveys for indicators, and       in prospecting/reconnaissance activities under the conditions set forth in the law.
prospecting for mining and quarry materials, may carry out said activities      This is a very broad provision. It also requires, however, that the individual or
under the terms of the present Act. A Decree of the [President] shall specify   entity have the necessary technical and financial capacity as a condition of
what is meant by "technical and financial capacities."                          eligibility for prospecting/reconnaissance rights. The article delegates to the
                                                                                President of the Republic the authority to specify what is intended by the term
(2) Persons or companies which are subject to international sanctions or
                                                                                “technical and financial capacity?. Thus, in this example, the legislature
criminal investigations related to fraud, corruption or money laundering
may not obtain mining or quarrying titles.                                      establishes a very broad criteria of eligibility for authorization of
                                                                                prospecting/reconnaissance activity, but enables the executive to limit eligibility
(3) No natural person may obtain or hold a mining title or permit in the        based on technical and financial capacity criteria that the executive is authorized
event that:                                                                     to establish.

(a) they suffer from a legal disability preventing them from acting in their    The article also specifies additional types of persons not eligible for any mineral
own name; or                                                                    rights, including:

                                                                                ?   Persons subject to international sanctions or criminal investigation for fraud,
(b) they have been imprisoned for violating the provisions of the present
                                                                                    corruption or money laundering,
[Code][Act][Law] and its implementing regulations.
                                                                                ?   Any individual whose status is incompatible with the exercise of commercial
                                                                                    activities, such as public officials, and

                                                                                ?   Any individual condemned and sentenced to prison for violation of any
                                                                                    provisions of the Mining Code and its implementing decrees.

24.1. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Nigeria’s Mining Law (2007), the first article in this example clearly
A qualified applicant for a Prospecting/Reconnaissance Permit is-               and concisely states which Nigerian nationals, locally formed companies and
                                                                                mining cooperatives are eligible for what is called a reconnaissance permit under
(a) a citizen of [Country] with legal capacity and who has not been convicted   Nigerian law. The article applies only to the reconnaissance permit and does not
of a                                                                            mix in considerations other than eligibility. It therefore provides great clarity.
criminal offence; or
(b) a body corporate duly incorporated under the [Companies Act]; or


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                83 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
(c) a Mining Co-operative.                                                        Drawn from Afghanistan’s mining law (2014), the second Article in this example
                                                                                  presents a very specific and comprehensive list of persons and companies
Article [_]                                                                       prohibited from obtaining and holding any type of mineral licence. In some
(1) The following persons shall not be eligible to obtain or hold licences set
                                                                                  cases, the prohibition is unlimited. In other cases, the prohibition is removed
forth in this [Law][Act][Code]:
                                                                                  after a specified time period. Drafters should consider whether transparency and
(a) The President, Vice-Presidents, Ministers, Chief Justice and members of       corruption concerns warrant providing such a detailed list of persons and entities
Supreme Court, Attorney General, members of the National Assembly, Heads          that are not eligible for mineral licences. In some countries, the prohibitions
and members of the Independent Government Commissions, Governor of the            against licence holding by public officials are set forth in other laws. In such
Central Bank and General Director of National Directorate of Security,            cases, the issue is more likely to be one of enforcement rather than drafting.
Provincial Governors, Mayors, and General Directors of the Government             Even in those cases it may be desirable to repeat such prohibitions in the mining
Independent Agencies, advisors, experts and Deputy Ministers of the [Mining       law so that the application process is designed to screen out persons prohibited
Regulating Authority] and their relatives up to the second degree of              from obtaining mineral licences.
consanguinity or by marriage.

(b) Judges, Prosecutors, Members of Provincial and District Councils, any
Employee of the Ministry [in charge of Defence] or Ministry [in charge of
Interior Affairs] or of the General Directorate of National Security, advisors,
as well as experts and staff of the Commission, stipulated in [relevant
article] of this [Law][Code][Act] (describing the membership of the
Commission that reviews all licencing decisions and mining agreements,
among other things);

(c) Any person who has been declared bankrupt and who continues to be
bankrupt under the laws of [Country];

(d) Any person whose licence has been prematurely revoked, based on
justifiable reasons, by the [Regulating Authority] prior to the expiry of the
licence term.

(e) Companies in which the listed figures in (a) above, have obtained or will
imminently obtain direct or indirect benefits;

(f) A natural person who has been convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction to more than ten (10) years in prison or has been convicted of
administrative corruption and who has completed his or her prison term but
has not yet had his or her prestige restored;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                84 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
(g) Any legal person which is under a liquidation process, unless the
liquidation is for the restructuring of such legal person;

(h) Any legal person that is subject to an order of dissolution issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction;

(i) Any legal person in which one or more of its major shareholders,
members of the executive board or members of its board of directors would
be legally disqualified.

(j) Where one or more major shareholders of a legal person has been
convicted of violation of the provisions of this [Law][Act][Code]; and/or

(k) Any major shareholder of a legal person or a member of its executive
board is an existing employee of the [Petroleum Regulating Authority].

(2) Any person whose licence has been revoked, may not re-apply for all or
part of its revoked Licence Areas for two years from the date of revocation;

(3) A major share for the purpose of this [Law][Act][Code] means ten
percent or more of the total shares of a company.

(4) Any person stipulated in subsections (a) and (b) of Paragraph (1) of this
Article may obtain a Licence or Contract provided for in this
[Law][Act][Code] five years after termination of their term in office.

                                               24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                 24.2 Requirements for Licence Application


Regulatory authorities generally require that eligible persons (or entities) seeking authorization to conduct prospecting/reconnaissance activities
submit particular documents or show proof of certain criteria as part of the authorization process. Requirements for Licence applications vary
greatly from country to country, and can include (but are not limited to):
    -   Proof of domicile, for the individual applicant and/or corporate entity seeking authorization;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                 85 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
    -    Proof of a minimum level of financial and technical expertise to conduct the activities;
    -    A statement including any research already conducted about the mineral deposit potential of the site in question;
    -    Payment of fees associated with the application process;
    -    Submission of duly completed applicable forms.

24.2. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation
Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from the mining law of Sierra Leone (2009), this article requires detailed
(1) An application for the grant of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence          information about:
shall be submitted to the Mining Cadastre Office in the prescribed form and-
                                                                                       1) the applicant company, its directors and principal shareholders;
(a) shall contain the registered name and place of incorporation of the                2) the company profile and its history of prior reconnaissance and
company, its certificate of incorporation and certified copy of its                        exploration activities;
memorandum and articles of association, the names and nationalities of its             3) the supervisor of its proposed activities;
directors and the name of every shareholder who is the beneficial owner of             4) a map (plan) of the proposed licence area;
five percent or more of the issued share capital;                                      5) a description of the cadastral blocks comprising the proposed licence
                                                                                           area;
(b) shall contain the company profile and history of reconnaissance and
                                                                                       6) a statement of the applicant’s technical and financial resources,
exploration operations in Sierra Leone and elsewhere;
                                                                                           accompanied by a certified copy of the company’s audited financial
(c) shall identify the name and qualifications of the person responsible for               statements for the prior year;
supervising the proposed programme of reconnaissance operations;                       7) a proposed program of reconnaissance operations for the next year,
                                                                                           including cost, equipment to be used, and particulars of the responsible
(d) shall be accompanied by a plan of the proposed reconnaissance licence                  individuals;
area over which the licence is sought, drawn in such a manner and showing              8) the requested licence term (maximum of one year);
such particulars as prescribed;                                                        9) particulars of any mineral right held by the company or by any affiliate
                                                                                           of the company;
(e) shall be accompanied by a description of the contiguous blocks                     10) any significant adverse effects that the reconnaissance activity may
comprising the proposed reconnaissance licence area, identified in the                     have on the environment, any monument or relic in the proposed
prescribed manner, which shall be considered definitive should there be any                licence area, with an estimate of the cost of “combating such effects?;
discrepancy with the plan submitted under paragraph (d);                               11) proposals regarding the employment of [national] citizens.
(f) shall be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of the technical       This level of information required in an application for a
and financial resources available to the applicant, and a certified copy of its   prospecting/reconnaissance licence is high by international and regional
audited accounts for the year immediately preceding the application;              standards, particularly for a non-exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance licence as
                                                                                  is the case in Sierra Leone. The application requirement indicates that Sierra
(g) shall be accompanied by a proposed programme of reconnaissance
                                                                                  Leone intends to control access to mineral rights and strictly limit such access to



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 86 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
operations as prescribed setting out in detail the work intended over the next    qualified companies that demonstrate an ability to perform serious work
twelve-month period together with the estimated cost, with details of the         programs.
equipment expected to be used in connection with it and the names and
particulars of the persons to be responsible for the conduct thereof;             The prospecting/reconnaissance licence under the mining law of Sierra Leone is
                                                                                  non-exclusive, does not provide the holder with any priority for obtaining an
(h) shall state the period applied for which shall be no longer than one year;    exploration licence, and is not a prerequisite for obtaining an exploration licence.
                                                                                  Given the extent of the application requirement for a prospecting/reconnaissance
(i) shall give details of any mineral right held within Sierra Leone by the       licence that grants no exclusive rights or priority, it is not surprising that as of
applicant or by any person controlling, controlled by or under joint or           September 29, 2016 only 7 such licences have been issued under the mining law
common control with the applicant;                                                of Sierra Leone; all have expired; and none have been issued since 2012. This
                                                                                  indicates that the rights provided by the prospecting/reconnaissance permit under
(j) shall provide details of any significant adverse effects which the carrying
                                                                                  Sierra Leone’s mining law are viewed as insufficient for applicants to make the
out of the programme of reconnaissance operations would be likely to have
                                                                                  commitments required by the application requirements. These application
on the environment and on any monument or relic in the proposed
reconnaissance area and an estimate of the cost of combating such adverse         requirements would be more appropriate for a prospecting/reconnaissance
effects;                                                                          licence that grants an exclusive right over the licence area and the exclusive right
                                                                                  to apply for an exploration or mining licence within that area during the term of
(k) shall give or be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of the         the prospecting/reconnaissance licence.
applicant’s proposals with regard to the employment of [national] citizens;
and

(l) may set out any other matter which the applicant wishes the [Regulating
Authority] to consider.

24.2. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation
Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from the Republic of Congo’s mining law (2005), this provision requires
(1) Applications for prospecting permits as provided for in Articles [_] and      information about the composition and the quality of the members of the
[_] (on the authority to grant a prospecting permit and its scope) above are      applicant’s leadership team, a comprehensive description of the intended
to be sent to [the regulatory authority] and must include:                        technical program and a detailed description of the planned financial effort. As in
                                                                                  Sierra Leone, the prospecting/reconnaissance licence available under the mining
(a) an application, duly signed by the managing director of the company           law of the Congo is non-exclusive and does not provide the holder with any
requesting the mining title;                                                      priority for the grant of an exploration licence. That is the case generally in
 (b) the company's constitutional documents;                                      African countries that offer reconnaissance licences.
 (c) the composition of the management team and the positions of its
members;                                                                          Countries that wish to strictly limit access to prospecting/reconnaissance rights in
 (d) the comprehensive technical programme:                                       order to ensure that they are only granted to qualified applicants who can be
(e) the details of the financial outlay per item;                                 expected to carry out a serious work program - while respecting the natural and
                                                                                  social environment and reporting accurate results of their work - should consider


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  87 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
 (f) the detailed business card for the company, along with the latest balance    whether the scope of the prospecting/reconnaissance rights are commensurate
sheet for the financial year for said company:                                    with the application requirements. If the rights are of very limited value, they are
(g) what the company requires locally.                                            likely to be ignored and bypassed.

(2) An application for a prospecting permit is to be drawn up in two original
copies, one of which must be stamped, in the case of a general application,
and in four original copies, two of which must be stamped, if it relates to
substances in categories [_] as provided for in Article [_] (on the
classification of mineral substances). It shall indicate the extent of the area
and the minerals applied for.

                                                   24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                       24.3 Licence Refusal Appeal Process


Because a prospecting/reconnaissance licence is the entry level licence for authorized mineral development activity, prior to which applicants will
not have made any recognized significant investment based on any existing rights, many countries that require or provide such licences provide no
recourse under the Mining law in the event that an application for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence is refused. In such cases, any recourse
would have to be based on the provisions of general administrative law rather than provisions of the Mining law. However, there may not be any
right to obtain a prospecting/reconnaissance licence under the Mining law in those situations – particularly if activity under a
prospecting/reconnaissance licence is not required prior to application for an exploration licence. On the other hand, mining laws typically
provide a general appeal process that may cover the refusal of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence – especially where the
prospecting/reconnaissance licence is a necessary prerequisite of an application for an exploration licence. For the purpose of a clearer legislative
regime, it may be reasonable for mining laws to distinguish between the processes that apply to particular licences such that extensive processes
that would apply to a large scale mining licence, could not be interpreted to apply to a prospecting/reconnaissance licence due to the general
reference of the enumerated process to all mining licences.
24.3. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       If the mining law provides for the licencing of prospecting/reconnaissance
A decision of the [Regulating Authority] denying the issuance of a                activity but does not require that the applicant for an exploration licence (for the
prospecting/reconnaissance licence shall not be subject to reconsideration        next phase of mineral resource development activity) have previously carried out
or appeal.                                                                        work on the area under such a licence as a condition for obtaining an exploration



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  88 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                                                   licence, and does not grant the prospecting/reconnaissance licence holder an
                                                                                   exclusive right to obtain an exploration licence for the subject area (in other
                                                                                   words, if the law permits an applicant to forego the prospecting/reconnaissance
                                                                                   phase without prejudice) then for the sake of administrative convenience and
                                                                                   efficiency it may be reasonable to provide that decisions to reject applications for
                                                                                   prospecting/reconnaissance licences are not subject to reconsideration or appeal,
                                                                                   as in this example.

24.3. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        If the mining law provides for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence as an
(1) A decision of the [Regulating Authority] denying the issuance of a             exclusive right, and also provides that only the holder of that right is entitled to
prospecting/reconnaissance licence shall state the reasons for the decision.       subsequently request and obtain a licence for the next phase of mineral resource
The party whose application for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence has           development activity (e.g., exploration), then the denial of the
been rejected may, within ten business days of receipt of notice of the            prospecting/reconnaissance constitutes a barrier to entry into mineral resource
decision, submit to the [Regulating Authority] a request for reconsideration       development activity.
of the decision, in writing, together with relevant documentation and
arguments in writing.                                                              In such cases, for considerations of accountability, transparency, protection
                                                                                   against corruption, and due process, best practice would require (1) reasoned
(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall issue its decision on reconsideration,        written decisions for denials of applications for prospecting/reconnaissance
stating the reasons therefore, within thirty (30) days of the filing of a timely   licences, (2) an opportunity for reconsideration by the regulatory authority, (3) an
request for reconsideration.                                                       appeal to a superior administrative authority, and (4) a judicial appeal of the
(3) If the decision on reconsideration affirms the initial decision of denial,     administrative decision on appeal.
the applicant may appeal the decision on reconsideration in writing together       The example of such a best practice provision presented here is inspired by
with relevant documentation, to the [Administrative Reviewer] within fifteen       provisions of the mining laws of Uganda (2003) and South Africa (2002).
(15) business days of receiving such decision.

(4) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall issue his or her decision on appeal
in writing, stating the reasons therefore; and said decision shall be notified
to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the filing of a timely appeal.

(5) If the decision of the [Administrative Reviewer] on appeal affirms the
initial decision of denial, the applicant may, within 45 days of receiving
notification of the decision on appeal, apply to the [Judicial Reviewer] for
review of the decision and seek such remedy as the [Judicial Reviewer] is
empowered to grant.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                   89 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                         PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
(6) The filing of a request for reconsideration or appeal of the initial
decision of denial does not suspend the administrative decision denying the
application unless so ordered by the [Regulating Authority] or the
[Administrative Reviewer], as the case may be.

                                                24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                                       24.4 Area


In jurisdictions that licence reconnaissance-type prospecting activity, areas are typically larger than exploration areas, which are usually larger
than mining areas, because reconnaissance, prospecting and exploration proceed from larger to smaller areas as the increasingly intense
investigation of mineral occurrences identify and focus on a targeted deposit. A mining law may provide for relinquishment, or the process of
mandatorily reducing the area under the prospecting/reconnaissance licence during successive renewals.
Because prospecting/reconnaissance licences are for very large areas, if the mining law provides for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence that is
exclusive and has a term of more than one year (including renewal), it should require either relinquishment of part of the area (typically half) after
the initial year or, alternatively, a doubling of the annual fee per unit area for the second year in order to prevent or discourage the tying up of
more area than a company can reasonably investigate during the term (including renewals) of the licence, and to encourage focusing on the most
prospective areas.
If the mining law provides for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence that is non-exclusive, or has a term limited to one year, with no renewals, then
the risk of non-productive tying up of excessive areas is low. If the licence is exclusive but limited to a one-year nonrenewable term, the mining
law will likely not grant an exploration licence for the subsequent phase of mineral resource development activity over the entire area covered by
the prospecting/reconnaissance licence because the maximum size of an exploration licence area is generally significantly smaller than the
maximum size of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence area.
Alternatively, a mining law may limit the size of the area for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence area by charging annual maintenance fees per
unit area that are relatively high or that increase in proportion to the size of the licenced area.
24.4. Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example sets a very large
A prospecting/reconnaissance licence area shall not exceed ten thousand       limit on the size of a reconnaissance licence area. The reconnaissance licence is
(10,000) square kilometres.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            90 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                                                  non-exclusive under the mining law of Sierra Leone.

24.4. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), the maximum are a of a reconnaissance
(1) The area of land in respect of which a reconnaissance licence may be          licence – which is exclusive under the Act (i.e. for the minerals to which the
granted shall be a block or any number not more than five thousand                licence relates) – is defined in terms of blocks. The size of the blocks is in turn
contiguous blocks each having a side in common with at least one other            defined in the article of the law describing the Cadastral System for mining, by
block the subject of the application.                                             reference to the geographical projection to be used for identifying the borders of
                                                                                  areas subject to mining rights. Thus, the area is a function of the defined
(2) For purpose of this [Act][Code][Law], the surface of the Earth shall be
                                                                                  cadastral grid system, which assures consistency among all licence areas.
deemed to be divided in accordance with the co-ordinates represented in the
official maps of [Country] held at the [Regulating Authority] at a scale of
1:50,000,

(a) by the meridian of Greenwich and by meridians that are at a distance
from that meridian of 15 or a multiple of 15 seconds of longitude,

(b) by the equator and by parallels of latitude that are at a distance from the
equator of 15 or a multiple of 15 seconds of latitude, into sections
(“geometric sections?) each of which is bounded,

(c) by portions of those 2 meridians that are at a distance from each other of
15 seconds of longitude, and

(d) by portions of 2 of those parallels of latitude that are at a distance from
each other of 15 seconds of latitude.

(3) For purposes of this [Act][Code][Law]

(a) a geometric section that is wholly within [Country] constitutes a block
and

(b) where only part of a geometric section is within [Country], that part
constitutes a block.

                                                   24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 91 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                 24.5 Specific Obligations of a Licence Holder


Provisions that lay out, for the holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence, the necessary responsibility or duty to undertake certain actions, or
restrictions from undertaking certain actions or causing certain effects, are collectively treated as obligations. Obligations may be addressed in a
number of different ways: in articles specific to the prospecting/reconnaissance licence, in general provisions that apply to all licences, and
sometimes in other miscellaneous parts of a mining law. Obligations to be considered include the following:
    1)  Central identification and registration of all prospecting/reconnaissance team members;
    2)  Notification of local authorities before entering or leaving a prospecting/reconnaissance area;
    3)  Stay out of areas subject to existing mining rights other than non-exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance areas;
    4)  Obtain consent of landowners and lawful users prior to entering land privately owned or subject to lawful customary usage;
    5)  Adhere to environmental guidelines or code of conduct, including site protection and restoration;
    6)  Not engage in trenching, drilling or other invasive exploration activities;
    7)  Declaration of samples to the Department of Geology as a condition for removing them from the site;
    8)  General obligation to report results to all relevant Government bodies;
    9)  Obtain authorization for the export of samples (that is, small rock samples chipped from outcroppings because no drill core or bulk
        sampling is authorized at this stage); and
    10) Submission of a report of findings.

24.5. Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision describes the obligations
(1) A Prospecting/Reconnaissance Permit shall be granted subject to the      of the prospecting/reconnaissance permit holder. The article contemplates
covenants and conditions that the holder thereof shall-                      additional specifications in the regulation, contains a reporting requirement for
                                                                             licensees and prohibits any subsurface exploration, including drilling or
(a) carry out prospecting/reconnaissance on a non-exclusive basis;           excavation.
(b) not engage in drilling, excavation or other sub-surface techniques;      Paragraph 3 of the provision in the example essentially exempts the rights
(c) submit information and such periodical reports as may be prescribed by   granted under the prospecting/reconnaissance licence from the requirements of
the [Regulating Authority];                                                  the Land Use Act, because of the limited term and nature of the licence and the
                                                                             detailed provisions elsewhere in the mining law regarding notification, consent
(d) conduct reconnaissance activities in an environmentally and socially     and compensation of land owners or lawful users in connection with licenced
responsible manner as may be prescribed by the [Regulating Authority]; and   mineral activities. Those other detailed provisions on reconciling temporary



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                           92 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
(e) compensate users of land for damage to land and property; and pay the         access rights to land under a prospecting/reconnaissance licence with other
fees prescribed by regulation.                                                    existing and prospective lawful uses of the land are crucial to a successful
                                                                                  outcome and the avoidance of conflict among competing land uses.
(2) The activities allowed under a Prospecting/Reconnaissance Permit
together with corresponding environmental and social obligations shall be
further specified in regulations.

 (3)    Prospecting/Reconnaissance         activity    authorised    by      a
Prospecting/Reconnaissance Permit shall not constitute a land use right for
the purposes, objectives, rents, fees and requirements of the [Land Use Act].

24.5. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Uganda’s mining law (2003), this example covers most of the
(1) No prospecting/reconnaissance licence shall authorise the holder of the       requirements that would be considered best practice, particularly with respect to
licence to prospect over an area of land that is, or forms part of -              (a) areas that are off-limits and (b) site restoration.

(a) An exploration area, a mining area, a retention area or a location licence    Licensees are obligated to remove all equipment and structures used during the
area; or                                                                          prospecting/reconnaissance operation and repair any damage to the surface.

(b) a forest reserve, game reserve, national park, or an urban centre, unless
the holder of the prospecting/reconnaissance licence has first given notice to
and obtained permission from the relevant authorities and complies with any
conditions imposed by such authorities.

(2) Where it is necessary to fly over any land for the purpose of exercising
any right under a prospecting/reconnaissance licence, nothing in this section
shall prevent any such flight from being undertaken, provided it is in
accordance with the provisions of [relevant section] (requiring compliance
with other applicable laws) of this [Act][Code][Law].

(3) The holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence shall-

(a) subject to section (1) of this article, carry on prospecting/reconnaissance
operations in accordance with the licence;

(b) submit to the [Regulating Authority] quarterly, or at such other intervals
as may be prescribed, geological and financial reports and such other



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                93 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
information as may be prescribed by regulation;

(c) report any mineral discovery to the [Regulating Authority]; and

(d) remove on or before the expiration of the prospecting/reconnaissance
operations, any camps, temporary buildings or installations which may have
been erected; and shall repair or make good any damage caused to the
surface of the land to the satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority].

                                                  24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                          24.6 Rights of a Licence Holder


The rights of a reconnaissance-type prospecting licence holder are generally limited to the right to conduct non-invasive
prospecting/reconnaissance activities as defined, within the licenced area, on a non-exclusive basis, and to collect samples in small quantities for
analysis. A clear definition of the scope of this reconnaissance-type of prospecting, and how it differs from exploration, is therefore essential. A
prospecting/reconnaissance licence may include the right to conduct airborne geophysical surveys, as in Sierra Leone and Uganda. Because it is
usually non-exclusive, this type of licence generally does not entitle the holder to a priority for obtaining an exploration licence. However, an
exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance licence that does entitle the holder to such a priority is available under the mining laws of Ghana and
Liberia, and constitutes a more valuable initial mineral right than the typical non-exclusive licence.
24.6. Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example is a fairly standard
(1) Subject to this [Act][Code][Law] and the conditions of a reconnaissance   statement of the rights of prospecting/reconnaissance licence holders. The rights
licence granted under this [Act][Code][Law], the holder of a                  in this case are limited to superficial investigation and reasonable sampling
reconnaissance licence, his employees, servants or agents shall have the      without the use of drilling or other invasive techniques (based on the definition of
non-exclusive right to carry on reconnaissance operations in the              reconnaissance in the mining law).
reconnaissance area.
                                                                              The rights are non-exclusive and do not convey any priority to obtain an
(2) For the purpose of exercising the right conferred under subsection (1),   exploration licence for the subsequent phase of mineral resource development
the holder of a reconnaissance licence may-                                   activity.
(a) enter on or fly over the reconnaissance area to carry on approved



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              94 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
reconnaissance operations on a non-exclusive basis;

(b) take and remove specimens and samples from the reconnaissance area
not exceeding such limit as is reasonably required for reconnaissance
purposes;

(c) sell, with the prior written permission of the [Regulating Authority],
mineral specimens and samples obtained from reconnaissance operations;

(d) subject to any law then in force, take timber and water from any lake or
watercourse for the purposes of reconnaissance operations;

(e) erect camps and temporary buildings, including installations in any water
forming part of the reconnaissance area provided that the erection of any
camp or building under this paragraph shall not be construed as conferring
any right, title or interest in the land;

(f) remove on or before the termination of the reconnaissance operations,
any camps, temporary buildings or installations which the holder may have
erected.

24.6. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this example provides for the exclusive
(1) Subject to this [Act][Code][Law] and the Regulations made under this         right to conduct reconnaissance with respect to specified minerals in the area that
[Act][Code][Law], a prospecting/reconnaissance licence confers on the            is covered by the licence. Drafters should consider clarifying whether the
holder and a person authorized, in accordance with this [Act][Code][Law]         exclusivity conferred by the licence means (a) that no other mineral activity
by the holder of the prospecting/reconnaissance licence, the exclusive right     whatsoever by another person will be authorized within the licence area during
to carry on reconnaissance in the reconnaissance area for the minerals to        the term of the licence or (b) no other mineral activity by another person with
which the reconnaissance licence relates and to conduct other ancillary or
                                                                                 respect to the specified minerals will be authorized during the term of the licence,
incidental activity.
                                                                                 but mineral activity as to other minerals may be authorized.
(2) For the purposes of exercising the right conferred under subsection (1), a   This provision specifically empowers the licence holder to authorize another
holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence and a person authorized in        person to conduct the reconnaissance operations on behalf of the holder,
accordance with this [Act][Code][Law] by the holder of the                       provided the authorization is done in accordance with the mining law. Care
prospecting/reconnaissance licence, may enter the reconnaissance area and        should be taken in other articles to prescribe the qualifications of such third
erect camps or temporary buildings, subject to compliance with the               parties and the nature of their relationship with the licence holder.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 95 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].                                              The scope of the activity authorized by the prospecting/reconnaissance licence in
                                                                                  the example – “reconnaissance ... and other ancillary or incidental activity? – is
(3) A holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence shall not engage in          defined in the definition of “reconnaissance? in the “Interpretation? section of the
drilling or excavation.                                                           mining law, which is the standard approach to drafting such provisions. The
(4) If a holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence applies for an            example adds the authorization to conduct ancillary and incidental activities to
exploration licence over all or part of the land and for a mineral which is the   ensure inclusion of necessary related activities.
subject of the prospecting/reconnaissance licence and the holder has              This provision includes one specific authorization as to land use and one specific
materially complied with the obligations imposed by this [Act][Code][Law]         prohibition as to drilling and excavation (for emphasis, even though those
with respect to                                                                   activities are excluded by the definition of reconnaissance). The land use
(a) the holding of the licence, and                                               authorization is typically qualified (in other articles) to require non-interference
                                                                                  with existing land uses to the extent possible, consultation with other land users,
(b) the activities to be conducted under the licence,                             and compensation for any damage or interference with other lawful uses of the
                                                                                  land.
The [Regulating Authority] shall within sixty days of the application, subject
to the permits and other obligations required by law having been complied         The provision in this example requires the Regulating Authority to grant the
with, grant the applicant the exploration licence on the conditions that shall    holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence an exploration licence if the
be specified in the licence.                                                      holder has materially complied with the obligations under the Act. By granting
                                                                                  the holder who is in compliance the right to obtain a licence for the subsequent
                                                                                  phase of mineral resource development activity, this article provides security of
                                                                                  tenure to the licence holder and thereby encourages investment in “greenfield?
                                                                                  reconnaissance (for which the success rate is very low). The exclusive nature of
                                                                                  the prospecting/reconnaissance licence and the security of tenure that it provides
                                                                                  to the holder are considered by the mining industry to be valuable rights.

                                                    24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                                   24.7 Term of Licence


Not all mining laws provide for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence. However, among those that do, the terms of such licences vary from three
months to two years.
In general, because the purpose of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence is to enable large scale but non-invasive investigation of an area’s
mineralization that, if successful, leads to exploration work which usually involves extensive drilling, the terms of prospecting/reconnaissance


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  96 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
licences are not long. Most mining laws that include separate licencing of reconnaissance activity provide a term of one year for the licences.
A few African countries (such as Ghana, Liberia, Madagascar and Namibia) grant prospecting/reconnaissance licences for periods of less than or
up to a year. Under their Mining laws, the holder of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence has a right that is exclusive (or that may become
exclusive, in the case of Namibia) and that has a priority for obtaining an exploration licence for the subsequent, more narrowly focused, phase of
mineral resource development activity. In Madagascar, the term of an Exclusive Perimeter Reservation Authorization, under which
reconnaissance activity is authorized, is limited to three months and is non-renewable.
24.7. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this is a typical term for a non -
A prospecting/reconnaissance licence shall be valid for a period not            exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance licence that confers no right or priority to
exceeding one year.                                                             obtain an exploration licence.


24.7. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision provides a shorter term
The [Regulating Authority] upon receipt of an application by an Eligible        for an exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance right that includes the right to obtain
Applicant for any Mineral Right that conforms to the requirements set forth     an exploration licence for the subsequent phase of mineral resource development
in this [Law][Act][Code] or in the Regulations, shall grant such Person a       activity if the holder is in compliance with his/her/its obligations under the initial
Reconnaissance Licence for the area applied for subject to the following        licence.
terms and conditions.

a) that the [Regulating Authority] shall grant and issue a Reconnaissance
Licence for a maximum period of six (6) months


24.7. Example 3:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (2005), this example provides for an
An Exclusive Permit to Reserve an Area confers on the holder an exclusive       AERP – which is an exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance licence with an
right to prospect and then, should the need arise, apply for a mining licence   exclusive right to apply for an exploration or exploitation licence during the term
with a view to prospecting and/or carrying out mining operations, for one or    of the AERP – with a very short term of 3 months. Reconnaissance-type
more zones within the area covered by the permit.                               prospecting activities are authorized under the AERP. The purpose of this
                                                                                licence is primarily to enable prospective applicants to reserve an area while
                                                                                conducting due diligence on it, contacting the local authorities, initiating an



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  97 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                        PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                                         environmental impact assessment and assembling an application for an
                                                                         exploration licence or a small scale mining licence (as spelled out in other
                                                                         omitted paragraphs of the article in the mining law of Madagascar).

                                                                         To avoid abuses, this provision forbids renewals of AERPs and further restricts
                                                                         any applicant from obtaining a new AERP on any part of the surface area
                                                                         covered by the initial AERP for three years after it expires.

                                                                         The short term of the AERP is thus inversely proportional to the robustness of
                                                                         the exclusive rights conferred. Because the AERP provides a very strong
                                                                         exclusive right, its term is kept very short in order to avoid tying up excessive
                                                                         areas of land that are not being explored.

                                              24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                          24.8 Renewal of Licence


Addressed often at the same time as the term of licence, renewal determines when, for how long, and how many times a licence holder may extend
the duration of the prospecting/reconnaissance licence. Among African mining laws that provide for prospecting/reconnaissance licences, some
provide that they are not renewable, others provide that they are renewable or extendable only once for a period equal to that of the initial term,
and a couple of mining laws provide that they are renewable indefinitely.
If the prospecting/reconnaissance licence provides an exclusive right to conduct mineral resource development activities in a specific area and
includes the exclusive right to apply for an exploration licence and to obtain such licence if in compliance with all requirements of the
prospecting/reconnaissance licence, then renewals tend to be, and should be, kept to a minimum in order to avoid tying up vast areas of land for
limited, non-invasive preliminary investigations that should be accomplished within a short period of time.
In cases where the prospecting/reconnaissance licence is non-exclusive and includes no right or priority to obtain an exploration licence for the
next phase of mineral resource development activity, there is no risk that its existence will freeze any areas of land from further mineral resource
development activities. In such cases, a more liberal rule on renewals may be appropriate.
24.8. Example 1:                                                         Annotation

Article [_]                                                              Drawn from Ghana’s Mining law (2006), this article provides for one extension



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                       98 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a reconnaissance licence may be extended once       of the term of an exclusive reconnaissance licence for up to a year, and a
only and for a period not exceeding twelve months.                                 conditional further extension up to a year if the condition is met. As noted
                                                                                   above, Ghana seeks to encourage investment in greenfield investigation by
(2) Where, at least one month before the end of the extended period, or            granting the reconnaissance licence holder an exclusive right to obtain an
within the shorter period that the [Regulating Authority] may allow, the           exploration licence over all or part of the reconnaissance area if the holder is in
holder of a reconnaissance licence satisfies the [Regulating Authority] that       compliance with the requirements of the licence.
delay by a government institution in the issuance of a permit or in carrying
out a lawful activity has resulted in delay by the holder in the discharge of an
obligation under the reconnaissance licence, the holder may apply in writing
to the [Regulating Authority] for extension and the [Regulating Authority]
may extend the term of the reconnaissance licence for a period not more than
twelve months.



24.8. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision grants a relatively
The reconnaissance permission is valid for two years and is not renewable.         long initial term for the prospecting/reconnaissance licence that is non-exclusive
                                                                                   and includes no priority or right to an exploration licence. The initial term in
                                                                                   this example is equivalent to the usual one-year initial term and one-year renewal
                                                                                   term found in other mining laws. Since the licence is not exclusive, its existence
                                                                                   does not prevent the grant of another licence over the same area, nor should it
                                                                                   inhibit other land uses in the area. Therefore, the longer initial term is benign.

                                                    24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                               24.9 Suspension of Licence


When the Regulating Authority temporarily prohibits operations under a prospecting/reconnaissance licence, due to the licence holder’s failure to
meet certain obligations or external circumstances that create dangerous conditions (e.g. conflict), this is referred to as suspension of the
prospecting/reconnaissance licence. Suspension provisions should address the grounds for and length of the suspension, the authority empowered
to order a suspension, what the licence holder must do in order to have the suspension lifted, and the related notification procedures. The
suspension provisions may also specify whether time lost will be added to the duration of the licence term once the suspension is lifted.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  99 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
Suspension is a temporary sanction that can be removed once remediation or correction of the ground for the suspension has occurred; whereas
revocation of the licence is a final sanction that terminates the rights of the licence holder definitively.
24.9. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example provides for both
(1) The [Regulating Authority], or any person authorised by the [Regulating       (a) temporary suspensions of operations on an emergency basis for 21 days by
Authority], may, in writing, order reconnaissance, exploration or mining          the Regulating Authority and (b) a longer term suspension of mining rights on
operations to be temporarily suspended on an emergency basis, regardless of       the non-compliance grounds stated in subsection 5 by the Administrative
whether such operations are authorized by a mineral right, until such             Reviewer, after consultation with the Advisory Board. The “Administrative
arrangements are made that are in the Regulating Authority’s opinion              Reviewer? as used in this example is the administrative authority that is the
necessary to prevent danger to life, property or the environment or to comply
                                                                                  immediate superior of the Regulatory Authority in the administrative hierarchy.
with this [Act][Code][Law].
                                                                                  The provision in the example also gives the Administrative Reviewer the power
(2) The [Regulating Authority] may cancel or vary the terms of any                to extend a temporary suspension by confirming it in writing.
temporary suspension order.                                                       In the case of a long-term suspension, the mining rights holder is provided with
(3) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall have the power to confirm a               notice and an opportunity to cure the breach of obligation within thirty days
temporary suspension order made by the [Regulating Authority] and may not         before the suspension takes effect. The suspension may be the precursor to
delegate this power.                                                              cancellation of the mineral right if the reason for the suspension is not corrected
                                                                                  on a timely basis.
(4) A temporary suspension order shall lapse after twenty-one days of its
issuance, unless it is confirmed, in writing, by the [Administrative Reviewer].

(5) The [Administrative Reviewer] after consultation with the [Regulating
Authority] may suspend a mineral right if the holder-

(a)fails to make any of the payments required by or under this
[Act][Code][Law] on the date due;

(b)fails to meet any prescribed minimum annual programme of work or work
expenditure requirement;

(c)grossly violates health and safety regulations or causes environmental
harm;

(d)employs or makes use of child labourers;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 100 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
(e)fails to submit reports required by this [Act][Code][Law];

(f)contravenes any of the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] or the
conditions of his mineral right or the provisions of any other enactment
relating to mines and minerals;

(g)dies and his heir or successor in title is not qualified under this
A[Act][Code][Law] to hold the mineral right, unless an application is
received from the heir or successor within ninety days of the death to
transfer the right to a third party who is so qualified and accepts all duties
under the right;

(h)becomes an un-discharged bankrupt or becomes of unsound mind;

(i)makes any statement to the [Regulating Authority] in connection with his
mineral right which he knows or ought to have known to be false;

(j)fails to substantially comply with the terms of a community development
agreement when required by this [Act][Code][Law] to do so;

(k)for any reason becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under
section [_] (listing the grounds for ineligibility).

(6) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall, before suspending any mineral
right, give notice to the holder in such a manner as shall be prescribed and
shall, in such a notice require the holder to remedy in not less than thirty
calendar days any breach of the conditions of his mineral right.

(7) If the holder of a mineral right fails to remedy any failure or
contravention specified in paragraphs (c), (d) and (k) of subsection (1), the
[Administrative Reviewer] may, by notice to the holder thereof, suspend the
mineral right forthwith.

24.9. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this example provides the grounds for
(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions of this [Act][Code][Law],          suspension of mining rights which apply to reconnaissance permits because they
upon the written approval of the [Regulating Authority], the Mining              are mining rights under the law. The mining law contains additional provisions
Cadastre Office may suspend a mining right for a period not exceeding sixty      on the suspension of certain mineral rights that do not apply to


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            101 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
days if the holder-                                                              prospecting/reconnaissance licences.

                                                                                 Like the provision in the Sierra Leone law, this provision requires notice to the
(a)fails to make any payments required by or under this [Act][Code][Law]
                                                                                 licence holder and an opportunity to cure the breach before the decision on
on the due date; or
(b)has breached any condition of the mining right;                               suspension is taken. Only if the holder fails to take the necessary remedial action
                                                                                 within the thirty-day notice period is the licence suspended. In this example, the
(c)has contravened any provisions of this [Act][Code][Law];                      notice must be given by the Mining Cadastre; and the length of the suspension
                                                                                 period is set in the law as 60 days in all of the cases listed.
(d)has failed to comply with any lawful order given in connection with his
operations;                                                                      Failure to remedy the ground for the suspension during the suspension period
                                                                                 may lead to revocation of the licence.
(e)makes any statement to the Mining Cadastre Office which he knows or
ought to have known to be false; or

(f) for any reason becomes ineligible to apply for a mining right under the
provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].

(2) A mining right shall only be suspended after thirty days’ notice of the
intention to suspend the mining right containing in detail the grounds thereof
is given to the holder and during the period fixed the holder has failed to
remedy the breach or remove the grounds for suspension within the required
period.

                                                  24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                            24.10 Termination of Licence


Typically, the reconnaissance-type prospecting licence is subject to the general provisions of the mining law on termination of mining rights,
rather than provisions specific to that type of mineral right. The mining law should state clearly in one place the various ways in which a mining
right can come to an end, which usually include expiration of the term, surrender by the holder, and revocation by the issuing authority. The law
should make clear what the status of the licenced area is upon termination in each manner and any remaining potential liabilities or incapacities
that the licence holder may have upon termination.
24.10. Example 1:                                                                Annotation




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                102 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Uganda’s mining law (2003) and Ghana’s mining law (2006), this
(1) [A mineral right shall be deemed terminated upon (a) the expiry of the        example specifies the three ways in which a mineral right, including a
licence (b) surrender of the licence by the licence holder pursuant to            prospecting/reconnaissance licence, can terminate. It further provides that the
Section/Article [Surrender section/article of the Law] or (c) revocation of the   holder is required to deliver all records, maps and other documents relating to the
licence by the [Regulating Authority] pursuant to Section/Article                 mineral right upon termination. Failure to comply is an offense punishable by the
[Revocation section/article of the Law]].                                         fine or prison term indicated.

(2) On the termination of a mineral right, the former holder shall deliver to
the [Regulating Authority] or as the [Regulating Authority] directs,

(a) the records which the holder is obliged under this [Act][Code][Law] or
regulations made under this [Act][Code][Law] to maintain,

(b) the plans and maps covered by the mineral right prepared by the holder
or at the holder’s instructions, and

(c) other documents, including in electronic format, if available, that relate
to the mineral right.

(3) A person who fails to deliver, within thirty days from the date of being
called upon to do so by the [Regulating Authority], a document which is
required to be delivered under subsection (1) commits an offence and is
liable on summary conviction to a fine not more than the cedi equivalent of
US$ ten thousand or imprisonment for a term not more than three years or to
both.

24.10. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Mali’s mining law (2012), this provision simply identifies the events
A prospecting permit shall expire when the specified period ends, if the          that result in the termination of the prospecting/reconnaissance licence (term
holder surrenders the permit, or if it is cancelled by [the regulatory            expiration, surrender or cancelation) and refers back to the article of the law that
authority] for non-compliance with the obligations by which the permit-           lists the grounds for cancelation of all mineral rights, including
holder is bound for the reasons listed in Article [_] (on the grounds for the     prospecting/reconnaissance licences.
cancellation of mining titles) of the present mining [Code][Act][Law].

                                                   24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  103 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                         PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                        24.11 Revocation of Licence


A provision authorizing the Regulatory Authority to put an end to the validity of a prospecting/reconnaissance licence before the end of its term is
referred to as the revocation of the licence. In some mining laws it is called withdrawal, cancellation or nullification of the licence. Whereas
suspension of the licence is a condition that can be cured, revocation of the licence is final. Moreover, many mining laws provide that a person
whose mineral licence has been revoked is ineligible to receive any new mineral licence for several years after the revocation. Because of the
seriousness of the revocation sanction, it should be subject to certain procedural due process safeguards including notification to the licence holder
of the grounds for the revocation and an opportunity to cure the problem, if feasible, or to present arguments and evidence that a failure or
violation constituting grounds for revocation of the licence has not in fact occurred or should be excused.
As noted above with respect to suspension, prospecting/reconnaissance licences tend to be subject to general provisions on revocation rather than
provisions specific to that type of licence in particular. Where revocation provisions are deemed necessary for a prospecting/reconnaissance
licence, the mining law should clearly spell out the grounds for revocation and the steps that occur before revocation is final, including notice and
an opportunity to cure the problem, as well as identify a transparent process through which the licence holder may contest the revocation.
Other issues to be given careful consideration in drafting clauses on revocation of mining rights are:
    1) Whether revocation of the reconnaissance/prospecting licence should be automatic in certain circumstances and, if so, in what
       circumstances;
    2) Whether revocation of the licence should always be preceded by an order of suspension of the licence and an opportunity for the holder to
       cure the problem that provides the grounds for revocation; and
    3) Whether the Regulating Authority should have discretion to revoke the licence or not, in all or certain circumstances.
As a general matter, if the prospecting/reconnaissance licence is exclusive and gives the holder an exclusive right or priority to apply for an
exploration licence in the licence area, then it constitutes a robust and valuable right under which the licence holder is likely to make a substantial
investment in reconnaissance work. In such cases, stronger procedural safeguards would be appropriate.
Conversely, if the prospecting/reconnaissance licence is non-exclusive and does not provide an exclusive or priority right to apply for an
exploration licence in the licenced area, then it constitutes a less robust and valuable right under which the licence holder is less likely to make a
substantial investment in reconnaissance work. In such cases, fewer procedural safeguards may be appropriate.
24.11. Example 1:                                                         Annotation




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     104 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this article details – in a general article
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may revoke any mining right if-                    on revocation of all mineral licences - the grounds for revocation of a
                                                                                  prospecting/reconnaissance licence. The licence is non-exclusive under the
(a) the holder is convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction for an         mining law of Nigeria. The provision includes the following safeguards:
offence under this [Act][Code][Law] or its Regulations and the time for
appealing against the conviction, if any, has lapsed or the appeal has been           1) The grounds for revocation are specified;
dismissed or withdrawn or struck out for want of prosecution;                         2) Notice of the ground for revocation of a holder’s licence must be
                                                                                         provided to the holder in writing, in one of three specified ways; and
(b) the holder breaches any provision of this [Act][Code][Law] or                     3) The holder is given thirty days to remedy the breach or remove the
regulations made or of any terms or conditions of his mining right whether               grounds for revocation.
express or implied;
                                                                                  Revocation is not automatic in this example. The Regulating Authority has
(c) the holder breaches any order or notice issued or given under this            discretion to exercise its revocation authority or not. These revocation terms are
[Act][Code][Law] or Regulations made under it, or on being required by the        more than adequate to protect the rights of the holder of a non-exclusive
[Regulating Authority] by notice to show cause within a time specified in the     prospecting/reconnaissance licence.
notice why the mining right should not be revoked, the holder fails to comply
or show adequate cause;

(d) the holder is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be insolvent
or bankrupt or goes into insolvent liquidation, except as part of a scheme for
reorganisation, amalgamation or an arrangement with its creditors; or

(e) the mining right is held jointly by more than one person and the
provisions of subsection (1) (a) of this section apply to any one of the joint
holders unless the other joint holders are able to assume the obligations of
the former and adopt measures which will guarantee the performance of
these obligations.

(2) A mining right shall be revoked upon written advice of the [Regulating
Authority] only after thirty days’ notice of the intention to revoke the mining
right containing in detail the grounds thereof is given to the holder and
during the period fixed the holder has failed to remedy the breach or remove
the grounds for revocation within the required period.

(3) Any notice issued by the [Regulating Authority] and sent by registered
mail to the last known address in [Country] or given in person to an
authorised representative of the mining right holder in [Country] or
published in the [Gazette], shall for all purposes be sufficient notice of the


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 105 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
revocation of the mining right to the mining right holder.

24.11. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from the mining law of Ghana (2006), this provision governs the
(1) The [Regulating Authority] on the recommendation of                   the    revocation of an exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance licence. It includes the
[Administrative Reviewer] may cancel a mineral right if the holder,              following safeguards:

(a) fails to make payment on the due date, whether due to the [State] or             1) The Regulating Authority is only authorized to revoke a licence on the
another person, required by or under this [Act][Code][Law],                             recommendation of the Minerals Commission;
                                                                                     2) The grounds for revocation are specified in the mining law and are more
(b) becomes insolvent or bankrupt, enters into an agreement or scheme of                limited than in the first example (i.e., a breach of any term of the mining
composition with the holder’s creditors, or takes advantage of an enactment             law is not a ground for revocation of the licence under the Ghanaian
for the benefit of its debtors or goes into liquidation, except as part of a            mining law); and
scheme for an arrangement or amalgamation,                                           3) The Regulating Authority must give prior notice to the holder,
                                                                                     4) The holder is given a sixty-day period to cure the breach or explain why
(c) makes a statement to the [Regulating Authority] in connection with the              the licence should not be revoked.
mineral right which the holder knows or ought to have known to be
materially false, or                                                             These safeguards are stronger than those for non-exclusive rights under the first
                                                                                 example in that a recommendation of the Commission is required in order for the
(d) for any reason, becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under this   Regulating Authority to revoke, the grounds for revocation are much more
[Act][Code][Law].                                                                limited, and the holder is given a longer cure period.

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall, before cancelling a mineral right under    As in the first example, the Regulating Authority is given the flexibility to revoke
subsection (1), give notice to the holder and shall in the notice, require the   or not, based on the circumstances and the reasoning provided by the licence
holder to remedy a breach of the condition of the mineral right within a         holder.
reasonable period, being not less than sixty days in the case of a
prospecting/reconnaissance right and if the breach cannot be remedied, to
show cause to the reasonable satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority] why
the prospecting/reconnaissance right should not be cancelled.

(3) On cancellation of a mineral right under this section, the right of the
holder shall cease but without prejudice to the liabilities or obligations
incurred by another person in relation to the mineral right prior to the date
of the cancellation.

                                                   24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 106 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                              24.12 Surrender of Licence


Surrender provisions address instances where the licence holder gives up the mining right voluntarily before the duration of the licence has run
out. As noted above with respect to suspension and revocation, prospecting/reconnaissance licences tend to be subject to general provisions on
surrender rather than provisions specific to the prospecting/reconnaissance licence itself.
The mining law should clearly spell out the steps that must occur before surrender of the mining licence is recognized by the Regulating Authority.
24.12. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this example of a surrender provision
(1) The holder of a mining right may, upon application in the form and            establishes the right of the licence holder to surrender the mineral licence
manner prescribed in the Regulation, and upon meeting the conditions              provided that certain conditions are met. Most importantly, the conditions
prescribed therein, surrender the mining right.                                   require a finding that the surrender will not affect any liability of the licence
                                                                                  holder, including environmental obligations, and that the holder of the licence
(2) The Mining Cadastre Office shall approve an application made under            has paid all fees and rents due. The provision applies to all mining rights (the
subsection (1) of this section to surrender the mining right if it is satisfied   language is not specific to prospecting/reconnaissance licences.)
that-

(a)the holder of the mining right has submitted the request for surrender in
the prescribed form and manner;

(b)the surrender will not affect any liability incurred by the mining right
holder before the surrender of the mining right, including environmental
obligation;

(c)all rents due and fees prescribed, if any, have been paid by the holder of
the mining right; and

(d) the holder of the mining right has surrendered the original title
document.

24.12. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Namibia’s mining law (1992), this example takes a different
(1) The holder of a mineral licence may surrender the reconnaissance area,        approach to surrender of the prospecting/reconnaissance licence. In contrast to



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                107 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
prospecting area, retention area or mining area to which such licence              the Nigerian example, which makes the administrative acceptance of a surrender
relates by notice in writing addressed and delivered to the [Regulating            subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions, this example makes surrender
Authority] and shall together with such notice return such mineral licence,        automatic upon the submission of a written request by the holder, together with
whereupon –                                                                        the mineral licence. The Regulating Authority is required to enter the surrender
                                                                                   in the register of mineral licences, to notify the surrendering licence holder of the
(a) the [Regulating Authority] shall -                                             cancellation of the licence and to notify the owner of the land covered by the
  (i) cancel such mineral licence;
                                                                                   surrendered licence.
  (ii) make an entry to that effect in the register of mineral licences referred
to in                                                                              Instead of imposing conditions precedent for recognition of a surrender of the
article [_] (on the register of mineral licences);                                 licence (which is called “abandonment? in the Namibian mining law), this
  (iii) notify the person who was the holder of such mineral licence that such     example imposes obligations on the surrendering licence holder after the
mineral
                                                                                   cancellation of the licence. These obligations include:
licence has been cancelled; and
  (iv) notify the owner of the land on which such area was situated of such                Demolition and removal of any works erected on the
surrender; and                                                                              prospecting/reconnaissance area, unless otherwise agreed with the
                                                                                            landowner.
(b) such area shall be deemed to have been surrendered on the date on
which such mineral licence has been cancelled as provided in subparagraph                  Remediation of any damage caused to the surface land and the
(i) of paragraph (a).                                                                       environment, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Administrative
                                                                                            Reviewer. The “Administrative Reviewer? as used in this example is
(2) If a reconnaissance area, prospecting area, retention area or mining                    the administrative authority that is the immediate superior of the
area is surrendered as provided in subsection (1), the holder of the mineral                Regulatory Authority in the administrative hierarchy.
licence to which such area relates shall –
                                                                                   Failure to comply with these post-surrender obligations is punished by a fine
(a) demolish any accessory works erected or constructed by such person in          and/or prison term.
such area, except in so far as the owner of the land retains such accessory,
works on such conditions as may mutually be agreed upon between such               Whereas the surrender of the mineral licence is effective as of the date of
owner and person, and remove from such land all debris and any other               cancellation by the Regulating Authority, the surrendering holder must retain
object brought onto such land;                                                     whatever access rights have been secured with the owners of the land covered by
                                                                                   the surrendered licence in order to accomplish the holder’s post -surrender
(b) take all such steps as may be necessary to remedy to the reasonable            obligations.
satisfaction of the [Administrative Reviewer] any damage caused by any
reconnaissance or prospecting operations and mining operations carried on          Like the previous example, this example stipulates that the surrender shall not
by such holder to the surface of, and the environment on, the land in the area     affect any liability or obligation under the mining law, or any legal proceeding
in question.                                                                       against the surrendering holder.

(3) The surrender of a reconnaissance area, prospecting area, retention area       The advantage of this approach is that it speeds the process of making
or mining area shall not affect any legal proceedings instituted against such      surrendered licence areas available to another applicant. The disadvantage is that



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                    108 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
holder or any obligation or liability of such holder in terms of the provisions   enforcement of the post-surrender obligations may be problematic.
of this [Act][Code][Law].

(4) Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with the provisions of
subsection (2) shall be guilty of' an offence and on conviction be liable to a
fine not exceeding [Maximum Penalty Amount] or to imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 12 months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.

                                                   24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                       24.13 Transfer/Assignment of Rights


Transfer and assignment of rights often addresses whether a prospecting/reconnaissance licence holder may hand over, sell, rent either part or the
whole of their licence to another person or entity or in any way encumber or place a lien on the licence for the benefit of such other person or
entity. Reconnaissance-type prospecting licences that are non-exclusive, even in jurisdictions where they constitute mining rights, are typically
non-transferrable. Since such rights are non-exclusive, any eligible person can simply apply directly for a prospecting/reconnaissance licence of
their own over the same area, so there is no real need for transfers of such rights. In the relatively rare case where reconnaissance-type prospecting
licences are exclusive, they tend to be transferable.
24.13. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Sierra Leon’s mining law (2009), a non -exclusive
A prospecting/reconnaissance licence is not transferable.                         prospecting/reconnaissance licence is not transferable. This is a typical
                                                                                  provision. Because a non-exclusive prospecting/reconnaissance licence over the
                                                                                  same area is available from the Regulating Authority, there is no need for
                                                                                  transferability.

24.13. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Mali’s mining law (2012), this provision states that the exclusive
(1) A prospecting right or reconnaissance permit confers on the holder an         prospecting/reconnaissance licence is transferable. As noted above, an exclusive
exclusive right to carry out prospecting and reconnaissance investigations        prospecting/reconnaissance licence is more valuable to an investor and is more
for minerals belonging to the group for which said permit was issued, within      likely to have given rise to significant investment than a non-exclusive licence.
the boundaries of the holder's area and with no limit as to depth.                In order to attract junior companies that focus on early stage reconnaissance and



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                109 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                          PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
                                                                                prospecting before selling their assets to a larger mining company, this provision
(2) A prospecting right or reconnaissance permit is a movable indivisible       grants a robust prospecting/reconnaissance right that promotes investment in
right that may not be subleased. It may be assigned or transferred. To this     previously unexplored or underexplored areas.
end, a rights holder must send [the regulatory authority] any contract or
agreement through which it purports confer, assign or transfer the rights and
obligations arising from the prospecting permit to a third party.

The assignment or transfer of a prospecting right may only occur under the
same conditions which applied for the allocation of the right and shall be
subject to the assignor providing [the regulatory authority] with a report on
the work carried out in accordance with the Establishment Convention. The
assignment or transfer shall take effect only when the order from [the
regulatory authority] comes into operation.

The assignee or heir must apply for the permit within thirty (30) days from
the signing of the deed of assignment or the legal instrument in which the
heirs were designated, which must have been finalised subject to the
condition precedent of regulatory authority approval. The terms for
assignment and transfer shall be specified in the implementing decree from
the regulatory authority.

                                                  24. Prospecting/Reconnaissance Licencing
                                                    24.14 Specific Violations and Penalties


Reconnaissance-type prospecting licences and their holders can be subject to applicable general violations and penalties, and may also be subject
to specific violations and penalties as deemed appropriate. Specific violations usually consist of engaging in prospecting/reconnaissance activities
outside of the licenced area, engaging in exploration or exploitation activities not authorized by the prospecting/reconnaissance licence, and
unauthorized removal or sale of minerals from the licence area. It is essential that the reconnaissance-type prospecting activity authorized by the
licence be carefully defined to distinguish it from exploration under an exploration licence.
24.14. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Mali’s mining law (2012), these provisions include violations and
(1) The following offences shall be subject to a fine of [amount] to [amount]


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               110 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
and a prison sentence of between eleven days and two years, or only one of        penalties that would be specific to reconnaissance-type prospecting, although not
these two penalties:                                                              necessarily exclusive to that type of activity:

(a) those who analyse samples outside of the [Country] without prior              (1) sending samples for analysis outside of Mali without authorization from the
authorisation from the Mining Division.                                           Department of Mines;

Article [_]                                                                       (2) engaging in exploration or exploitation of mineral substances without the
(1) The following offences shall be subject to a fine of [amount] to [amount]     proper title;
and a prison sentence of between one month and three years, or only one of
                                                                                  (3) assisting clandestine prospectors or miners;
these two penalties:
                                                                                  (4) failure to implement the approved protective measures prior to site closure;
(a) conducting mining or prospecting activities in the absence of an              and
appropriate mining right;
(b) those who, within the meaning of the provisions of the Criminal Code,         (5) failure to implement required measures for safety, pollution control,
provide aid or assistance to illegal prospectors or operators.                    environmental protection, protection of communication lines, structural stability,
                                                                                  and water usage, flow and quality.
(2) In addition, mineral substances which are extracted illegally, as well as
the means, items and instruments which contributed to offences 1) and 2)          The penalties include fines and imprisonment, as well as confiscation of illegally
above shall be seized by and forfeited to the State.                              extracted minerals and the means, instruments and things used to extract them.

(3) Those who have not carried out the work in accordance with Article [_]
(on measures relating to preserving public health and safety, and those
relating to respecting the features of the surrounding environment) above
before the relevant mining right comes to an end; and

(4) Holders of mining rights who do not, within the prescribed time periods,
comply with the instructions of the [the regulatory authority] relating to the
measures provided for in Article [_] (on obligations relating to public health
and safety, nature conservation, and the preservation of transportation
routes, the sturdiness of buildings, and the use, output or quality of water of
any kind) above.

24.14. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Namibia’s mining law (1992), this example pre sents an additional
Any person who intentionally or negligently transgresses the boundaries of        specific violation applicable to reconnaissance-type prospecting licences –
his or her reconnaissance area, prospecting area, claim area, retention area      namely, conducting operations outside of the licenced area - that may be found
or mining area while carrying on reconnaissance operations, prospecting



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 111 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                        PART B-1: Mineral Licences – Prospecting/Reconnaissance
operations or mining operations or such boundaries to be so transgressed   within a general article on miscellaneous violations.
shall be guilty of an offence and on conviction be liable to a fine not
exceeding [Maximum Penalty Amount] or to imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 12 months or to both such fine and such imprisonment.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                  112 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART B-2: Exploration

                                                           25. Exploration Licensing

Exploration – also called “prospecting? in many Anglophone African jurisdictions (e.g., Botswana, Ghana, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania,
Zambia, Zimbabwe) and “recherche? in Francophone jurisdictions - is the systematic investigation of the surface and subsurface of the Earth in a
designated area using geological, geophysical and geochemical methods for the purpose of determining the presence of economic deposits of
mineral substances and establishing their nature, chemical composition, shape, grade and estimated quantity within degrees of certainty according
to industry norms, as well as the most effective, efficient and appropriate means of extracting, processing and marketing the mineral products
derived from the deposits under forecasted conditions of price and cost (including fiscal terms). Exploration can be conducted by the state or an
investor.

Exploration activity proceeds in stages. The results of each stage are evaluated by the explorer and a determination is made to either proceed to
the next stage, sell the exploration rights where possible, or abandon the project and relinquish the rights. The first stage of exploration in a
geographical area that has not been the subject of extensive prior exploration or mining activity typically commences with wide scale, superficial
investigation using primarily geological and geophysical methods. This is the least costly stage of exploration activity.

If the results of that activity are sufficiently promising and the explorer is willing and able, then the second stage of exploration work will typically
involve progressively more narrowly targeted investigation of the type, quality, extent and quantity of concentrated mineralization in a specific
area by means of drilling and the analysis of core samples taken at various depths from selected points on a grid laid over the targeted surface area,
and the completion of at least a preliminary reserve study to quantify the volume of mineralization identified or projected based on the drilling and
analysis in accordance with industry norms as to degree of certainty. The second stage of activity may be the first stage of exploration activity in
an area that has previously been extensively explored or mined and for which substantial data is available for analysis.

If the results of the drill core analysis and preliminary reserve study are determined to justify a significant investment in evaluating the commercial
feasibility of exploiting the identified deposit, the third and most expensive stage of exploration activity will involve conducting the final mineral
reserve studies (if one has not already been completed), prefeasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessments and final feasibility
studies with the goal of establishing the economic justification for developing the identified deposits.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       113 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART B-2: Exploration

In some jurisdictions, an exploration licence may be, or must be, preceded by a prospecting/reconnaissance licence as described in the previous
part of this Guiding Template (Part B-1). In those jurisdictions, the main difference between prospecting/reconnaissance activity and exploration
(or “prospecting?) activity is that the former is limited to the types of activity common to the first stage of “greenfield? exploration, whereas the
latter includes drilling, analysis of drill core samples of ore and the conduct of in-depth studies to determine the presence of a commercial deposit
of valuable mineral substances.

In other jurisdictions, the activity described under prospecting/reconnaissance licences in Part B-1 of this Guiding Template is considered part of
exploration and there is no separate licensing of prospecting/reconnaissance activity.

Thus, depending on the jurisdiction, an exploration licence may be the right or title that authorizes (a) initial activity to locate and evaluate
concentrations of valuable minerals in nature, and/or (b) the second stage of exploration activity following the completion of an initial stage of
such activity pursuant to a prospecting/reconnaissance licence. Overall, it is essential for “exploration? (or “prospecting? or “recherche?) to be
defined or described in the “definitions? and “types of mineral rights? sections of a mining law to avoid confusion.

                                                               25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                      25.1 Eligibility

A mining law may restrict what legal entities can receive a permit or authorization to conduct exploration activities, either by defining who may or
may not apply for the right, or by defining prior conditions that must be met before such an entity can be considered eligible to apply.
Eligibility conditions are key in determining the ease or difficulty of access to a nation’s mineral resources.
Issues to be considered include:
?   Whether individuals and legal entities are eligible for exploration rights?
?   Whether foreign individuals or entities are eligible, and under what conditions? (When distinguishing between foreign and national entities,
    mining legislation should define what is meant by a foreign entity.)




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    114 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

?   Whether and what financial and/or technical capacity is required?
?   Which individuals and entities are not eligible for exploration rights?

The eligibility requirements will determine not only who may obtain an exploration licence directly, but also to whom such a licence may be
transferred in the future.
25.1. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]. Eligibility for mining and quarrying rights                         Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), these provisions contain specific
(1) Subject to the provisions of Article [_] below (on persons who are not       eligibility requirements for individuals and corporate entities, national and
eligible), the following shall be eligible for mining and quarrying rights:      foreign, as well as circumstances that render certain types of individuals and
                                                                                 entities ineligible to hold mining and quarrying rights. The eligibility
(a) any natural person who is of age and is a Congolese national as well as      provisions are broken up into four articles, for clarity. They cover, respectively:
any legal entity under Congolese law which has its registered office and its     (1) the general rule of eligibility, (2) the local domicile requirement for foreign
administrative office within the National Territory and whose objects are        nationals and entities, (3) the accreditation and role of mining and quarrying
mining activities;                                                               representatives, and (4) the general rule of ineligibility.

(b) any natural person who is of age and is a foreign national as well as any    The first article establishes who is eligible for what types of licences (unless
legal entity under the law of a foreign country;                                 declared ineligible by the subsequent article on ineligibility). It makes a
                                                                                 distinction between (a) citizens of the DRC and companies organized as mining
(c) any scientific body.                                                         companies under the laws of the DRC that have their official headquarters and
                                                                                 principal administrative office in the DRC, on the one hand, and (b) foreign
(2) Eligible persons referred to in (1) (b) above shall be required to elect a   citizens and companies organized under foreign laws, and (c) scientific
domicile with a representative in the mining and quarrying industry which is     organizations, on the other hand. Foreign citizens and companies, as well as
set up within the National Territory and to act through their intermediary.      scientific organizations, are eligible only for exploration licences for mines and
                                                                                 quarries. They are not eligible for exploitation licences.
(3) Legal entities incorporated in foreign countries and the scientific bodies
cited in 1 (b) and (c) above shall only be eligible for mining and quarry        Foreign citizens and companies are required to make an election of domicile in
prospecting rights.                                                              care of a mining and quarrying representative based in the National Territory
                                                                                 and to act through such representative. This requirement is intended to assure
Article [_]. Electing a domicile                                                 the administration that they will be able to serve all legal notices for the foreign
(1) Electing the domicile referred to in the preceding Article is to be done     citizen or company on a known local entity. It will also serve to establish a tax




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 115 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

intentionally and may only be done in writing.                                    domicile of the foreign nationals and entities in the DRC.

(2) All service of documents, claims and actions for the performance of an act    The second article provides that the election of domicile required of foreign
for which the domicile was elected, may be validly done at this domicile.         citizens and companies must be made in writing; and that any notification,
                                                                                  request or legal process concerning anything for which such election of
Article [_] Agents in the mining and quarrying industries                         domicile has been made is valid if delivered to that address.
(1) Agents in the mining and quarrying industries require prior approval
from [the regulatory authority] as regards their respectability, ethics, skills   The third article describes the role and control of the mining and quarrying
and in-depth knowledge of mining legislation, or of the management of the         representatives. They must be accredited by the Regulating Authority based on
mining and quarrying field.                                                       the criteria of honor, ethics, competency and deep knowledge of the mining
                                                                                  legislation or the administration of matters relating to mines and quarries. In
(2) In addition to representation, part of the role of agents in the mining and   addition to their role of representation, the mining and quarrying representatives
quarrying industries is to advise and/or assist any interested person in the      are authorized to advise and/or assist any person or entity interested in the
granting and exercising of mining and quarrying rights as well as in disputes     issuance and the exercise of mining and quarrying rights, as well as related
relating thereto.                                                                 dispute resolution. The conditions for accreditation of mining and quarrying
                                                                                  representatives are to be set forth in the Mining Regulation; and the Regulating
(3) [The regulatory authority] shall maintain and publish the list of approved    Authority is to maintain and publish the list of accredited mining and quarrying
agents and shall update said list on an annual basis.                             representatives and update it annually. This provision, in effect, creates a new
                                                                                  profession – that of mining and quarrying representative – in the interest of
(4) The Mining Regulations shall lay down the conditions for approving            establishing a high standard of competency and professionalism in the
agents in the mining and quarrying industries.                                    representation of mining companies before the administrative authorities and
                                                                                  dispute resolution bodies.
Article [_] Persons who are not eligible
(1) The following are not eligible to apply for and obtain mining and/or          The fourth article describes the categories of persons who are not eligible to
quarrying rights, an artisanal miner's card or a merchant's card, as well as      receive mineral rights. They include: (a) the listed categories of public servants,
authorisation to purchase and sell mineral substances from artisanal              (b) persons lacking legal capacity under the applicable legislation (in this case
operations:                                                                       the Family Code), and (c) persons subject to a prohibition. The latter category
                                                                                  includes persons convicted of a criminal violation of the mining law (prohibited
(a) State officials and civil servants, judges, members of the Armed Forces,      for 10 years), persons from whom an artisanal mining or trading permit has
the Police and Security Services, the employees of public bodies which are        been withdrawn (prohibited for three years) and persons whose authorization to
authorised to carry out mining operations;                                        operate a trading post for artisanal mining products has been withdrawn
                                                                                  (prohibited for five years).
(b) any person who lacks legal capacity, as provided for in Article [_] of the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  116 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

[Family Code];

(c) any person who has been prohibited therefrom including:

(i) a person who has been convicted, by a final judgement, for violating
mining and quarrying legislation or legislation relating to economic activities
as regards their mining and quarrying rights and affiliates, and they shall
have been prohibited from so acting for a period of 10 years;

(ii) a person whose artisanal miner's or merchant's card has been withdrawn,
and prohibited from obtaining such a license for a period of three years;

(iii) a person whose authorisation to purchase and sell mineral substances
from artisanal operators has been withdrawn, and purchases/sales prohibited
for a period of five years;

25.1. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_] Eligibility for exploration licence.                                  Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision refers back to and
A person shall not be eligible to apply for the grant of an exploration licence   modifies the general provision on eligibility for mineral licences. Unlike the
under this [Act][Code][Law] unless that person is a company incorporated          DRC Mining Code eligibility provision which makes exploration licences
or registered under the [Companies Act] and whose name has not been struck        available to foreign and national individuals and companies, the Sierra Leone
off the register of companies at the time of the application.                     provision limits the issuance of exploration licences to corporate entities formed
                                                                                  under the Companies act of Sierra Leone only. However, a company can be
Article [_] Restrictions on grant of mineral rights                               formed under the Companies act by foreign nationals. This provision, in
(1) No mineral right shall be granted to-                                         comparison to the DRC provision, provides the Administration with the
                                                                                  additional assurance of knowing that each entity eligible for an exploration
(a)an individual who-                                                             licence is subject to the provisions of the local Companies act and registered
  (i)is under the age of 18 years;                                                thereunder, as opposed to being an entity formed under the law of a foreign
  (ii)is not a citizen of [Country] or has not been ordinarily resident in        jurisdiction with a different legal system and tradition and possibly a different
[Country] for a period of ten years immediately preceding his application for     language and alphabet.
a mineral right;
  (iii)is an un-discharged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise            Neither the Companies Act nor the mining law of Sierra Leone requires the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 117 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

declared bankrupt under any written law, or enters into any arrangement or      participation of local citizens as shareholders or directors of a company formed
scheme of composition with his creditors; or                                    under the Companies act that is eligible to hold an exploration licence. Civil
 (iv)has been convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty;            society in many African countries has advocated such measures, however; and
                                                                                enlightened mining companies often seek local partners. The issue merits
(b)a co-operative society which is not registered in accordance with the laws   consideration in connection with formulating eligibility requirements.
of [Country];
                                                                                In addition, countries that are members of a regional customs union, economic
(c) a body corporate-                                                           and/or financial community, or uniform law organization may wish to consider
  (i)which is not registered or incorporated under the [Companies Act]; or      whether companies formed under the similar laws of other member states
  (ii)which is in liquidation other than a liquidation which forms part of a    should be deemed eligible to hold exploration rights.
scheme for the reconstruction or amalgamation of such body corporate;
  (iii)in respect of which an order has been made by a court of competent
jurisdiction for its winding up or dissolution;
  (iv)which has made a composition or arrangement with its creditors;
  (v)which has among its shareholders any shareholder who holds at least a
ten percent share of the company or a director, who would be disqualified in
terms of subparagraphs (i) or (iv) of paragraph (a).


                                                            25. Exploration Licensing
                                                         25.2 Requirements for Licence Applications

Regulatory authorities generally require that eligible entities seeking authorization to conduct exploration activities submit particular documents
and show proof of certain criteria as part of the authorization application process. Several countries have adopted a two-tier approach to the
procedure for issuing exploration licences: that is, (1) an application procedure with defined criteria for areas in which significant deposits have
not yet been identified (i.e., “greenfields? projects), and (2) a tender procedure for areas containing known deposits that have been explored or
worked previously. For those areas put up for bid, the requirements are set out in the bidding terms and specifications, and the tender is conducted
in accordance with established rules for transparency and objectivity. A third possibility is to grant exploration rights to known stratoform
deposits by an auction procedure (i.e., by offering them to the highest bidder during a specified auction period, without the other more extensive
requirements of a tender procedure).




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                             118 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        PART B-2: Exploration


In addition to identification and eligibility of the applicant, the requirements for the grant of an exploration licence will or may contain some or all
of the following:
      The availability of the area requested;
      Proof of eligibility and domicile, for the individual applicant and/or the firm seeking authorization;
      The specification of the minerals to be targeted by the exploration project;
      A proposed work program for all or part of the licence term;
      Proof of technical and financial capability to carry out the proposed work program;
      Compliance with limitations on the number of permits or the aggregate area that a person or entity and its affiliates may hold under
         licence;
      Completion and submission of specified official forms;
      Payment of processing fees upon application; and
      Payment of any fees required as a condition for the issuance of the licence.

A fundamental issue in designing the requirements is whether to (a) restrict access to mineral exploration licences by imposing technical and
financial standards as conditions for the grant of rights, or (b) facilitate access to such licences and eliminate non-performing licencees
subsequently based on their failure to meet performance standards under their licences.

In some jurisdictions where the right to a mining licence is attached to the exploration licence, subject to the fulfilment of defined conditions, the
signature of a contract between the State and the licensee may be required at the time of issuance of the exploration licence. This would often be
the case when the right to explore and exploit a known valuable mineral deposit is awarded by a tender process. The contract sets forth the rights
and obligations of the licensee during the term of the exploration licence and the conditions under which a mining licence will be issued. In light
of increasing global commitments related to Climate Change and Land Use, it would be prudent for the State to require in such cases the conduct
of an initial social, environmental and overall sustainable development assessment of the project at an early stage of contract implementation prior
to the completion of the exploration phase and the authorization of mine development. The applicant’s commitment to and prop osed plans for the
funding and conduct of such a study in collaboration with the national and local environmental authorities and their contractors, as well as local
communities, could constitute an essential component of the application.
25.2. Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_] Application for exploration licence                             Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision sets forth the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      119 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

(1) An application may be made for an exploration licence for minerals              requirements for the grant of an exploration licence (called a prospecting licence
falling under any of the following groups:                                          in the law). The law provides for a two-tier process of issuing such licences (an
     (a) metallic minerals;                                                         application process and a tender process). It sets out the requirements for the
                                                                                    licence in the article describing the required application contents and then refers
(2) An application for an exploration licence including an application in           back to them in the article on the conditions for the grant of the licence.
respect of land in an area reserved for applications by tender for exploration
licences shall be made to the [Regulating Authority] and shall be in the            The requirements for obtaining an exploration licence by application include all
prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fee.                              of the elements described in the immediately preceding annotation and, in
                                                                                    addition, the following:
(3) An application for the grant of an exploration licence-                             1. Statement as to local procurement of goods; and
                                                                                        2. Minimum annual expenditure per square kilometre.
(a) shall contain-
  (i) in the case of an individual, his full name and nationality, physical and
postal addresses, and attach his recent passport size photograph; or
  (ii) in the case of a body corporate, its Corporate name, place of
incorporation, names and nationality of directors;
  (iii) in the case of more than one person, particulars referred in items (i)
and (ii) of each person.

(b) shall state the type of minerals and its relevant group, as indicated in
subsection (1);

(c) shall state the size of the area of land over which it is sought, which shall
not exceed the maximum area prescribed as provided under section [_]
(stating that maximum areas are to be established by regulation), and be
accompanied by a plan of the area;

(d) shall contain a statement giving particulars of the financial and technical
resources available to the applicant; and

(e) shall contain a statement on the procurement plan of goods and services
available in [Country];




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    120 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration


(f) shall contain details of any mineral right previously granted to the
applicant.

(4) Every application for an exploration licence made in the prescribed form
by an applicant who has tendered to the licensing authority the prescribed
fee, shall be registered immediately in the register maintained for such
applications under this [Act][Code][Law].

(5) Each application registered under subsection (4) shall be assigned a
number and the date on which it was received and shall be indicated on an
official receipt handed to the applicant or his authorised agent or sent to the
applicant by registered mail.

Article [_] Exploration licence by tender
(1) An application for an exploration licence in an area designated as an
area for which applications for such a licence are invited by tender shall-

(a) be in the prescribed tender form and accompanied by the prescribed
tender fee; and

(b) subject to the terms and conditions of the invitation to tender, include the
matters required to be included in applications by section [_] (the general
article on the application requirements for an exploration licence).

(2) Applications made under subsection (1) shall be submitted to the
[Administrative Reviewer] for its advice.

(3) On receipt of a report from the [Administrative Reviewer], the
[Regulating Authority] shall consider the competing bids and shall select the
bid which is most likely to promote the expeditious and beneficial




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    121 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

development of the mineral resources of the area having regard to

(a) the programme of exploration operations which the applicant proposes to
carry out and the commitments as regards expenditure which the applicant is
prepared to make;

(b) the financial and technical resources of the applicant; and

(c) the previous experience of the applicant in the conduct of exploration and
mining operations, and the successful application shall be treated as an
application under section [_] (on the rules governing priority in the case of
competing applications) which has priority over any other application and
the applicant shall be notified accordingly.

25.2. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (1999), this provision provides for the
                                                                                 issuance of an exploration licence to the first eligible applicant who submits a
In general, mining licences shall be considered and granted according to a       complete application for an available area. No proof of technical or financial
principle of "1st come, 1st served".                                             capacity is required; and no work program is reviewed as a requirement for the
Article [_]                                                                      grant of the licence.

(1) All applications for mining rights are to be made using the prescribed       Madagascar is an example of a jurisdiction that relies on ex-post requirements
form from the Ministry of Mines, a template of which shall be set out in the     for maintaining the validity of an exploration licence rather than limiting access
decree implementing the present [Code][Act][Law].                                to exploration licences by imposing requirements for their issuance.


(2) After correctly completing the form, the applicant is to file their
application with said office, with acknowledgement of receipt that indicates
the date and time, to the hour and minute, that the application was filed, and
constitutes evidence of filing.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                122 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

Article [_]
(1) Prospecting licences, or "P" licences, relating to a defined area shall be
granted by a decision of [the regulatory authority] or its representative,
within no more than thirty (30) working days, to the first eligible person who
filed an application which meets the conditions specified in Article [_] (which
states that the template for application forms shall be set out in the
implementing decree) above.


(2) In cases where the applicant is applying pursuant to an exclusive permit
to reserve an area, they are to attach said permit, duly endorsed by the
authorities for the relevant Decentralised Territorial Collectives, to their
application.


                                                               25. Exploration Licensing
                                                              25.3 Licence Refusal Appeal Process

In order for there to be accountability of the granting authority, there should not only be standards for the grant of licences that limit or eliminate
the granting authority’s discretion, but also a procedure for independent review of the authority’s decision to refuse to iss ue a licence.

A due process review procedure would include an initial procedure for reconsideration by the granting authority and/or his or her hierarchical
superior, followed by a judicial or quasi-judicial review of the ultimate decision on reconsideration.

If a competitive bidding procedure is used to award the exploration licence, the bidding rules (either in the Mining law or regulations, or in a
separate law and regulations on public contracting) should include a clear statement of the procedure and criteria for challenging any awards of
exploration rights. If the bidding procedure involves a two-stage process (i.e., a bidder qualification stage to narrow the field of eligible bidders
and a bid evaluation stage to determine the prevailing bid, if any), then the rules should provide separate procedures for challenges of a
determination of ineligibility, on the one hand, and challenges of an award of a licence, on the other hand. The grounds for a challenge of a




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     123 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

decision in a competitive bidding process should be narrowly defined but should include, for example:

                  Conflict of interest or misconduct by one or more members of the bid review commission affecting the outcome;
                  Decision of the commission based on criteria or weighting other than those specified in the bidding rules;
                  Improper influence on the decision of the commission; and
                  Decision of the commission contrary to public policy established by law.

If a procedure other than competitive bidding is used to award the licence (e.g., first-come-first served, auction, or best offer), the licence refusal
appeal process should be specified in the Mining law. That process should enable appeals of refusals by in the action as well as explicit refusals.

In order to enable appeals of licence refusals to potentially succeed, the licence granting procedure set forth in the Mining law should include clear
statements of the following elements:

                  The criteria for the grant of the licence;
                  A registry and mapping of all applications for exploration licences, accurately recording the name of the applicant, the location of
                   the exploration area sought, the mineral substances targeted and the date and time of filing the application;
                  The timeframe within which a decision to grant or refuse the licence must be made; and
                  The requirement that the reasons for the refusal of a licence must be provided by the granting authority to the applicant in writing;
                  The timeframe within which requests for reconsideration and appeals of refusals must be filed, and with which authority.

In jurisdictions that experience a high volume of applications for mineral rights, and an actual or potential high volume of disputes over mineral
rights, it may be desirable and justifiable to establish a special adjudicatory tribunal to resolve such conflicts, including appeals of licence refusals.
For example, such appeals could be submitted to a review board composed of members of a mineral resource development advisory commission
consisting of representatives of government, industry, artisanal and small scale mining, civil society and authorities and community leaders from
the affected areas.

25.3. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_] The end of the application assessment                               Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision provides for an expedited
(1) The assessment of an application for mining and/or quarrying rights shall   administrative and judicial appeal process in the case of refusal to grant a




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                          124 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

come to an end on the day on which the applicant is notified of the decision to   licence under the general procedures for judicial review of administrative
grant the application or the day of the judge's decision as provided for in       decisions. It includes:
Article [_] (on registration through legal channels) of the present                     Filing a request for reconsideration with the granting authority within
[Code][Act][Law].                                                                          30 days of the notification of the decision to refuse the licence.
                                                                                        Filing a request for judicial reversal within twenty days of the rejection
(2) In the event of a decision to refuse the application, and subject to the               of the request for reconsideration;
provisions of Article [_] (on the application of the common law appeals to a            Filing of the briefs in opposition and the administrative record within
higher administrative authority) and Article [_] (on the shortening of time                15 days of notification of the appeal;
periods within which appeals may be brought) of the present                             Limitation of the power of the court to grant filing deadline extensions:
[Code][Act][Law], the assessment of an application for mining and/or                       12 days maximum;
quarrying rights shall come to an end on the day on which the applicant is              Issuance of the decision of the Supreme Court of Justice within 30
notified of the decision.                                                                  days of closure of the pleadings.
Article [ ] The application of the common law
Subject to the provisions of Article [_] (on registration through legal
channels) and Article [_] (on matters which concern appeal proceedings) of
the present [Code][Act][Law], an appeal against administrative acts decreed
by administrative authorities in application of, or in violation of, the
provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law], or those of the Mining
Regulations shall be governed by the common law, in particular by the
provisions of Articles [_] of the [Code of Judicial Organisation and
Jurisdiction] and by the [relevant law] relating to procedure before the
[Supreme Court], as amended and supplemented to date.

Article [_] The shortening of time periods
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of the [_] Act mentioned above, the
applicant's preliminary appeal, as a litigant before the Administrative
Division of the [Supreme Court of Justice], to the authority which may set
aside or amend the administrative act must be brought within thirty days of
the date on which the decision was published or the applicant was personally
notified of it. A request to set aside the decision is to be brought within
twenty days from the day on which notification was given for the total or
partial dismissal of the appeal.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                125 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

(2) The time limit for filing the reply and the one for the administrative file
shall be fifteen working days from the date of notification of the appeal. The
same time limit shall apply for the opinion of the [Attorney General of the
Republic]. An extension of the time limits imposed on the parties for sending
in the appeal and the reply, which may possibly be decided on by a reasoned
order of the President of the Administrative Division of the [Supreme Court of
Justice], may not exceed 12 working days.

(3) The shortening of the time limits provided for in the preceding paragraphs
of the present Article only apply to refusals to grant mining and/or quarrying
rights, and of the approval or perfection of mortgages.

(4) In all circumstances, the judgement of the [Supreme Court of Justice]
shall be delivered within thirty working days of the deliberations relating to
the case.

25.3. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision acknowledges a
(1) Any person whose rights or legitimate expectations have been materially        right of appeal under the Promotion of Administrative Justice act and imposes
and adversely affected or who is aggrieved by any administrative decision in       an obligatory internal administrative appeal (a request for reconsideration) as a
terms of this [Act][Code][Law] may appeal in the prescribed manner to –            prerequisite. It does not establish expedited deadlines in the manner that the
                                                                                   DRC provision does.
   (a) the [Regulating Authority], if it is an administrative decision by an
   officer of the [Regulating Authority]; or
   (b) the [Administrative Reviewer], if it is an administrative decision by the
   [Regulating Authority].

(2) An appeal in terms of subsection (1) does not suspend the administrative
decision, unless it is suspended by the [Regulating Authority], as the case
may be.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 126 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

(3) No person may apply to the court for the review of an administrative
decision contemplated in subsection (1) until that person has exhausted his or
her remedies in terms of that subsection.

(4) Sections [_] of the [Administrative Procedures Act], apply to any court
proceedings contemplated in this section.


                                                              25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                      25.4 Area

The area refers to the physical boundary marking the space grantable for exploration. Most laws only provide for the maximum size permitted
under the exploration licence, but a law may also provide the minimum threshold allowed. Some laws will mandate the licence holder to clearly
demarcate the granted space with physical markers (stones, pegs, wooden slats), while others require solely that the size of the property be listed in
the licence document itself, in the mining cadastre, and/or in the applicant’s application documents. The area covered by an exploration licence
should be subject to the requirements as to form and orientation imposed by the cadastral system.

A licence should indicate the specific area granted to the licence holder, usually by geographic references and official map coordinates. Due to the
larger footprint of prospecting/reconnaissance activities relative to exploration activities, the maximum grantable area for exploration is usually
smaller in size relative to the maximum grantable area for prospecting/reconnaissance, subject to being reduced over time either by voluntary
relinquishment or mandatory size reductions at renewals. Voluntary relinquishment can be encouraged by a system of gradually increasing annual
fees payable per unit of surface area.

25.4. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this example represents perhaps the
(1) Subject to the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law], an exploration licence   outer limit (1000 km2) of the maximum size of area available under an
shall cover such area, not exceeding 1000 km2, as is in accordance with the      exploration licence (called prospecting licence under the Botswana law). It is
applicant’s application.                                                         fairly typical in requiring a reduction of at least half of the area upon each
                                                                                 renewal, but allows some flexibility in the case of renewals after the first.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                             127 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (4), the exploration area shall be
reduced in size to eliminate therefrom—                                             Areas covered by retention licences are eliminated because they come under a
                                                                                    separate licence (i.e., a licence holder may obtain a retention licence for part of
(a) at the end of the initial term of the exploration licence, not less than half   a licence area while continuing to hold the rest under the prospecting licence).
of the initial area;

(b) at the end of each period of renewal, half of the remaining area, or such
lower proportion as the [Regulating Authority] may in any case agree; and

(c) the area covered by any retention licence or mining licence granted
thereon.

(3) The holder of an exploration licence shall designate, prior to the end of
each of the periods referred to in subsection (2), the area or areas to be
eliminated from the exploration area and, in default thereof, the designation
shall be made by the [Regulating Authority].

(4) Where a person holds two or more contiguous exploration licences
covering the same period and the same mineral or minerals the [Regulating
Authority] shall, for the purposes of the elimination, under subsection (2), of
part of any of the areas thereof, permit the areas covered thereby to be
deemed to be one area, the subject of one such exploration licence.

(5) No compensation shall be payable to the holder of any exploration licence
arising out of reductions in area effected in terms of subsection (2).

25.4. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Côte d’Ivoire’s mining law (2014), this pro vision imposes cadastral
(1) The area covered by a prospecting licence shall be a polygon with               shape, orientation and border limitations on the area available under an
straight sides which are oriented north-south and east-west, with geographic        exploration licence, as well as a minimum (1 km2) and a maximum (400 km2)
north as the reference, with the exception of land borders and international        size limit on the area.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    128 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

waters.
                                                                                  This article is an innovative approach to the typical area reduction requirement
(2) The minimum length of each segment of the polygon shall be (1)                for renewals. In light of the smaller maximum area allowed, the article only
kilometre.                                                                        requires that the area held be reduced by one quarter, rather than one half, at
                                                                                  each renewal. Furthermore, it allows the licence holder to opt to hold onto a
(3) The area covered by a prospecting licence shall have a surface area of        larger area at renewal provided that the holder demonstrates that work is being
between one (1) square kilometre and four hundred (400) square kilometres.        done on the larger area and pays a special fee (set by regulation) in order to
                                                                                  exercise that option.
(4) Each time a prospecting licence is renewed, it's surface area shall be
reduced by a quarter.

(5) However, the prospecting licence holder may choose to retain the same
surface area provided that they prove that work is being carried out over the
entire area which is under the relevant licence. In this event, the prospecting
licence holder shall be required to pay an option fee, the rates and terms of
which shall be determined by decree.


                                                             25. Exploration Licensing
                                                           25.5 Specific Obligations of a Licence Holder

Provisions that lay out, for the holder of an exploration licence, the necessary responsibility or duty to undertake certain actions or restriction from
undertaking certain actions or causing certain effects are collectively treated as obligations. Noncompliance with these obligations may lead to
fines and/or ordered suspensions of operations until the licencee is in compliance. Where suspension occurs, continued, uncured non-compliance
beyond a specified time period may result in revocation of the licence.

Specific obligations of an exploration licence holder may include obligations before, during and after operations.
Obligations prior to the commencement of operations may include: (1) introduction and presentation to local authorities; (2) preparation and
regulatory approval of an environmental and social mitigation plan; and (3) establishment of an environmental restoration surety bond or fund.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               129 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

Obligations during operations may include:
    Commencement of operations within a specified time period;
    Posting of an environmental surety;
    Payment of annual fees per unit of surface area held;
    Implementation of an approved work program;
    Filing regular reports on work and investment completed and results achieved (e.g., geological findings);
    Implementation of approved environmental and social mitigation plan, and filing of periodic reports thereon;
    Compliance with labour, health and safety regulations;
    Compliance with applicable immigration, customs and tax laws and regulations;
    Compliance with all applicable contract terms, in countries where a contract between the State and each exploration licence holder is
        required.

Obligations upon the closure of operations normally include a final report of work carried out and results achieved, as well as the implementation
of the site closure and restoration provisions of the approved environmental impact mitigation plan, unless the site is to be developed as a mine.
25.5. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]: Obligations for maintaining the validity of the right               Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision deals with obligations in
(1) In order to maintain the validity of their mining or quarrying right, the    two chapters. Chapter 1 establishes the principle that the holders of all licences
     holder must:                                                                must comply with two specific obligations that have specific time requirements
                                                                                 in order maintain the validity of their rights:
(a) commence work within the period specified in Article [_] of the present            begin work within the time specified in article 197 of the Code; and
[Code][Act][Law];                                                                      pay the surface fee per square unit of area related to their title before
                                                                                          the deadline set in article 199 of the Code.
(b) pay the annual surface area fees per square relating to their title, each
year before the deadline set in Article [_] (on the amounts due as annual        Failure to comply with either of these obligations results in the licensee being
surface area fees per square) of the present [Code][Act][Law].                   stripped of the licence.

(2) Should one or more of these obligations not be fulfilled, the holder shall   The licencee’s failure to comply with the obligations listed in t he second
lose their right in application of the procedure provided for in Articles [_]    chapter will be penalized by fines and/or possible orders to suspend operations,
(on failure to comply with administrative obligations, and the related           or in the case of violations, by judicial process.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                130 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

penalties) of the present [Code][Act][Law].
                                                                                    This bifurcation of obligations into two categories and the clarity and objectivity
(3) Should the holder fail to comply with the obligations listed in the             of the two obligations that are enforced by revocation of the title provides great
following chapters, they shall be subject to fines and/or possibly with an          security of title to licencees and also ensures prompt and complete payment of
order to suspend operations or, in the case of an offence, shall be prosecuted.     the fees that fund the work of the Regulating Authority.

Article [_] The obligation to commence work                                         The obligations in the second category are numerous and are only referenced
A Prospecting Licence holder shall be required to commence work within six          here by article title, except for the obligation to prepare and obtain the approval
months from when the title establishing their right was issued.                     of an Environmental Mitigation Plan (PAR) before commencing work (which
                                                                                    must begin within 6 months of delivery of the licence). The process of approval
Article [_] The obligation to pay the annual surface area fees per square           is expedited by a sectoral environmental review authority.
(1) To cover costs for the services and management relating to the rights
established by mining titles, annual surface area fees per square, for each
mining or quarrying title which is issued, shall be collected for the Ministry of
Mines which shall redistribute a portion to the departments of [the regulatory
authority] responsible for the administration of the present
[Code][Act][Law].

(2) Holders of Prospecting Licences, Operating Licences, Operating Licences
relating to Tailings, Operating Licences for Small-Scale Mining, Permits to
Prospect for Quarry Products and Permanent Quarry Operating Permits
shall pay the surface area fees for the first year when the mining or quarrying
title is issued.

(3) The holder is to settle the annual surface area fees per square for each
following year before the end of the first quarter of the calendar year.
However, annual surface area fees are to be paid pro rata to the relevant
time period, when the initial title is issued, or in the last year during which
the title is valid.

(4) Annual surface area fees per square are to be paid at the relevant counter
at the Ministry of Mines which issued the mining or quarrying title, which
shall issue the holder with a receipt when payment is made.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    131 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration


Article [_] Environmental protection during prospecting
(1) Before prospecting work relating to mining or quarry products may
commence, the holder of a Prospecting Licence or a Permit to Prospect for
Quarry Products must draw up and obtain approval for an Environmental
Management Plan (Plan d’Atténuation et de Réhabilitation (PAR)) for the
proposed activities.

(2) The terms of the PAR and its approval shall be laid down in the
regulations.

(3) The approval of a PAR shall fall under the jurisdiction of the department
responsible for environmental protection within the [the regulatory authority]
in collaboration with [the regulatory authority for the environment].

Article [_] Declaration of indicators of an archaeological discovery

Article [_] The discovery of items relevant to the national cultural heritage

Article [_] The jurisdiction of [the regulatory authority]

Article [_] The declaration of an accident in a mine or quarry

Article [_] The use of explosive products

Article [_] The relationship with local authorities

Article [_] Registers and reports
Article [_] Inspections

Article [_] The commencement and closure of a prospecting or operation/s




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     132 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

area.

25.5. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_] Legal nature of exploration right, mining right, or production      Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision requires (for
right, and rights of holders thereof                                            exploration licences called prospecting permits) compliance with all of the
 (1) No person may prospect for or remove, mine, conduct, technical co-         obligations noted above and also:
operation operations, reconnaissance operations, explore for and produce             Approval of an environmental management plan (as part of the licence
any mineral or petroleum or commence with any work incidental thereto on                 grant process);
any area without –                                                                   Notification and consultation with the landowner or lawful occupier;
                                                                                     Presentation of the licence to the Mining Licences office for
(a) an approved environmental management programme or approved                           registration;
environmental management plan, as the case may be;                                   Commencement of exploration (called prospecting) activities within
                                                                                         120 days of the effective date of the licence;
(b) a prospecting/reconnaissance permission, exploration right, permission to        Maintenance of records, drilling logs, etc.; and
remove, mining right, mining permit, retention permit, technical co-operation        Obtaining the [Regulating Authority]’s approval for any removal of
permit, reconnaissance permit, exploration right or production right, as the             bulk samples for testing.
case may be; and
                                                                                This is a clear and comprehensive set of specific obligations of exploration
(c) notifying and consulting with the land owner or lawful occupier of the      licence holders.
land in question.
Article [_]. Rights and obligations of holder of exploration right

(1) The holder of an exploration right must –

(a) lodge such right for registration at the Mining Licences Office within 30
days of the date on which the right –
  (i) becomes effective in accordance with the provisions of this
[Act][Code][Law]; or
  (ii) is renewed in accordance with the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law];




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                          133 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

(b) commence with exploration activities within 120 days from the date on
which the exploration right becomes effective or such an extended period as
the [Regulating Authority] may authorise;

(c) continuously and actively conduct exploration operations in accordance
with the exploration work programme;

(d) comply with the terms and conditions of the exploration right, relevant
provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] and any other relevant law;

(e) comply with the requirements of the approved environmental management
programme;

(f) pay the prescribed exploration fees to the State; and

(g) subject to section [_] (on the rules regarding the removal and disposition
of minerals), pay the State royalties in respect of any mineral removed and
disposed of during the course of exploration operations.
Article [_]. Permission to remove and dispose of minerals
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the holder of an exploration right may      only
remove and dispose for his or her own account any mineral found by         such
holder in the course of exploration operations conducted pursuant to       such
exploration right in such quantities as may be required to conduct tests   on it
or to identify or analyse it.

(2) The holder of an exploration right must obtain the [Regulating
Authority]'s written permission to remove and dispose for such holder's own
account of bulk samples of any other minerals found by such holder in the
course of exploration operations conducted pursuant to such exploration
right.

Article [_] Information and data in respect of prospecting/reconnaissance




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   134 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

and exploration
(1) The holder of an exploration right or prospecting/reconnaissance
permission must –

(a) keep proper records, at the registered office or place of business, of
exploration operations and the results and expenditure connected therewith,
as well as borehole core data and core-log data, where appropriate; and

(b) submit progress reports and data, in the prescribed manner and at the
prescribed intervals, to the [Regulating Authority] regarding the exploration
operations.

(2) No person may dispose of or destroy any record, borehole core data or
core-log data contemplated in subsection (1)(a) except in accordance with
written directions of the relevant [Officer of the Regulating Authority].
Article [_] Environmental management principles
(1) The principles set out in section [_] of the [National environmental
legislation] –

(a) apply to all exploration and mining operations, as the case may be, and
any matter or activity relating to such operation; and

(b) serve as guidelines for the interpretation, administration and
implementation of the environmental requirements of this [Act][Code][Law].

(2) Any exploration or mining operation must be conducted in accordance
with generally accepted principles of sustainable development by integrating
social, economic and environmental factors into the planning and
implementation of exploration and mining projects in order to ensure that
exploitation of mineral resources serves present and future generations.
Article [_] Integrated environmental management and responsibility to




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                  135 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

remedy
(1) The holder of a reconnaissance permission, exploration right, mining
right, mining permit or retention permit –

(a) must at all times give effect to the general objectives of integrated
environmental management laid down in the [relevant environmental
legislation];

(b) must consider, investigate, assess and communicate the impact of his or
her exploration or mining on the environment as contemplated in the
[relevant environmental legislation];

(c) must manage all environmental impacts –
 (i) in accordance with his or her environmental management plan or
approved environmental management programme, where appropriate; and
 (ii) as an integral part of the prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or
mining operation, unless the [Regulating Authority] directs otherwise;

(d) must as far as it is reasonably practicable, rehabilitate the environment
affected by the exploration or mining operations to its natural or
predetermined state or to a land use which conforms to the generally
accepted principle of sustainable development; and

(e) is responsible for any environmental damage, pollution or ecological
degradation as a result of his or her prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration
or mining operations and which may occur inside and outside the boundaries
of the area to which such right, permit or permission relates.

(2) Notwithstanding the [Companies Act], or the [other relevant legislation],
the directors of a company or members of a close corporation are jointly and
severally liable for any unacceptable negative impact on the environment,
including damage, degradation or pollution.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                  136 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

Article [_] Financial provision for remediation of environmental damage
(1) The holder of an exploration right, mining right or mining permit must
annually assess his or her environmental liability and increase his or her
financial provision to the satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority].

(2) If the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied with the assessment and
financial provision contemplated in this section, the [Regulating Authority]
may appoint an independent assessor to rehabilitate the closed mining or
exploration operation in respect of latent or residual environmental impacts.

                                                              25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                  25.6 Rights of a Licence Holder

Provisions that address what possession of an exploration licence allows the licence holder to do or what the licence holder may be entitled to are
collectively treated as rights. The rights of an exploration licence holder are usually exclusive exploration rights at depth within the licenced
area. Although the licence usually relates to specified minerals only, under most mining laws no other exploration or mining licence can be
granted to another party over the same area, except a short-term quarrying licence.

The exploration licence entitles the holder to carry out exploration activities, as defined; but not to engage in mining. The exploration licence
holder generally also has the exclusive right to apply for an exploitation licence over the same area, in whole or in part, during the term of the
licence.

Depending on the defined nature of the exploration right, the licensee may have the right to pledge, mortgage or transfer the licence.

25.6. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Côte d’Ivoire’s mining law (2014), this provision states that the
(1) A prospecting licence confers on the holder an exclusive right to prospect   exploration licence confers on the licence holder an exclusive right to explore
for mining materials, within the boundaries of the holder's area, including      for minerals other than industrial minerals and to apply for an exploitation




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              137 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

surface area and depth of the right, as well as an exclusive right to dispose of   permit to develop commercial deposits identified within the licence area. It is a
any products extracted as part of said prospecting.                                generous provision in that the exploration licence includes an exclusive right as
                                                                                   to all such minerals, rather than specific types or classes of minerals as in some
(2) It confers on the holder an exclusive right to request and obtain an           mining laws. Furthermore, that exclusive right includes the right to apply for an
operating licence, at any time during term of validity for the prospecting         exploitation licence for multiple deposits within the licenced area - as opposed
licence, if they have performed their obligations under the present Act, in the    to a single deposit as in some more restrictive mining laws - provided that the
the event they discover one or more mineral deposits within the area under         licence holder is in compliance with its obligations under the Mining Code.
the prospecting licence.
                                                                                   According to this provision, the exploration licence holder has the right to
(3) A prospecting licence constitutes a movable, indivisible right and, may not    dispose of products extracted during the course of exploration. However, such
be subleased, subject of a pledge or a mortgage.                                   right is subject to the condition that the exploration work not constitute
                                                                                   exploitation work, and to the further conditions that the licence holder (a)
Article [_]                                                                        submits a declaration to the Regulating Authority prior to any such disposition
(1) A prospecting licence holder shall have the right to freely dispose of         and (b) pays the mining taxes (e.g. royalties) applicable to the mineral products.
products extracted during the prospecting and assaying, provided that the          Exemptions from the mining tax payment obligation are to be granted for
prospecting work does not in fact constitute operating work.                       samples, the maximum amounts of which are to be set by regulation.

(2) Disposals shall only be possible under the following conditions:               The exploration licence is not eligible for pledge, mortgage or sublease; but it
                                                                                   may be transferred with the approval of the Regulating Authority, to which the
(a) the prospecting licence holder has made a prior declaration relating to        licensee is entitled if in compliance with its obligations under the Mining Code.
the products extracted, to the Mining Department (Administration des
Mines);

(b) the prospecting licence holder has paid the mining taxes relating to said
extracted products, unless an exemption has been granted for the samples by
the Mining Department and the Department for the Economy and Finance
(Administration de l'Economie et des Finances).

(3) The maximum quantities of samples which may be collected shall be
specified by decree.

Article [_]
The rights of a mining right holder shall relate to the entire extent of the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  138 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

demarcated area under the mining title, with no limit as to depth, extending
down within vertical lines based on the defined area on the surface.

Article [_]
(1) A mining right may be assigned or transferred subject to the prior written
approval from [the regulatory authority] and under the conditions provided
for by decree.

(2) Any agreement for the transfer or assignment of a mining right must be
subject to the condition precedent of said authorisation.

(2) The approval of [the regulatory authority] shall be automatic where the
    mining right holder has fulfilled their obligations under the
    [Code][Act][Law].

25.6. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), which calls an exploration right a
(1) Subject to the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] and the Regulations,        prospecting licence, this provision provides for an exclusive exploration right
an exploration licence confers on the holder the exclusive right to carry on       that entitles the holder to enter the exploration area and erect camps and
exploration operations in the exploration area for minerals to which the           temporary buildings thereon in connection with the holder’s exploration
licence applies.                                                                   activities. It also entitles the holder of a “prospecting? licence for gemstones to
                                                                                   sell gemstones recovered during exploration to a licenced dealer. In the event
(2) In the exercise of the rights conferred by this section, the holder may,       of such sales, the prospecting licence holder is required to submit the particulars
subject to section [_] (on restrictions on the right of a mineral licence holder   of the transactions to the Commissioner of Mines in order to enable the Mining
to enter land), either himself or by his employees or agents, enter upon the       Administration, among other things, to confirm that the licenced dealer has paid
exploration area and erect camps and temporary buildings and may erect             the applicable royalty, or enforce such payment by the dealer if it has not been
installations in any water forming part of the exploration area.                   made. The mining law provides that licenced dealers and licenced brokers are
                                                                                   responsible for the payment of royalties on gemstones that they purchase.
(3) The holder of an exploration licence for gemstones who in the course of
carrying out exploration operations under the exploration licence recovers         This provision also authorizes the licence holder to apply for a retention licence
gemstones, may dispose of the gemstones by sale to a licenced dealer and           and to apply for and obtain a “special mining licence? (which is long term) or a
shall promptly following any such sale submit particulars thereof to the           mining licence (which has a shorter term), subject to compliance with the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   139 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

[Regulating Authority], showing the name and business address of the dealer,       relevant application requirements.
a description of the stones, their weight and a copy of a receipt given by the
purchaser for the price received.

(4) The holder of an exploration licence for gemstones who recovers
gemstones in the course of exploration operations shall for the purpose of
holding the gemstones and selling them pursuant to subsection (3) be deemed
to be a mineral right holder.

(5) The exploration licence holder is authorized to apply for a retention
licence.

(6) The exploration licence holder is entitled to apply for and obtain a special
mining licence or a mining licence, subject to compliance with the application
requirements specified in other articles.


                                                                25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                     25.7 Term of Licence


The term of an exploration licence should be long enough to allow time for enough investigation to enable the licence holder to make a
determination of whether to pursue intensive drilling and sampling of specific targets within the licence area, provided that renewal terms are
available during which feasibility studies, environmental and social impact studies and required or necessary plans for local procurement, hiring
and training, and community development can be developed or negotiated. It is thought that the initial term should be short enough to prevent
licensees from holding large areas for excessive periods without developing them; however, this goal could also be achieved by gradually
increasing the annual fees per unit area payable by the licensees, to encourage voluntary relinquishment.

In setting the term of the exploration licence, consideration should be given to whether the term includes the initial period (typically six months)
within which certain conditions prior to the commencement of operations must be fulfilled (for example, preparation, submission and approval of
an environmental and social impact mitigation plan; funding of an environmental rehabilitation guarantee or account; presentations to local




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                   140 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

authorities; and negotiations of surface access rights with the owners or lawful occupiers of land.)

It should be noted that as requirements are increased for the grant of a mining licence (for example, Economic and Social Impact Study (ESIS),
community development agreement, local procurement, hiring and training programs), more time will be needed in order to accomplish them.

The typical term of an exploration licence in Africa is 3 years, or a period not exceeding three years. (Examples: Botswana, Cameroon, CAR,
Ghana, Guinea, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.)

The term is 4 years, or for a period not exceeding four years, in Côte d’Ivoire, DRC for precious stones, Sierra Leone and Ta nzania. The term is 5
years in the DRC except for precious stones, as well as in Madagascar and Mozambique. In Angola the term is set by contract.

25.7. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision reflects a progressive
(1) Where an applicant is entitled to the grant of an exploration licence under   awareness of the potential need for a somewhat longer than normal exploration
the terms and conditions of this [Act][Code][Law], the [Regulating                term as well the need to accomplish certain formalities and obtain certain
Authority] shall issue to the applicant the exploration licence as provided in    approvals before actual exploration work can begin.
that section and the licence so issued shall subsist for the following periods-

(a) for the initial exploration period for which the applicant has applied, a
period not exceeding four years;

(2) In determining the date for the commencement of the period for which the
licence is granted, the licensing authority may take account of any period not
exceeding six months from the date of the grant which is required by the
applicant to make any necessary preparations for exploration operations.

25.7. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Malawi’s mining law (1981), this provision provides for the
(1) Where the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that an initial period is       standard exploration term of up to three years, but also takes into account the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               141 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

required to make the necessary preparations to carry on exploration             potential need for a preparation period and provides for the possible
operations he may, in an exclusive exploration licence, specify a period (not   incorporation of a preparation period of up to three months into the term of the
exceeding three months) as the preparation period.                              exploration licence (called prospecting licence).

(2) The term of an exclusive exploration licence is the period for which the
licence is granted, not exceeding three years, stated in the licence, and any
preparation period specified in the licence.

(3) The term of an exclusive exploration licence commences on and includes
the date of the grant of the licence, as stated in the licence.


                                                             25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                 25.8 Renewal of Licence


Addressed often at the same time as the term of the licence, renewal of licence refers to provisions determining when, for how long, and how
many times a licence holder may extend the initial duration of the exploration licence. Given the relatively short initial term of exploration
licences, renewal terms are generally necessary for the completion of the studies and plans required prior to mining operations.

Licence holders who are in compliance with the terms of their licence and their obligations under the mining law are generally entitled to
renewals.
Most countries provide for two renewal terms, which may be of the same length as the initial term or may be for shorter periods.

Most countries have ultimate term limits on the combined initial and renewal terms; but ultimately, term limits are arbitrary and may be inadequate
for the necessary preparation to develop a complex deposit or one situated in an area presenting major logistical or environmental challenges, or
simply to finalize a feasibility study under difficult market conditions. To deal with such situations, Botswana, Namibia, Tanzania and Uganda
provide for the availability of a retention licence after the exhaustion of renewal terms under an exploration licence.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                             142 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

Mining laws generally require an application for the renewal of an exploration licence to be filed no later than a certain date prior to the end of the
initial term, in order to allow time for processing of the application before the initial term expires. The better mining laws also provide that an
exploration licence for which a renewal application has been timely filed are automatically extended until they are either renewed or the renewal is
definitively denied.

Most renewal provisions require the relinquishment of a percentage of the area held under the exploration licence (usually half) upon each
renewal. An alternative approach would be to permit the holder to retain a larger area upon the payment of an additional fee in order for the
licence holder to retain the area that would otherwise be subject to mandatory relinquishment (see Article 24 of the 2014 Mining Code of Côte
d’Ivoire, for example). As a general matter, mining laws make very large areas available for initial prospecting /reconnaissance activity, but reduce
the maximum size of the area that may be retained upon each renewal or transition from prospecting/reconnaissance to exploration and from the
latter to exploitation. In doing so, the laws seek to maximum efficiency on the part of licence holders so that the country’s mineral resources are
developed expeditiously, thereby generating employment, commercial activity and fiscal revenues that can be used for other national purposes.
Most mining laws require reduction of the area licenced for exploration upon renewals in order to prevent the tying up of areas larger than are
necessary for a normal exploration program and to make the excess area available to other prospective applicants who may be more highly
motivated to conduct exploration in the relinquished area than the initial licence holder.

25.8. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision clearly states the
(1) Where an applicant is entitled to the grant of an exploration licence, the   conditions under which the exploration (called prospecting) licencee is entitled
[Regulating Authority] shall issue to the applicant the exploration licence as   to renewals, when the applications must be filed, and the length of the renewal
provided in that section and the licence so issued shall subsist for the         terms.
following periods-
                                                                                 The terms of exploration licences for metallic and processed minerals decline
(a) for the initial exploration period for which the applicant has applied, a    from 4 years to 3 years for the first renewal and 2 years for the second and third
period not exceeding four years;                                                 renewals. (For gemstones other than diamonds, there is only a one-year initial
                                                                                 term, non-renewable.) An exploration licence for such minerals can therefore
(b) where application for renewal has been made by the holder in the             be held for up to 11 years in Tanzania, which also provides for the issuance of a
prescribed form, for the first period of renewal for which the applicant has     retention licence for a term of 5 years, renewable once for a like term, if the
applied, a period not exceeding three years;                                     required justification is demonstrated. Reduction of the surface area by half is
                                                                                 required at each renewal, but not below 20 square kilometres.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                143 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

(c) where application for renewal has been made by the holder in the
prescribed form, for the second period of renewal for which the applicant has       By contrast, the one-year terms of exploration licences for gemstones other than
applied, a period not exceeding two years;                                          kimberlitic diamonds and for building materials are not renewable.

(d) where the holder is not in default and at the end of the second period of
renewal a further period is required to complete a feasibility study, already
commenced by the holder, for such further period as may be reasonably
required for that purpose, but not exceeding two years.

(2) A holder of the licence who intends to renew the licence shall, not later
than one month before expiry date of the licence, submit an application for
renewal of the exploration licence.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on application of the holder of a licence
granted under subsection (1) of this section and on payment of prescribed
fees for renewal, renew the exploration licence-

(a) at the end of the initial exploration period or, as the case may be, at the
end of the first renewal period, for the period referred to in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of subsection (1);

(b) at the end of the second renewal period, in a case falling under paragraph
(d) of subsection (1), for the period required to complete the feasibility study.

(4) The obligation of the [Regulating Authority] to renew an exploration
licence is subject to the condition that-

(a) the holder is not in default except that the [Regulating Authority] shall not
reject an application to renew an exploration licence on the grounds that the
holder is in default, without first serving on the holder a notice giving
particulars of the default and requiring the holder within a reasonable time
specified in the notice to remedy the default; and




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 144 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration


(b) the holder, on renewal under paragraph (a) of subsection (3), has
relinquished in the case of a first renewal fifty per centum of the area held
during the initial exploration period and in the case of a second renewal fifty
per centum of the balance, and has by notice in writing to the [Regulating
Authority] given a sufficient description of the areas he is relinquishing.

(5) The relinquished areas shall be displayed on the notice board at the
[[Regulating Authority] headquarters and local offices on a monthly basis.

(6) An exploration licence for gemstones other than kimberlitic diamonds,
and an exploration licence for building materials shall subsist for one year
from the date of grant and shall not be subject to renewal.

(7) The obligations of the [Regulating Authority] under paragraph (b) of
subsection (4) shall not apply in the case where the exploration area is not
more than twenty square kilometres.

25.8. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision sets the initial
(1) The holder of an exploration licence may, not later than ninety calendar      exploration term of four years that can be renewed twice for 3 years and 2 years
days before the initial expiry of the licence, apply to the Mining Cadastre       respectively. This gradual reduction in term length encourages the licence
Office for a first renewal of the licence in respect of not more than one         holder to focus on the most prospective sites within the licenced area and to
hundred and twenty-five square kilometres of the exploration licence area,        conduct its exploration program expeditiously.
except that where the results of exploration to date strongly indicate the
presence of widespread mineralisation such that a surrender to one hundred        Unlike Tanzania, Sierra Leone’s mining law does not provide for a retention
and twenty-five square kilometres would result in some highly prospective         licence. Thus, an exploration licence may be held for a maximum period of 9
areas being surrendered, the [Regulating Authority], on the advice of the         years in Sierra Leone. That period is likely to be sufficient for the identification
Minerals Advisory Board, may exceptionally allow such areas constituting          of a small to medium sized commercial deposit and completion of the requisite
more than one hundred and twenty five square kilometres to be retained.           environmental and feasibility studies in order to progress to the exploitation
                                                                                  phase, but the 9-year limit may be problematic for the detailed study of a




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  145 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

(2) An application for the first renewal of an exploration licence-                complex or very large scale deposit in a challenging environment.
(a)shall be accompanied by-
                                                                                   The article requires a mandatory reduction in size of the area to a maximum of
 (i)a detailed annual report as prescribed describing all operations carried       120 square kilometres for the first renewal that may be waived upon the
out in the previous year together with an annual financial report for the same     requisite showing to the Minerals Advisory Board and the Regulating
period, plus a surrender report as prescribed, covering in detail all work         Authority. No further reduction of area is required for the second renewal.
carried out over any portion of the ground to be surrendered and
accompanied by all results, data, information and interpretation since the         Renewals are not automatic under Sierra Leone’s law. The licence holder is
grant of the exploration licence;                                                  required to submit a detailed annual report of operations carried out and results
 (ii)a proposed programme of exploration operations to be carried out              achieved, as well as a proposed exploration work program for the requested
during the period of first renewal and the estimated cost thereof;                 renewal period. The renewal must be approved by the Minerals Advisory
 (iii)a plan identifying that part of the exploration licence area for which       Board.
renewal is sought; (iv)a description of the contiguous blocks comprising the
exploration licence area for which renewal is sought, identified in the
prescribed manner; and

(b)shall give particulars of any alteration in the matters stated in the
application for the grant of the licence under paragraphs [_] of section [_]
(on the required elements of an application for an exploration licence).
(3) The Mining Cadastre Office shall forward an application for the first
renewal of an exploration licence to the Minerals Advisory Board.
(4) Upon receipt of a completed application for the renewal of an
explorations licence from the Mining Cadastre Office, where the [statutory
advisory board] has determined that an application for the renewal of an
exploration licence has met all the criteria for such licence the [statutory
advisory board] shall certify to the [Regulating Authority] in the prescribed
form that it advises that the application be approved, and such certification
shall be recorded in the mining cadastre registry.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, subject to all prescribed criteria of this
[Act][Code][Law] and of the regulations, on the certified advice of the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 146 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

Minerals Advisory Board, renew the licence for the reduced area applied for
with or without variation of the conditions of the initial licence, for a period
not exceeding three years.

(6) The holder of an exploration licence may, not later than ninety calendar
days before the expiry of a once-renewed licence apply to the Mining
Cadastre Office for a second renewal of the licence.
(7) An application for the second renewal of an exploration licence-
(a)shall be accompanied by-
  (i)a report on exploration operations carried out so far and the direct costs
incurred thereby;
  (ii)a proposed programme of exploration operations, feasibility studies, and
environmental impact assessments to be carried out during the period of
second renewal and the estimated cost thereof;
  (iii)a plan identifying that part of the exploration licence area for which
renewal is sought, which shall not be greater than one hundred and twenty-
five square kilometres unless it can be conclusively demonstrated that to do
so would unavoidably exclude part of an economically recoverable mineral
deposit;
  (iv)a description of the blocks comprising the exploration licence area for
which renewal is sought, identified in the prescribed manner;

(b)shall give particulars of any alteration in the matters stated in the
application for the grant of the licence under paragraphs [_] of section [_]
(on the required elements of an application for an exploration licence); and
(c)shall provide evidence that a mineral discovery has been made that may be
of commercial value.
(8) The Mining Cadastre Office shall forward an application for the second
renewal of an exploration licence to the Minerals Advisory Board.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    147 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

(9) Upon receipt of a completed application for the second renewal of an
explorations licence from the Mining Cadastre Office, where the Minerals
Advisory Board has determined that an application for the second renewal of
an exploration licence has met all the criteria and where the holder of an
exploration licence who has made and reported a discovery of possible
commercial value, the Board shall certify to the [Regulating Authority] in the
prescribed form that it advises that the application be approved, and such
certification shall be recorded in the mining cadastre registry.

(10) The [Regulating Authority] shall on the certified advice of Minerals
Advisory Board confirming all prescribed criteria of this [Act][Code][Law]
and of the regulations have been met, renew the licence for a period not
exceeding two years.

(11) The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision on renewal
applications, and if an application is refused, the [Regulating Authority] shall
give reasons for such refusal.

(12) Where the [Regulating Authority] has refused an application to renew an
exploration licence that is renewable and the cause given by the [Regulating
Authority] for such refusal can be remedied by the holder of the licence, if the
cause has been remedied with thirty calendar days of receiving the notice
under subsection (11), the licence holder may reapply for a renewal of the
licence within such thirty-day period.

                                                                25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                  25.9 Suspension of Licence

Suspension of a licence may be a temporary sanction against a licence holder or a de facto suspension of the licence term due to a force majeure
event preventing the holder from conducting operations.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                               148 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART B-2: Exploration


In the case of force majeure, the licence holder is excused from compliance with certain obligations during the reasonable duration of the event;
and the term of the licence may be extended for that period. Careful attention should be given to the drafting of what constitutes a force majeure
event, the related notification requirement, the obligations of the licence holder to use best efforts to overcome the force majeure event as
peditiously as practicable, the determination and notification of the end of the force majeure event, whether the term of the licence is extended by
the period of the force majeure event, and under what circumstances the licence may be terminated if the force majeure event continues beyond a
specified time limit.
A distinction should be made between suspension of the mineral licence, on the one hand, and suspensions of operations, on the other hand. When
the mineral licence is suspended, the rights of the holder of that right, as well as the term, are suspended; and this may complicate the remediation
of the breach that the suspension requires. It also raises collateral issues to be addressed such as whether and on what conditions a third party
application for the area that is subject to the suspended licence can be submitted or accepted. The suspension of operations, on the other hand,
prohibits the mineral activity under the licence but does not alter the holder’s right to occupy the licenced area and undert ake whatever is
necessary in order to remedy the breach of an obligation; and the term of the licence continues to run.

A suspension of the licence may be an appropriate temporary sanction for failure of the licence holder to timely make required payments or file
required reports, because both the failure to meet those obligations and the remedy are administrative events wholly within the control of the
licence holder and do not require any operations at the site.

A suspension of operations may be the appropriate temporary sanction for failures to implement sufficient environmental protection measures, to
implement required social obligations or to meet health, safety, security and labor standards. Under such a suspension, the licence holder
maintains its mineral licence for the purpose of taking the necessary remedial action, but is prohibited from conducting production activities until
the problem issues have been resolved to the satisfaction of the regulatory entity.

Some mining laws provide for the suspension of operations or of the licence as a preliminary sanction to be followed by revocation of the licence
if the underlying cause for the suspension is not remedied within a specified time period.

25.9. Example 1:                                                           Annotation

                                                                           Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision is designed to




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    149 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

Article [_]                                                                       apply to reconnaissance, exploration or mining licences. That is appropriate
                                                                                  insofar as there can be a risk of dangerous activity taking place under a
(1) The [Regulating Authority}, or any person authorised by the [Regulating       prospecting/reconnaissance or exploration licence and there is no apparent
Authority], may, in writing, order reconnaissance, exploration or mining          reason to be more tolerant of any of the stated grounds for suspension based on
operations to be temporarily suspended on an emergency basis, regardless of       the type of licence under which they have occurred.
whether such operations are authorized by a mineral right, until such
arrangements are made that are in the Regulating Authority’s opinion              This provision makes the distinction between suspension of operations pending
necessary to prevent danger to life, property or the environment or to comply     remediation of a condition that constitutes a danger to life, property or the
with this [Act][Code][Law].                                                       environment or is in non-compliance with the mining law, on the one hand, and
                                                                                  suspension of a mineral licence as a precursor to potential cancelation of the
(2) The Regulating Authority may cancel or vary the terms of any temporary        licence in the event of non-remediation of any of the reasons listed, on the other
suspension order.                                                                 hand. Whereas suspension of operations is not preceded by prior notice and an
                                                                                  opportunity to remedy the cause of the suspension, prior notice and such
(3) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall have the power to confirm a               opportunity are required in the case of suspension of the licence.
temporary suspension order made by the [Regulating Authority] and may not
delegate this power.                                                              The Administrative Reviewer is the supervisory authority immediately superior
                                                                                  to the Regulating Authority in the administrative hierarchy.
(4) A temporary suspension order shall lapse after twenty-one days of its
issuance, unless it is confirmed, in writing, by the [Administrative Reviewer].   This provision represents, in general, a balanced approach to protecting the
                                                                                  interests of the State and affected stakeholders from harm in a manner
 (5) The [Administrative Reviewer] after consultation with the [statutory         consistent with providing security of title to the licence holder. Failures to
advisory body] may suspend a mineral right if the holder-                         comply with specific obligations of the licence holder are sanctioned initially by
                                                                                  suspensions of operations or rights, as the case may be, and the offending
(a) fails to make any of the payments required by or under this
                                                                                  licence holder is encouraged and given the opportunity to establish compliance
[Act][Code][Law] on the date due;                                                 before action to cancel the licence is taken. Because of the breadth of some of
(b) fails to meet any prescribed minimum annual programme of work or work         the grounds stated for ultimate cancellation of the licence, the provision may
                                                                                  heighten the risk of loss of title more than necessary. This could be attenuated
expenditure requirement;
                                                                                  by limiting the grounds for cancellation of the licence whilst maintaining
(c) grossly violates health and safety regulations or causes environmental        broader grounds for temporary suspension of operations which is a costly
harm;                                                                             sanction in itself.

(d) employs or makes use of child labourers;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 150 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

(e) fails to submit reports required by this act;

(f) contravenes any of the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] or the
conditions of his mineral right or the provisions of any other enactment
relating to mines and minerals;

(g) dies and his heir or successor in title is not qualified under this
[Act][Code][Law] to hold the mineral right, unless an application is received
from the heir or successor within ninety days of the death to transfer the right
to a third party who is so qualified and accepts all duties under the right;

(h) becomes an un-discharged bankrupt or becomes of unsound mind;

(i) makes any statement to the [Administrative Reviewer] in connection with
his mineral right which he knows or ought to have known to be false;

(j) fails to substantially comply with the terms of a community development
agreement when required by this [Act][Code][Law] to do so;

(k) for any reason becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under
section [_] (on eligibility rules).

(2) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall, before suspending any mineral right
give notice to the holder in such a manner as shall be prescribed and shall, in
such a notice require the holder to remedy in not less than thirty calendar
days any breach of the conditions of his mineral right.

(3) If the holder of a mineral right fails to remedy any failure or
contravention specified in paragraphs (c), (d) and (k) of subsection (1), the
[Regulating Authority] may, by notice to the holder thereof, suspend the
mineral right forthwith.

 (4) The powers of the [Regulating Authority] under this section shall, in
relation to artisanal mining licences, be exercised by the Regulating




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    151 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

Authority but the Regulating Authority need not consult the [statutory
advisory board].

25.9. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from the DRC Mining Code (2002), these provisions represent a
(1) Any serious offence, as defined in the Mining Regulations, which is           different approach to suspension. The first article provides for a suspension of
committed by the holder shall be penalised with the immediate suspension of       work as a sanction for any “serious failure?. The provision delegates to the
work, decided on by [the regulatory authority], subject to prior written notice   mining regulation the definition of “serious failure? and the length of the
having been given.                                                                suspension, which is to be a function of the seriousness of the failure and its
                                                                                  effect on the environment and public health and safety. The provision
(2) The duration of the suspension shall be set in the regulations, according     authorizes the Mining Administration to undertake the necessary remedial
to the seriousness of the offence and its impact on the environment, public       action if the licence holder fails to do so, at the licence holder’s expense.
health and/or safety.
                                                                                  The second article provides for suspension of operations for three months as the
(3) To remedy said serious offence, [the regulatory authority] may, ex officio    sanction for a repeated failure by the licence holder to maintain required
or at the request of the local authorities concerned, require that the holder     documentation. In such case, a warning and opportunity to remedy is provided
carry out such works which it deems necessary in order to protect public          before the imposition of the suspension order. The suspension is extended for a
health, the environment, workers or neighbouring mines. Should the holder         second period of three months if the underlying cause is not remedied by the
fail to perform within the required time period, [the regulatory authority]       end of the initial suspension period; and if still not remedied at the end of the
may have said work carried out by a third party, at the holder's expense.         second suspension period, a fine of USD 500 per day is levied against the
                                                                                  licence holder until the documents are properly maintained.
Article [_]
(1) Should it be duly found that the required documents prescribed by the         The suspensions do not ultimately lead to cancellation of the licence in either
present [Code][Act][Law] have not been kept in proper order, [the                 case. This approach represents a philosophy that a costly sanction that does not
regulatory authority] shall send a written warning to the mining operator         involve loss of rights is more conducive to remediation and compliance, as well
concerned, if this failure to comply does not constitute an offence.              as more attractive to long term investment, than a sanction that leads to
                                                                                  cancellation of rights. However, it does involve a risk that the Mining
(2) Should the holder repeat the offence, their activities may be suspended by    Administration will not be able to cancel the mineral licence of a holder that
the Minister, after notice to comply has been given, for a period of three        repeatedly fails to remedy a serious violation but nevertheless complies with the
months, and the holder fails to comply.                                           obligations (stated elsewhere) necessary to maintain the licence in effect.

(3) At the end of the suspension period, [the regulatory authority] shall carry




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                152 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART B-2: Exploration

out an audit. If it is found that the holder is now compliant, the suspension
shall be lifted. If not, it shall be renewed for a further period of three months.

(4) If the holder remains in default on expiry of the second suspension period,
the holder shall be subject to a penalty, the total amount of which, in
[national currency], shall be equivalent to [_] [currency] per day or part
thereof, until the procedural defect has been cured.


                                                                  25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                    25. 10 Termination of Licence

A mining law should state clearly in one place the various ways in which an exploration licence can terminate, which would include expiration of
the term, surrender by the holder, and cancellation or withdrawal by the issuing authority. The law should make clear what the status of the
licenced area is upon termination in each manner and any remaining potential liabilities or incapacities that the licence holder may have upon
termination.

Some mining laws also provide that an exploration licence is automatically extended during the application process for a mining right once a
timely application by the holder has been filed.
25.10. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002) this provision states all of the
(1) Any right, permit, permission or licence granted or issued in terms of this      different ways in which a mineral right granted pursuant to the act may
[Act][Code][Law] shall lapse, whenever –                                             terminate. However, it does not go on to specify the consequences for the area,
                                                                                     any installed structures and equipment, or the licence holder under each form of
(a) it expires;                                                                      termination.

(b) the holder thereof is deceased and there are no successors in title;

(c) a company or close corporation is deregistered in terms of the relevant




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  153 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

acts and no application has been made or was made to the [Regulating
Authority] for the consent in terms of section [_] (requiring the consent of the
Administrative Reviewer for transfers of mineral rights) or such permission
has been refused;

(d) save for cases referred to in section [_] (establishing an exception to the
consent requirement for certain mortgages and security interests), the holder
is liquidated or sequestrated;

(e) it is cancelled in terms of section [_] (concerning the Administrative
Reviewer’s authority to cancel mineral rights); or

(f) it is abandoned.

25.10. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from the unofficial English translation of Guinea’s Amended Mining
(1) A mining right or authorisation expires at the end of the period for which     Code (2011), this provision:
it was granted (including subsequent renewals thereof), by relinquishment or
by revocation. At the end of the term of a mining right or authorisation, the              States the three grounds on which mineral licences terminate: (i) at the
rights conferred on its holder revert to the State free of charge.                          end of their term, (ii) by relinquishment, or (iii) by revocation;
                                                                                           Establishes that the rights revert to the State upon termination and that
(2) Rights granted by the holder to third parties over substances and within                all rights granted to third parties lapse upon expiration;
the zone covered by the right, automatically lapse at the end of the term of               Preserves the obligations of the mineral licence or authorisation holder
such right.                                                                                 after expiration, particularly as to payments due and site rehabilitation;
                                                                                            and
(3) However, the holder of a mining right or mining operation permit for                   Requires the holder to submit a final report of work carried out to the
quarry substances remains liable for the payment of outstanding duties and                  Mining Administration.
taxes and for the obligations incumbent upon it with respect to the
environment and rehabilitation of the developed sites, as well as for all the      Thus, these terms clarify the status of the mineral rights and related obligations
other obligations contemplated under this [Code][Act]Law], its implementing        at termination of the mineral licence or authorisation.
regulations and in the terms of reference or the mining agreement.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  154 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

                                                                                   This provision applies to both exploration and exploitation licences.
(4) Furthermore, the mining rights holder shall provide the [Regulating
Authority] of a detailed report on the work carried out in five (5) copies. All
information provided shall become the property of the State.

                                                                25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                 25.11 Revocation of Licence

A provision in which a licence is withdrawn and/or taken away by the Regulating Authority is referred to as revocation of the licence. Whereas
suspension or monetary penalties may be imposed for various failures to comply with health, safety, environmental protection and other qualitative
obligations – thereby providing an incentive to comply while protecting workers and communities from the consequences of such breaches,
revocation of the licence is the ultimate penalty, the grounds for which should be limited and clearly stated. The revocation provisions of the law
should also state whether the ground for revocation is one that can be cured and, if so, within what timeframe after notice.

25.11. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision stipulates two clear
(1) The following shall be considered as failure to comply with administrative     grounds for the revocation of exploration permits: failure to pay the annual
obligations by a rights holder: non-payment of annual surface area fees per        surface fees and failure to commence work within the required
square and failure to commence work within the time period provided for in         timeframe. Articles 287 and 288 set forth the procedure for establishing the
the articles on these respective obligations.                                      facts that constitute failures to satisfy those obligations. Under Article 289,
                                                                                   notice of the occurrence of grounds for revocation is given to the licence holder,
(2) Subject to the provisions of Articles [_] of the present [Code][Act][Law]      who has the right to appeal the findings under other articles of the Code. Article
(on offences and penalties), the failures to comply as listed in Article [_] (on   290 sets forth the revocation procedure that applies once the appeal period has
the non-payment of annual surface area fees and failure to commence work           lapsed without an appeal or the appeal has been denied. It further provides that
within the legal time period) shall constitute grounds for the Prospecting         the licenced area returns to the public domain of the State, free and clear of any
Licence, as well as [their Permanent Quarry Operating Permit] to be                rights of the former licensee.
revoked.
                                                                                   Finally, article 291 sanctions the holder whose licence was revoked by making
(3) The Ministry of Mines shall immediately notify the holder of the decision      the holder ineligible for mineral or permanent quarry rights for five years. It




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  155 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

to revoke the licence or permit and shall post an announcement in a room           also stipulates that the revocation does not liberate the licence holder from his
indicated in the Mining Regulations.                                               environmental or tax obligations.

(4) Notification of the decision to revoke the licence or permit creates a right
to appeal as provided for in Articles [_] (on arbitration appeal) of the present
[Code][Act][Law].
(5) Such appeals must be brought within thirty days of the decision being
posted in the Ministry of Mines with jurisdiction over the revoked right.

(6) Should an appeal not be brought within the time period given above, the
decision to revoke the licence or permit shall be registered in the appropriate
register and published in the [Official Gazette].

(7) Where an appeal is brought against a decision to revoke a licence or
permit, the mining or quarrying right concerned shall remain valid for the
duration of the proceedings. However, there shall be notice of the decision
and the appeal proceedings which have been brought, in the register of
granted licences and permits.

(8) The mining rights and [the permanent quarry operating permit] shall be
cancelled by [the regulatory authority] when the holder has not brought an
appeal against the decision to withdraw the licence or permit and when the
time period for an appeal has lapsed or the appeal has been dismissed.

(9) The decision to cancel a licence or permit shall be made on the day the
appeal is dismissed or the last day of the period within which the appeal
should have been brought.

(10) The Ministry of Mines shall be notified of the decision of the to cancel
the licence or permit and shall register it in the register of cancelled titles.

(11) The area which is the subject of a mining or quarrying right which has
been cancelled shall return to and be held by the State.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 156 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART B-2: Exploration

(12) Holders of mining rights and [a permanent quarry operating permit]
who have lost their rights and whose titles have been cancelled may not
obtain new mining rights or a new [permanent quarry operating permit] for a
period of five years from the date on which the cancellation was registered in
the register kept by the Mining Cadastre.
(13) In addition, the cancellation of mining rights or [a permanent quarry
operating permit] does not relieve the holder from their environmental and
tax obligations.

25.11. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision provides broader
                                                                                 grounds for the cancelation or revocation of an exploration licence (called
(1) Subject to subsections (2), (3) and (4), the [Regulating Authority] may      “prospecting right?) than do the provisions of the DRC Code. However, the
cancel or suspend any prospecting/reconnaissance permission, exploration         South African provision also provides due process safeguards in the form of
right, mining right, mining permit or retention permit if the holder thereof –   notice of grounds for revocation (to the licencee and any mortgagees), an
                                                                                 opportunity for the licencee to respond with justifications, and required
(a) is conducting any prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or mining          instructions for curative measures. The revocation can only proceed if the cause
operation in contravention of this [Act][Code][Law];                             is not cured within the allotted timeframe.

(b) breaches any material term or condition of such right, permit or
permission;

(c) is contravening the approved environmental management programme; or

(d) has submitted inaccurate, incorrect or misleading information in
connection with any matter required to be submitted under this
[Act][Code][Law].

(2) Before acting under subsection (1), the [Regulating Authority] must –

(a) give written notice to the holder indicating the intention to suspend or




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              157 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

cancel the right;
(b) set out the reasons why he or she is considering suspending or cancelling
the right;
(c) afford the holder a reasonable opportunity to show why the right, permit
or permission should not be suspended or cancelled; and
(d) notify the mortgagor, if any, of the exploration right, mining right or
mining permit concerned of his or her intention to suspend or cancel the right
or permit.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] must direct the holder to take specified
measures to remedy any contravention, breach or failure.

(4) If the holder does not comply with the direction given under subsection
(3), the [Regulating Authority] may act under subsection (1) against the
holder after having –

(a) given the holder a reasonable opportunity to make representations; and
(b) considered any such representations.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] may by written notice to the holder lift a
suspension if the holder –

(a) complies with a directive contemplated in subsection (3); or
(b) furnishes compelling reasons for the lifting of the suspension.

                                                                25. Exploration Licensing
                                                                  25.12 Surrender of Licence

A provision in which the licence holder gives up the mining right voluntarily before the duration of the licence has run out is referred to as
surrender of the licence. Surrender of an exploration licence may be total or partial. Partial surrender or relinquishment of area subject to the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                158 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART B-2: Exploration

licence will require the issuance of a new exploration licence for the area not surrendered. Surrender/relinquishment may be automatic at the
option of the licence holder upon notice to the Regulating Authority, or it may require a decision of the authority.

An exploration licence holder may wish to surrender all or relinquish part of the licenced area when it has satisfied itself that the area in question
does not contain a commercial deposit of the minerals sought, or because the holder lacks the funds or does not wish to allocate further funds to
continue exploring for minerals in the area, or to reduce the amount of the annual fee that it must pay in order to maintain the licenced area in
subsequent years, or to reduce its aggregate licenced area holdings in order to qualify for a licence in a more attractive area that has become
available in the same jurisdiction.

It is considered to be in the interest of the State to facilitate surrender or partial relinquishment of areas held under exploration licences in order to
encourage exploration licence holders to focus their exploration efforts and investment expeditiously, and to make areas available for other
investors as soon as no further exploration activity in the area by the existing licence holder is to be expected. Therefore, the procedure for
surrender or partial relinquishment of licenced exploration areas may be simpler and faster than the corresponding procedure for the surrender or
relinquishment of a licence or licenced area for exploitation. However, such procedures tend to be similar across types of licences.

The mining law provision on surrender should (a) cover both total and partial surrenders of licenced area, (b) require that any partial surrender be
of blocks or segments that comply with the cadastral rules of shape and dimensions, (c) indicate whether an administrative approval is required in
order for the surrender to become effective, (d) clarify the consequence of a surrender with respect to responsibility for area-based fees paid or to
become due, (e) clarify the consequence of a surrender with respect to liabilities or responsibilities of the licence holder under the mining law and
other laws, in particular environmental laws, and related agreements, and (f) clarify the status and availability of the surrendered area, as well as
the responsibility of a subsequent holder of a licence for the area.

Care should be taken in the mining law and regulations and/or the environmental law and regulations to assure that an environmental bond, escrow
account or other surety mechanism is required and has been established and that either the surrendering/relinquishing exploration licence holder
has completed all necessary environmental rehabilitation work or that the [Regulating Authority] has access to a sufficient surety to complete all
necessary rehabilitation work.

25.12. Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), these two articles deal separately




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        159 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

(1) The holder of a mining right may, upon application in the prescribed form     with the surrender of a mining right, on the one hand, and the total or partial
and manner, and upon meeting prescribed conditions, surrender the mining          relinquishment of land held under the mining right, on the other hand.
right.
                                                                                  The provisions apply to surrender of land held under all types of mineral
(2) The Mining Cadastre Office shall approve an application made under            licences, without distinction. That is probably appropriate as between
subsection (1) of this section to surrender the mining right if he is satisfied   exploration and exploitation, because exploration can involve the construction
that-                                                                             of access roads and camps, the introduction of chemicals for drilling, and
                                                                                  invasive exploration techniques. Prospecting/reconnaissance activity, on the
(a)the holder of the mining right has submitted the request for surrender in      other hand, does not present similar issues, so surrenders of area held under
the prescribed form and manner;                                                   prospecting/reconnaissance licences could be dealt with in more summary
                                                                                  fashion.
(b)the surrender will not affect any liability incurred by the mining right
holder before the surrender of the mining right, including environmental          These articles cover both total and partial surrenders of licenced area.
obligation;                                                                       Apparently, in the case of a total surrender of the licence, a two-stage procedure
                                                                                  is involved: first the surrender of the licenced land area (under the second
(c)all rents due and fees prescribed, if any, have been paid by the holder of     article), and then surrender of the licence (under the first article). The second
the mining right; and                                                             article requires, appropriately, that any surrender of licenced land area comply
                                                                                  with the prescriptions of the law and regulations as to geometry and dimension.
(d) the holder of the mining right has surrendered the original title document.
                                                                                  The surrender of land area, total or partial, appears to require an administrative
Article [_]
                                                                                  approval, whereas the surrender of the licence appears to be automatic if the
 (1) The holder of a mining right may at any time during the period of the
                                                                                  stated conditions are met. The second article provides for adjustment of fees
validity of such mining right, upon application to the Mining Cadastre Office
                                                                                  payable on the basis of the area covered by mining right, to reflect any partial
in the prescribed form and manner and upon meeting prescribed conditions,
                                                                                  surrender or relinquishment. Both articles provide that the surrender of licenced
relinquish the area or part of area covered by the mining right; provided, the
                                                                                  land area or of the licence does not affect any liability of the licence holder
geometry and dimensions of each surrendered area shall satisfy the
                                                                                  incurred prior to the surrender, including environmental liability in particular.
prescriptions of this [Act][Code][Law] and its Regulations.
                                                                                  These provisions do not clarify the status of the surrendered area, however.
(2) Upon relinquishment of the area or part of the area covered by the mining     Ideally, provision would be made for an environmental audit or review before
right in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the    the area becomes available to another licencee and a clarification of the
fees payable on the basis of the area covered by the mining right shall be        respective environmental liabilities of the surrendering licence holder and the
adjusted proportionally taking into account the area relinquished.                next licence holder. Clarification is also needed as to whether the surrendered
                                                                                  area will subsequently be made available for minerals exploration, and if so, by




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 160 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

(3) The relinquishment of the area or part of the area covered by the mining        what method (for example, whether by competitive bid or by claim staking).
right shall not affect the duration of the mining right.

(4) The relinquishment of the area or part of the area shall not affect any
liability incurred by the mining right holder in respect of the area
relinquished prior to the relinquishment, including environmental
obligations.

25.12. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this article combines the provisions
(1) A holder of a mineral right who wishes to surrender all or a part of the        for total and partial relinquishment of licenced area and surrender of the licence.
land subject to the mineral right shall apply to the [Regulating Authority] for     As in the first example, the conditions and procedure are the same regardless of
a certificate of surrender not later than two months before the date on which       the type of mineral right involved; and the coverage is similar.
the holder wishes the surrender to take effect.
                                                                                    However, in this example, stricter conditions apply for the issuance of the
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be in accordance with                 certificate of surrender, and the conditions under which such a certificate shall
prescribed Regulations.                                                             not be issued are specified. These include, in particular, a failure to provide
                                                                                    records and reports of mineral operations (presumably as further detailed in
(3) Subject to subsection (4), upon an application duly made under subsection       regulations) and “where the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied that the
(1), the [Regulating Authority] shall issue a certificate of surrender in respect   applicant will surrender the land in a condition which is safe and accords with
of the land to which the application relates.                                       good mining practice?. The latter stipulation appears to require an inspection of
                                                                                    the area to be surrendered. Further clarification is needed as to whether the
(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not issue a certificate of surrender           condition applies to environmental rehabilitation and as to the applicable
                                                                                    standard, both of which could be provided in the mining regulation.
(a) to an applicant who is in default,

(b) to an applicant who fails to give records and reports in relation to the
applicant’s mineral operations,

(c) where the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied that the applicant will
surrender the land in a condition which is safe and accords with good mining
practice, or




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    161 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

(d) in respect of land, if the remaining area of the land after the surrender
would be less than one block.

(5) Where a certificate of surrender is issued under this section, the
[Regulating Authority] shall, where only part of the land subject to the
mineral right is surrendered, amend the relevant licence accordingly or
cancel the mineral right where the surrender is in respect of the whole area
covered by the mineral right.

(6) Land in respect of which a certificate of surrender is issued, shall be
treated as having been surrendered with effect from the date on which the
certificate of surrender is issued under subsection (3).

(7) The surrender of land under this section shall not affect a liability
incurred by a person in respect of that land before the date on which the
surrender took effect.

                                                             25. Exploration Licensing
                                                              25.13 Transfer/Assignment of Rights

Transfer and assignment of rights refers to provisions that deal with whether a licence holder may hand over, sell, rent (either in whole or in part)
or in any way encumber/place a lien on the licence for the benefit of another person or entity. The ability to transfer or assign rights to an
exploration licence, or ownership of the company holding the licence, and any conditions for such transfer or assignment, are key considerations in
a mining law. Most exploration work is carried out by junior mining companies, usually with the goal of discovering a commercial deposit and
then selling the rights to develop it – in whole or in part – to a major mining company. While transfer of exploration rights do not on their own
grant the transferee the right to exploit a mineral deposit, acquisition of another company’s exploration lic ence covering a substantial identified
deposit can place a larger mining company in a preferential or exclusive position to acquire exploitation rights for the deposit, since most regimes
give the exploration licence holder a preferential or exclusive right to acquire such an exploitation licence during the term of the exploration
licence, subject to meeting the requirements for issuance of the exploitation licence.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    162 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration


If such transfers and sales are discouraged or rendered difficult, that in turn can have a negative impact on investment in exploration, since the vast
majority of investment in exploration in previously underexplored territory around the world since about 1990 has been made by or through junior
mining companies that lack the capability to develop and exploit a major mineral deposit on their own and who invest with the intent of
transferring their rights or shares to a major mining company if they make a substantial discovery. On the other hand, countries are entitled to
verify that the transferee is an eligible person who is not disqualified from holding the licence. Accordingly, review and control over transfers and
assignments to assure compliance with eligibility and capability requirements is the norm.

The transfer provisions should specify that the transferee assumes all of the obligations under the licence, and also whether the transferor remains
responsible or liable for obligations incurred during the transferor’s tenure.

25.13. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_].                                                                        Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision establishes an
(1) Subject to this section, an exploration licence or any interest therein or      equilibrium between the licence holder’s right to transfer the licence and the
any controlling interest in the holder thereof may be transferred to any other      State’s right to require that the transferee be an eligible holder. It also clarifies that
person provided that the [Regulating Authority] is notified not less than 30        the transferee assumes all of the transferor’s liabilitie s and duties under the licence.
days before the intended transfer.
                                                                                    This is a liberal transfer provision because:
(2) In such notification, the applicant shall give to the [Regulating Authority]
such details of the transferee as would be required in the case of an                        It requires only the eligibility of the transferee; and
application for an exploration licence.                                                      the mining law does not state that the transferor continues to be liable for
                                                                                              the results of the transferor’s action or inaction during its tenure as holder
(3) Where the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the transferee is not                  of the licence.
disqualified under any provision of this act from holding an exploration
licence, he shall notify the applicant of his approval of the transfer of the
prospecting licence or an interest therein.

(4) Upon the transfer of an exploration licence, the transferee shall assume
and be responsible for all rights, liabilities and duties of the transferor under




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                        163 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

the prospecting licence.

25.13. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]. The deed of assignment                                               Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), these articles provide a substantial
(1) Mining rights and [permanent quarry operating permits] may be the             amount of detail as to the treatment of various aspects and types of transfers of
subject of a total or partial assignment. Said assignment shall be final and      mineral rights. The same procedures and standards apply for transfers of
irrevocable. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, the common law         exploration rights as for transfers of exploitation rights.
relating to assignment shall apply.
                                                                                  The first article establishes that mineral rights and quarry rights may be
(2) Any partial assignment must comply with the provisions of Articles [_] (on    transferred in whole or in part; that partial transfers must conform to cadastral
the shape and location of mining areas) of the present [Code][Act][Law].          rules as to the size and form of licenced areas, specified in other articles; that
                                                                                  rights can only be transferred to an eligible person, and that the agreement of
(3) In addition, any partial assignment of an operating right or a [permanent     transfer must contain the engagement of the transferee to assume all of the
quarry operating permit] shall be effective only from when the amended mine       obligations of the transferor under the licence; as well as other details.
or quarry operating right is granted.
                                                                                  The second article refers back to other articles for the details of the review of
(4) It is a prerequisite that the assignee must be a person who is eligible to    applications for transfers of mineral rights and quarrying rights, respectively.
hold the mining rights or the [permanent quarry operating permits].
                                                                                  The third article provides that a partial transfer is only enforceable when a new
(5) The deed of assignment must contain a commitment on the part of the           licence has been issued and registered.
assignee to assume all of the holder's obligations with regard to the State
which arise from the mining right or [the permanent quarry operating              The fourth article establishes a time period for and the content of the technical
permit] concerned.                                                                part of the review of a request for transfer. The technical review focuses on
                                                                                  verifying the financial capacity of the transferee, the latter’s assumption of the
Article [_]. The assessment of an assignment application. The assessment of       obligations corresponding to the licence, and the acceptability of any changes
an assignment application is to be done in accordance with the provisions of      proposed by the transferee in the documents related to the licence, such as the
Article [_] (on cadastral surveys) and Article [_] (on the assessment of a        environmental management and site rehabilitation plans. The article requires
subleasing application) of the present [Code][Act][Law].                          written reasons for any refusal of a request for transfer and a right to appeal any
                                                                                  refusal. It also provides for the registration of the transfer immediately
Article [_]. The registration and enforceability of the deed of assignment (1)    following notice of the approval of the transfer to the transferor and transferee.
In the event of the partial assignment of a mining or quarrying right for
prospecting, the Ministry of Mines shall issue a new mining or quarrying title.   The fifth article clarifies that a transfer of mineral rights does not free the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  164 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

                                                                                  transferor from any payment obligations to the State incurred prior to the
(2) In the event of the partial assignment of an operating right or a             transfer, nor does it extinguish the initial licence holder’s environmental
[permanent quarry operating permit], the partial assignment shall be              rehabilitation obligations.
registered when the new right is granted.
                                                                                  The sixth article establishes that mineral rights are transferrable by succession,
(3) In order to be binding on third parties, the registration of the deed of      including corporate mergers in accordance with applicable provisions of general
assignment is to be done in accordance with the provisions of Article [_] (on     law, provided that the successor in interest must be eligible to hold the mineral
the registration and enforceability of mortgage deeds) of the present             right.
[Code][Act][Law].
                                                                                  The seventh, eighth and ninth articles refer to other articles whose provisions
Article [_]. The transfer of a right                                              must be complied with in the case of partial transfers by succession, transfers by
                                                                                  merger, and transfers through the estate of a deceased individual.
(1) Subject to the provisions of Article [_] (on cadastral surveys) and Article
[_] (on the assessment of a subleasing application) of the present                The tenth article establishes that the transferee becomes responsible vis à vis the
[Code][Act][Law], the technical assessment of the application file for the        State and third parties for all obligations of the transferor in respect of the
transfer of a mining right or a [permanent quarry operating permit] into the      transferred mineral rights, irrespective of any clause to the contrary in the
transferee's name is to be carried out within twenty working days of the date     agreement between the transferor and the transferee. In other words, any
on which the application file was sent to the [Technical Division] by the         limitation of liability of the transferee in the agreement of transfer is only
Ministry of Mines.                                                                binding as between the transferor and the transferee.

(3) The technical assessment shall consist of:                                    The eleventh article establishes that exploration licences, specifically, may be
                                                                                  subject to option rights, while the twelfth article provides (by cross-reference)
a) verifying the transferee's financial ability;                                  for the registration of option rights. These final provisions are designed to
                                                                                  promote investment in exploration through the popular forms of farm-outs and
b) verifying that the transferee has assumed the transferor's obligations;        farm-ins.

c) determining, where appropriate, that any changes proposed by the
transferee to the original documents which were the basis for the mining right
or [permanent quarry operating permit] being granted do not alter the
technical findings for the project.

(3) Should the transfer of a mining right or a [permanent quarry operating
permit] be refused, written reasons must be given and said refusal gives the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  165 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART B-2: Exploration

right to appeal as provided for in the provisions of Articles [_] and [_] (on
appeal proceedings) of the present [Code][Act][Law].

(4) The transfer of a mining right or a [permanent quarry operating permit]
shall be registered in the appropriate registry kept by the Ministry of Mines in
accordance with Article [ ] (on the registration and enforceability of
mortgage deeds) immediately after the transferor and transferee have been
notified of the decision to approve the transfer.

(5) A transfer may only take place if it relates to mining rights or [Permanent
Quarry Operating Permits] which are currently valid.

Article [_]. The obligations of the assignor after assignment
Notwithstanding any clause to the contrary, a transfer does not relieve the
original holder of their obligations, with regard to the State, to pay the fees
and charges which relate to their mining or quarrying title during the period
in which they were the holder, nor does it relieve the holder of their
obligations relating to environmental rehabilitation.

Article [_] Deeds of transfer
(1) Mining rights and [permanent quarry operating permits] may be
transferred in whole or in part under the terms of a merger agreement and on
account of death of the holder to his beneficiaries. In the absence of
provisions to the contrary, common law relating to transfers shall apply.

(2) It is a prerequisite that the person to whom the right is to be transferred
must be eligible to hold mining or quarrying rights.

Article [_] Deeds of partial transfer
The partial transfer of mining rights and [permanent quarry operating
permits] is to be done in compliance with the provisions of Articles [_] and
[_] (on the shape and location of mining areas) of the present
[Code][Act][Law].




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    166 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART B-2: Exploration

Article [_]
The registration and enforceability of deeds of transfer
In order to be binding on third parties, the registration of deeds of transfer is
to be done in accordance with the provisions of Article [ ] (on the registration
and enforceability of mortgage deeds) and Article [ ] (on the registration and
enforceability of a deed of assignment) of the present [Code][Act][Law].

 Article [_] A deed of transfer under the terms of a merger agreement and on
account of death
The terms and procedures for the admissibility and assessment of deeds of
transfer under a merger agreement and on account of death shall be those
provided for for deeds of assignment relating to mining rights organised
under the present [Code][Act][Law].

Article [_]. The obligations of the person to whom the right is transferred
Notwithstanding any clause to the contrary, the person to whom the right is
transferred shall remain liable with regard to the State and third parties to
fulfil all of the obligations of the original holder of the mining right or
[permanent quarry operating permit].

Article [_]. Option contracts
A prospecting licence may be the subject of an option contract. Such a
contract may be freely concluded between the parties and gives the recipient
the right to obtain an interest in the enjoyment of an operating right following
on from a Prospecting Licence or in the total or partial alteration of it if a
certain investment is realised and/or specific work is completed as part of the
mining activities relating to the Prospecting Licence in question.

Article [_]. The registration of option contracts
 The registration of option contracts is to be done in accordance with the
provisions of Article [_] (on the registration and enforceability of mortgage
deeds) of the present [Code][Act][Law].




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     167 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration



                                                             25. Exploration Licensing
                                                          25.14 Specific Violations and Penalties

In addition to the general Offenses and Penalties described in Part A of this Guiding Template, the common specific violations and penalties that
apply to Exploration Licences are (1) conducting exploration activities in an area for which the operator does not hold an exploration licence, (2)
engaging in mining under an exploration licence, and (3) not meeting the applicable work and expenditure requirements. It is therefore of critical
importance, notably in cases where a mining right may ultimately attach to an exploration licence to clearly define and distinguish between what
activities are permitted under exploration licences and mining rights, respectively – particularly with respect to the taking and disposal of samples
under an exploration licence. Typical penalties include fines, suspension of the mineral right, and seizure `of minerals (that are mined illegally).

25.14. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), this provision articulates the classic
(1) The following offences shall be penalised with imprisonment for a period    prohibition against engaging in exploration without a licence or outside of the
of between two months and three years and with a fine of between [x] and [y]    licence area and the prohibition against engaging in mining (exploitation) while
[national currency] or with only one of these two penalties: whoever is         only holding an exploration licence. The law provides for a range of financial
engaged in prospecting or mining work relating to a mine or quarry without a    penalties dependent on the type of violation, as well as seizure of any mineral
title, or outside of the limits for their title, or whoever undertakes mining   products obtained in the course of the violation.
work with a prospecting licence.
                                                                                Though no amounts are specifically given in the example, the fine amount
(2) The above fine shall be between [2x] and [2y] [national currency] if the    should be significant enough to meet the deterrence objective of sanctions.
related substance is diamond or another gemstone.

(3) A conviction shall result in the State seizing the fraudulently mined
products and the relevant instruments used for this.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                             168 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART B-2: Exploration

(4) Should the offence be repeated, the fine shall be tripled and the prison
sentence doubled.
25.14. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision contains a more
(1) A person who--                                                                   generic description of the violations discussed above. However, the penalties
                                                                                     for violations are much more severe. In light of the exchange rate of +/- 250
(a) conducts exploration or mines minerals or carries out quarrying                  Naira to one US dollar on September 14, 2015, the penalty for the offenses of
operations otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the                   unauthorized exploration or mining is a fine of the equivalent of USD 100,000
[Act][Code][Law];                                                                    and a prison sentence of not less than 5 years.

(b) in making an application for mining rights, knowingly makes a statement          Notably, the Nigerian law covers a broader range of offences, including but not
which is false or misleading in any material particular;                             limited to knowingly giving false and misleading information or failing to
                                                                                     declare relevant information. While it can be of value to provide a broader range
                                                                                     of offences as shown in this example, for organizational clarity it may serve a
(c) in any report, return or affidavit submitted in pursuance of the provisions      mining law to place offences that occur across all mining licences in a general
of this [Act][Code][Law], knowingly gives any information which is false or          offences and penalties section, restricting offences discussed here to those that
misleading or fails to declare in any material particular;                           are narrowly specific to the particular licence.

(d) removes, possesses or disposes of any mineral contrary to the provisions         Article 134 of Nigeria’s law contains a specific offense o f salting as described
of this [Act][Code][Law], commits an offence.                                        therein (perhaps in light of the 1997 Bre-X salting scandal). The fine for salting
                                                                                     is not less than USD 2,500; and a prison term of up to 2 years may be assessed
(2) A mining rights holder who is guilty of an offence under section [_] (on         in addition or in the alternative.
illegal mining, false and misleading statements, false or non-declaration and
smuggling) is liable to have his licence revoked and on conviction at the first
instance, to a fine not less than [x][national currency]; and imprisonment of
not less five years, if the offence is a continuing one, whether or not it is a
first offence, the person convicted shall, in addition, be liable to a fine of [x]
[national currency] in respect of each day during which the offence
continues.

(4) A person who-




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    169 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART B-2: Exploration

(a) places or deposits, or causes to be placed or deposited in a place any
minerals, with the intention to mislead any other person as to the mineral
possibilities of the place; or

(b) mingles or causes to be mingled, with samples or ore, any substances
which may enhance the value or in any way change the nature of the ore, with
the intention to cheat, deceive or defraud; or engages in the business of
milling, leaching, sampling, concentrating, reducing, assaying, transporting,
or dealing in ores, metals or minerals, contrary to the provisions of this
[Act][Code][Law] commits an offence under this [Act][Code][Law] and is
liable on conviction to a fine of not less than [x][national currency] or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both fine and
imprisonment.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                  170 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                            PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation

                                                     26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing

Activities involving the extraction of minerals that require complex technologies and equipment in order to separate the minerals from the host
rock or in order to access the orebody at depth underground are referred to as large scale exploitation. Such mining activities may be conducted in
an open pit, underground or alluvial type of operation, depending on the location and nature of the mineral deposit. Large scale exploitation
typically includes relocation of large amounts of waste rock and water from the mine.

Most countries, including all African countries, require separate licences, permits, authorizations or concessions for exploration and exploitation,
respectively. By doing so, the country is able to impose certain conditions or prerequisites that must be met before a company is granted the right
to proceed from exploration to exploitation. Some countries (such as Mexico and Peru), however, grant a single concession for exploration and
exploitation. In those countries, the holder of such a concession is able to proceed from exploration to exploitation without obtaining a separate
exploitation licence, but subject to compliance with environmental impact assessment and mitigation rules and other operating requirements. This
is similar to the case in some African countries whose mining laws provide for the execution of a contract with mining companies covering both
the exploration and the exploitation phases of a project.

Many mining laws provide that exploitation rights to a previously worked or studied area containing a deposit for which substantial geological
information is already available, and for which no exploration licence is currently in effect, are to be awarded based on a competitive tender
process. In such cases, the mining law will provide for the reservation of such areas for tender, and for the establishment of the rules that will
apply to the process. Those rules may contain provisions for the compensation of the entity that carried out the prior exploration work (for
example, under a prior exploration licence that has expired) that identified the deposit and provided the basis for conducting the tender process.
The rights granted in such cases may include both an exploration stage, in order to complete certain studies and plans that must be submitted as a
prerequisite to exploitation, and a subsequent exploitation stage.

Large scale exploitation activity can generally be divided into sub-phases of (1) mine development and construction, (2) extraction, processing and
marketing of mineral products derived from the mine, and (3) mine site closure and site restoration.

                                                          26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                   171 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                              PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
                                                                         26.1 Eligibility


A mining law will generally restrict what legal entities can receive a licence or authorization to conduct mineral exploitation activities, either by
defining who may or may not apply for the right or to what type of entity the right may be granted, or by defining prior conditions that must be
met before a person or entity can be considered eligible or qualified to apply.
Most mining laws provide that if an exploration licence is currently in effect for a particular area, then only the holder of that exploration licence is
eligible to apply for an exploitation licence for all or any part of the area covered by the exploration licence. This is considered to be an important
incentive to motivate investors to invest in high risk minerals exploration and mine planning and is therefore an investor-friendly approach. A state
may still opt for an approach that allows for a competitive tender for such exploitation licence with fair compensation to the entity that carried out
the exploration work if the law allows for it and if deemed appropriate for the circumstance. Most mining laws also require that the applicant for a
large scale exploitation licence be a company organized under local law specifically for the purpose of conducting mining activities. Individuals or
foreign companies that may have been eligible to hold an exploration licence are therefore required to form such a company under the law of the
jurisdiction where the deposit is located, which local company will then be eligible to receive the exploitation licence. This assures the State that
the holder of the exploitation licence will be subject to local law and taxation and that it is not a company organized for purposes other than
mining and that might take advantage of certain incentives granted to mineral rights holders for other business purposes that are not entitled to
such incentives. This requirement also facilitates the implementation of any State equity participation requirements that the country may have. In
addition, the mining law typically requires that the exploration licence holder be in compliance with conditions of its exploration licence in order
to be eligible to apply for an exploitation licence.
In the case of areas that are reserved pursuant to the mining law for the grant of a large scale exploitation licence by a tender process, the rules for
that tender process will specify the eligibility requirements for potential bidders. The eligibility requirements in such cases may require an upfront
payment or the making of certain commitments.
Finally, many mining laws specify certain types or classes of persons or entities that are ineligible to receive the grant of an exploitation licence.
These would include, for example: any person or entity whose mineral licence has been revoked by the regulatory authority within the last 5 years,
who is insolvent or in bankruptcy, who is found guilty of tax fraud, or members of the Mining Administration acting directly or indirectly and
members of the Government.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       172 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
26.1. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Mauritania’s mining law (2008, as modified), the first of these
(1) Mines may be operated only under an operating licence or a small-scale        articles states that a large scale or small scale exploitation licence can only be
mining licence.                                                                   granted, in accordance with the conditions provided in the Mining Code, to a
                                                                                  company organized under the law of Mauritania. It also makes clear that the
(2 An operating licence may only be allocated to a juristic person under          exploitation area must lie within the boundaries of an exploration licence and
Mauritanian law, and in accordance with the terms provided for in the             that the holder of the latter is entitled to receive the exploitation licence if it has
present Act. It may only apply within the area for its existing prospecting
                                                                                  fulfilled its obligations. Thus, this provision is consistent with the principle of
licence and shall be granted automatically if the holder of the prospecting
                                                                                  security of tenure by providing that only the holder of the exploration licence, or
licence has fulfilled their obligations.
                                                                                  a local company formed by the holder, is eligible to receive an exploitation
(3) Once the operating licence has been allocated, the prospecting licence        licence for an area within the area covered by the exploration licence. The
shall remain valid outside the area for the operating licence.                    provision also clarifies that the exploration licence continues in effect in the
                                                                                  areas covered by it that are outside of the area for which the exploitation licence
Article [_]                                                                       is issued.
(1) No person may engage in mining activities if they do not have the
technical and financial ability required to meet the provisions of Articles [_]   The second article provides that the applicant who receives an exploitation
(on the duty to comply with best practices for a going concern and the duty to    licence must establish its technical and financial capacities before mining
respect obligations relating to workers' health and safety, public health and     operations will be authorized under the exploitation licence. In other words,
safety, and respect for the essential features of the surrounding environment)    obtaining the exploitation licence is a necessary condition for mining, but it is
of the present Act and to meet the environmental requirements provided for in     not sufficient by itself to authorize mining activity. If the exploitation licence
the implementing regulations.                                                     holder’s technical and financial capabilities are inadequate, the holder must do
                                                                                  one of two things within 6 months of notification by the Ministry: Either (1)
(2) Any prospecting licence holder, insofar as they have fulfilled their          form a local corporate joint venture with another company that satisfies the
obligations, shall be granted an operating licence.                               criteria, or (2) transfer the exploitation licence to a Mauritanian company that
                                                                                  satisfies the technical and financial capacity requirements.
(3) Once the operating licence has been granted, [the Regulatory Authority]
shall evaluate the financial and technical capacity of the holder before giving   This is one way of encouraging junior mining companies to engage in
authorisation for operations to commence.                                         exploration - by making it possible for them to obtain valuable exploitation
                                                                                  licences and giving them alternatives if they are unable to satisfy the technical
(4) In the event that the operating licence holder does not meet the required
                                                                                  and financial capability requirements.
criteria for operating, the operating right may be subject to:

(a) the holder forming a partnership with a legal entity which meets the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     173 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
required criteria for operating, in a new entity under Mauritanian law, to
which the operating licence shall be transferred;
(b) the assignment of the operating licence to a juristic person under
Mauritanian law which meets the required criteria for operating

(5) One of these solutions must be implemented within six (6) months from
when [the Regulatory Authority] notifies the operating licence holder that
they do not meet the required criteria. During this period, the operating
licence shall remain valid.

26.1. Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011, as amended in 2013), these five
(1) The following may mine or quarry in terms of the present Act:              articles establish the rules of eligibility for large scale exploitation concessions.
                                                                               They include (A) general rules of eligibility applicable to all applicants, (B) the
(a) any natural person, or public or private sector juristic person under      rule and conditions of eligibility of the exploration licence holder in the target
Guinean law which demonstrates their financial and technical ability to        area, and (B) provisions for eligibility rules to be set by regulation in the case of
undertake the requested operations;                                            licence areas awarded by competitive bidding.
(2) A decree of the [Head of Government] shall specify what is meant by        The general rules of eligibility applicable to all applicants include positive
"technical and financial ability".                                             standards that an applicant must meet and negative standards that exclude
                                                                               certain categories of potential applicants, as follows:
(3) Persons or companies which are subject to international sanctions or
criminal investigations related to fraud, corruption or money laundering may       1) The applicant must be a citizen of Guinea or a company organized
not obtain Mining Titles or Permits.                                                  under the laws of Guinea;
                                                                                   2) The applicant must meet the required technical and financial capability
Article [_]                                                                           standard established by regulation (in the form of a Presidential
(1) No natural person may obtain or hold a Mining Title or Permit in the
                                                                                      decree);
event that:
                                                                                   3) The applicant must not be subject to international sanctions or criminal
(a) their status is incompatible with carrying out business activities;               investigations relating to fraud, corruption or money laundering;
                                                                                   4) In the case of an applicant who is an individual:
(b) they have received a prison sentence for violating the provisions of the               a) The applicant’s status must not be incompatible with the
present [Code][Act][Law] and its implementing regulations;                                     conduct of commercial activities;
                                                                                           b) The applicant must not have been sentenced to jail for




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                174 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(c) their application does not comply with the requirements of the of the                            breaches of the provisions of the Mining Code or its
present [Code][Act][Law] and its implementing regulations.                                           implementing regulations; and
                                                                                                c)   The individual’s application must meet the requirements of
Article [_]                                                                                          the Mining Code and its implementing regulations.
During the period in which a Prospecting Licence is valid, only the holder
has the right to apply for an Operating Licence or a Mining Concession for         The rule and conditions of eligibility of the exploration licence holder in the
Deposits which are revealed within the area for the Prospecting Licence.           target area blend considerations of eligibility and requirements for the grant of
This right comes into effect once the holder has produced the complete results     the exploitation licence or mining concession.
as from the date of the Prospecting, reassigned half of the original area to the
State, and has produced the file of relevant documents in accordance with          If the deposits for which the large scale exploitation concession is sought are
Article [_] (on the allocation of an Operating Licence) and Article [_] (on the    subject to an exploration licence, the Mining Code of Guinea provides that only
allocation of a mining concession) of the present [Code][Act][Law].                the holder of that exploration licence has the right to obtain the exploitation
                                                                                   concession. It further provides that such right becomes operative when the
Article [_]                                                                        holder has complied with the following requirements:
(1) As regards a company under Guinean law, a Mining Concession shall be
given automatically, to the holder of a Prospecting Licence which has                           a) Submitted the complete exploration results,
complied with their obligations under the Mining Code, by decree of the                         b) Surrendered half of the initial exploration licence area back to
Cabinet, on a proposal from [the Regulatory Authority], after receiving                            the State, and
approval from [the Advisory Commission]. This application must be                               c) Produced the requisite filing in accordance with articles 30
submitted at least three months before the end of the period of validity for the                   and 37 of the Mining Code.
Prospecting Licence in respect of which it is brought.
                                                                                   This provision includes three key elements that together provide essential
(2) The following shall be eligible for the Mining Concession system               security of tenure to investors in mineral exploration. First, it establishes that
established by the present [Code][Act][Law]: investments of an amount equal        only the exploration licence holder has the right to obtain an exploitation licence
to or greater than a billion (1,000,000,000) USD for substances in categories      or mining concession for deposits discovered within the exploration licence
1 (bauxite) and 5 (radioactive materials).                                         area. That right is exclusive. No one else may obtain an exploitation right
                                                                                   within the exploration area. Second, it provides the exploration licence holder
(3) This threshold shall be set at five hundred million (500,000,000) USD for
                                                                                   with a right to obtain the exploitation licence or mining concession if it meets
substances in categories 2 (precious materials), 3 (metallic materials), 4
                                                                                   the requisite conditions. This exclusive right to obtain the exploitation licence
(non-metallic materials and rare earths) and 6 (mineral water and thermal
springs).                                                                          or mining concession is more than a priority and stronger than an exclusive right
                                                                                   to apply for the licence or concession. Third, the provision states and references
Article [_]                                                                        all of the objective conditions that the exploration licence holder must meet in
(1) For a deposit which has been revealed, where there is no valid                 order to obtain the exploitation licence or mining concession. Thus, in addition
Prospecting Licence, a Mining Concession shall be granted following the            to complying with the requirements listed above, the applicant who is the holder




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   175 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
procedure for a competitive and transparent invitation to tender according to   of the exploration licence for the area must:
rules to be defined in the regulations.
                                                                                             d) Have met its obligations under the Mining Code,
(2) The invitation to tender shall be implemented by the [relevant technical                 e) Have filed an application for the exploitation concession in
committee] together with the [Advisory Commission].                                             accordance with the regulations, at least three months prior to
                                                                                                the date of the exploration licence, and
                                                                                             f) Demonstrate its intent and ability to invest at least USD 1
                                                                                                billion in developing a bauxite or iron ore deposit, or at least
                                                                                                USD 500 million in developing a deposit of a different
                                                                                                mineral. (For smaller investments, Guinea provides an
                                                                                                exploitation permit that has a shorter term than the mining
                                                                                                concession but is subject to the same eligibility requirements
                                                                                                except as to the amount of the investment.)
                                                                                If the area for which the large scale exploitation concession is sought is not
                                                                                subject to an exploration licence and is offered by a tender process, Guinea’s
                                                                                Mining Code provides that the eligibility rules and other requirements for that
                                                                                process set forth in the regulations will apply, and that the bidding procedure is
                                                                                carried out by the technical committee on licences together with the national
                                                                                mining commission.

                                                     26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                       26.2 Requirements for Licence Applications


Regulating entities generally require that eligible entities seeking authorization to conduct mining activities submit particular documents or meet
certain criteria as part of the authorization process. Requirements for licence applications at this stage of the mining process are typically lengthier
and specific, incorporating greater elements of environmental and social concerns than at the prospecting or exploration stage.
The general requirements for obtaining a large scale exploitation licence should be set forth in the law to ensure consistency, clarity, objectivity
and transparency in the award of the licence. The requirements should then be further detailed in the regulations and/or the relevant bidding




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               176 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
documents. Most countries require a feasibility study demonstrating how a proven commercial deposit will be developed. An approved
Environmental and Social Impact Study, Environmental Management Plan and Rehabilitation Plan are required virtually everywhere either as a
requirement for the grant of the large scale exploitation licence or as a condition prior to the commencement of operations under the licence.
Recently, approved plans for social obligations – local hiring, training and promotion, local procurement, and local community development – are
required either as a condition for the grant of the licence or as conditions to be met within a short period after the mining licence takes effect. State
participation in the company that holds the exploitation licence may be required, if that policy is enshrined in the mining law.
26.2. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011, as amended in 2013), this provision
(1) As regards a company under [national] law, a Mining Concession shall           complements the eligibility requirements described in 26.1 above by specifying
be given automatically, to the holder of a prospecting licence which has           in detail the documents that the holder of an exploration licence must file with
complied with their obligations under the Mining Code, by decree of the            the holder’s application in order to obtain the exploitation licence or mining
Cabinet, on a proposal from [the Regulatory Authority], after receiving            concession for up to one half of the licence area held under the exploration
approval from [the Advisory Commission]. This application must be                  licence. By stating in the Mining Code that the exploration holder who
submitted at least three months before the end of the period of validity for the
                                                                                   complies with the specified conditions has the right to receive the exploitation
prospecting licence in respect of which it is brought.
                                                                                   licence or mining concession, as noted above in 26.1, and by specifying in the
(2) The following shall be eligible for the Mining Concession system               Mining Code the documents required to be submitted, rather than delegating the
established by the present [Code][Act][Law]: investments of an amount equal        authority to set the documentary and other requirements to the Executive
to or greater than one (1) billion United States dollars (USA).                    Branch, Guinea confers a robust right to obtain an exploitation licence or mining
                                                                                   concession on the exploration licence holder and eliminates or greatly
(3) An application for a mining concession must be given in together with a        circumscribes the existence of discretion in the process of granting exploitation
file, as detailed in the mining regulations, and which must include each of the    licences and mining concessions.
following:
                                                                                   As noted above, Guinea’s mining law also contemplates the awarding of large
(a) a copy of the prospecting licence, which must still be valid, and proof of     scale exploitation permits and mining concessions by a competitive bidding
payment for any taxes and fees due;                                                process in cases where there exists a studied and documented deposit but no
                                                                                   exploration licence is in effect. In such cases, the requirements are set in the
(b) a report on the results from the prospecting, with regard to the type,         bidding rules as established pursuant to regulations.
quality, volume and geographic location of the mineral resource which was
identified;                                                                        Guinea’s law requires the submission of a feasibility study among the other
                                                                                   documents that must accompany an application by an exploration licence holder
(c) the plan for the first or second reassignment, as the case may be, together    for an exploitation permit or mining concession. A significant innovation in




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 177 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
with the results from the prospecting work, and corresponding to half of the     Guinea’s law is the stipulation that the feasibility study must take into account:
previous surface area;
                                                                                 1) an Environmental and Social Impact Study including a Threat Assessment,
(d) a feasibility study which is to include:                                        A Risk Management Plan, A Health, Hygiene and Safety Plan, A
  (i) a detailed environmental and social impact assessment, together with an       Rehabilitation Plan, a Relocation Plan for the Affected Populations and
Environmental and Social Management Plan, including a Hazard Plan, a                measures to reduce the negative impacts of the project and to optimize the
Risk Management Plan, a Health and Safety Plan, a Rehabilitation Plan, a            positive impacts;
Plan for the Resettlement of Affected Population Groups, for those affected by   2) the economic and financial analysis of the project and the plan for obtaining
the project, and the measures for mitigating the negative impact and                the necessary permits and authorizations;
optimising the positive impact;
                                                                                 3) plans and estimates for the industrial infrastructure;
  (ii) an economic and financial analysis of the project and the plan for
obtaining the necessary licences and permits;                                    4) a plan for the support of Guinean enterprises in the creation or the
  (iii) the plans and estimates for the industrial infrastructure;                  reinforcement of the capacities of small and medium scale enterprises and
  (iv) a plan to support Guinean businesses, for creating and/or strengthening      industry or enterprises controlled by Guineans for the supply of goods and
the capacities of [SMEs/SMIs] or businesses owned or controlled by                  services necessary for the activities and a plan to promote the employment
Guineans, for the provision of the required goods and services for their            of Guineans for which the minimum must conform to the quotas in this law.
activities, and a plan for promoting the employment of Guineans, which must
at least comply with the quotas set in the present [Code][Act][Law];             These factors that must be taken into consideration by a feasibility study for a
  (v) a detailed timetable for the work which is to be carried out;              large scale exploitation project in Guinea are a significant innovation in
  (vi) a community development plan annexed to the Local Development             integrating economic and social development planning goals into the required
Agreement, which is to include, among other things, aspects such as training,    mine planning process. The setting of fixed local employment quotas in the
medical, social, educational and road infrastructure as well as the              law, however, creates a rigidity that may be self-defeating and possibly in
infrastructure for supplying water and electricity; this Agreement shall be      conflict with international treaty obligations.
signed and the development shall be carried out once the title has been
obtained; and                                                                    This provision of Guinea’s mining law also requires a community development
  (vii) an architectural blueprint of the registered office for the company,     plan attached to a local community development agreement covering, among
together with an application addressed to the relevant administration for the    other things, training; and medical, social, educational, road, water and electric
allocation of a plot of land; with regard to the allocation of concessions for   infrastructures; to be signed upon obtaining the mining licence. The law thereby
iron ore, bauxite, gold and diamond, the registered office must be completed     converts a soft law CSR obligation into a hard law requirement for the grant of a
within no more than three years from when the concession is allocated.           large scale exploitation licence.

(4) The allocation of a mining concession shall entail the cancellation of the   The innovative expansion of the mine planning requirements in the Guinean
prospecting licence within the area for the mining concession.                   mining law does not only apply to very large scale exploitation projects,
                                                                                 however. They are requirements for all applications for exploitation permits for
(5) Prospecting related to the operations may continue. Should a mineral of a    small mines as well. Those requirements may constitute a significant barrier to




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 178 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
different category to the one for which the concession was allocated be           entry for Guinean entrepreneurs seeking to develop small scale mines involving
discovered as part of this prospecting, the holder shall have a pre-emptive       investments of less than USD 10 million, for example. Consideration should be
right to the relevant operating right. This right must be exercised within no     given as to whether or in what form to apply such terms to different sizes and
more than eighteen (18) months from the date on which the State is notified of    types of mining projects.
said discovery.
(6) [The Regulatory Authority] shall ensure that the assessment of an             The Guinean mining law includes other, more standard documentation required
application and the cadastral survey are carried out.                             with an application for a large-scale exploitation licence, stipulates the
                                                                                  regulatory bodies that review the cadastral and technical aspects of the
(7) The technical evaluation and the environmental and social impact              application, and provides for the negotiation and signature of a mining
assessment as well as the related opinions shall be matters for [the              agreement that sets forth the terms on which the mine will be exploited. It also
Regulatory Authority] in conjunction with [the Regulatory Authority].             requires the publication of all decisions regarding mineral licences.
(8) The decision to approve or refuse the mining title, notify the party
concerned and ensure it is published shall be matters for [the Regulatory
Authority].

(9) An Agreement determining the operating terms for the Concession shall
be negotiated and signed in accordance with the provisions of Article [] of the
present [Code][Act][Law].

(10) For a deposit which has been revealed, where there is no valid
prospecting licence, a Mining Concession shall be granted following the
procedure for a competitive and transparent invitation to tender according to
rules to be defined in the regulations.

(11) The invitation to tender shall be implemented by [the Regulatory
Authority] together with the [Advisory Commission].

(12) The legal instruments which sanction the allocation, extension, renewal,
transfer, subleasing, withdrawal or surrender of a mining concession must be
published in the Official Gazette and on the official web site for [the
Regulatory Authority].

(13) When areas which have already been prospected are put on the market
in order to grant a mining concession, through an invitation to tender, this




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               179 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
must be published in at least two widely-circulated newspapers, and this must
be done at least forty-five (45) days before the deadline for the submission of
tenders.

26.2. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision requires
(1) An application for the grant of a large-scale mining licence shall be          documentation supporting an application for a large scale exploitation licence
submitted to the Mining Cadastre Office in the prescribed form.                    that is similar to Guinea’s law in comprehensiveness. There is some
                                                                                   redundancy in the environmental protection requirements; and the requirements
(2) An application for the grant of a large-scale mining licence shall–            with respect to local employment and procurement are described as the
                                                                                   applicant’s proposals – which suggests some flexibility and that they may be
(a)contain the registered name and place of incorporation of the company, its
                                                                                   subject to negotiation.
certificate of incorporation and certified copy of its memorandum and articles
of association, the names and nationalities of its directors and the name of       The Sierra Leone provisions also requires the identification of the directors of
every shareholder who is the beneficial owner of five percent or more of the       the applicant company and of all shareholders of a share of five per cent or
issued share capital;                                                              more; and it further requires:
(b)contain the company profile and history of exploration operations in Sierra        The identification of interested and affected parties including land owners
Leone and elsewhere;                                                                   and lawful occupiers of the proposed mining area (k); and
(c)identify the name and qualifications of the person responsible for                 Details of consultation with interested and affected parties and the results
supervising the proposed programme of mining operations;                               thereof.

(d)be accompanied by a plan of the area over which the licence is sought           This reflects a sensitivity to the rights of landowners and lawful land occupiers
drawn in such manner as prescribed;                                                in the affected area, which is often a source of conflict if not addressed early,
                                                                                   fairly and openly.
(e)state the period applied for;

(f)identify the minerals in respect of which the licence is sought;

(g)give or be accompanied by a statement giving details of the mineral
deposits in the area of land over which the licence is sought, including details
of all known minerals proved, estimated or inferred, ore reserves and mining
conditions;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 180 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(h)be accompanied by a technological report on mining and treatment
possibilities and the intention of the applicant in relation to them;

(i)give or be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of the proposed
programme of mining operations, including a statement of-

(i)the estimated date by which the applicant intends to work for profit;

(ii)the estimated capacity of production and scale of operations;

(iii)the estimated overall recovery of ore and mineral products;

(iv)the nature of the products;

(v)proposals for the progressive reclamation and rehabilitation of land
disturbed by mining and for the minimisation of the effects of mining on
surface water and ground water and on adjoining or neighbouring lands;

(vi)the effects of the mining operations on the environment and on the local
population and proposals for mitigation, compensation and resettlement
measures;

(vii)any particular risks (whether to health or otherwise) involved in mining
the mineral, in particular a radioactive mineral, and proposals for their
control or elimination;

(j)give or be accompanied by a statement giving a detailed forecast of capital
investment, operating costs and revenues and the anticipated type and source
of financing;

(k)contain the identification of interested and affected parties including land
owners and lawful occupiers of the proposed mining area;

(l)contain details of consultation with interested and affected parties and the
results thereof;

(m)be accompanied by a report on the goods and services required for the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                      181 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
mining operations which can be obtained within Sierra Leone and the
applicant’s proposals with respect to the procurement of those goods and
services;

(n)give or be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of the
applicant’s proposals with respect to the employment and training of citizens
of Sierra Leone;

(o)be accompanied by details of the applicant’s proposals for insurance
including life and health cover for its employees;

(p)give or be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of expected
infrastructure requirements;

(q)be accompanied by a report on the proposed marketing arrangements for
the sale of the mineral production;

(r)give details of any mineral rights held in Sierra Leone, by the applicant or
by any person controlling, controlled by or under joint or common control
with the applicant;

(s)be accompanied by an environmental impact assessment licence as may be
required by the [Regulating Authority] under subsection (2) of section 131;

(t)set out any other matter which the applicant wishes the [Regulating
Authority] to consider; and

(u) be accompanied by the prescribed non-refundable fee.

(3) Where an application for the grant of a large-scale mining licence is made
by a person who is not the holder of an exploration licence to which the
proposed mining area relate, there shall be provided in addition to the
matters referred to in subsection (1), a statement giving particulars of the
financial and technical resources available to the applicant for the proposed
mining operations.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     182 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                             PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
                                                  26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                          26.3 Large Scale: Licence Refusal Appeal Process


Many African mining laws lack specific provisions on the appeal of refusals to grant large scale exploitation licences. Therefore any appeals of
such decisions can only be taken under the provisions of the country’s general administrative law and/or judicial law. Such laws may not take into
account, however, whether the mining law grants an exploration licence holder who has complied with specific requirements an enforceable
“right? to the grant of an exploitation licence, for example, or the extent to which the exploration licence holder has spent years and millions of
dollars on exploration studies, planning for mine development planning and social obligations to the host community. Given the high risk nature
of minerals exploration and the length, scope and cost of exploration activities needed in order to satisfy the requirements for obtaining a large
scale exploitation licence (as detailed in the preceding subsection), international best practice would include provisions in the mining law that
specify the rights and procedures for appeals of administrative decisions that refuse to issue requested licences.
The provisions on the licence refusal appeal process would include some form of the following administrative and judicial components:
    1) The requirement that a refusal to grant a licence be issued in writing, delivered to the applicant within a specified time frame, specifying
       the reasons for the refusal;
    2) An opportunity for the applicant to respond to the decision within a specified period, presenting arguments why the licence application
       requirements were met, in writing and/or in person, and requesting reconsideration;
    3) The issuance of a final decision on reconsideration by the decisional authority in writing explaining its reasons, delivered to the applicant
       within a specified time frame, possibly subject to one limited extension of time;
    4) An opportunity for an appeal in writing by the applicant to a higher administrative authority or to an independent review board within a
       specified period;
    5) The issuance of the decision on appeal by that administrative authority or board within a specified timeframe, possibly subject to one
       limited extension;
    6) If the independent review board option is implemented, that may be the final, non-appealable decision (as an arbitration award would be);
    7) If the administrative appeal is to a higher administrative authority, then the right of the applicant to appeal an unfavourable decision of the
       administrative appellate authority to one or more specified levels of judicial authority would normally be provided;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     183 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                              PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
    8) Preservation of the status quo pending the outcome of the appeal process, including automatic extension of the term of the applicant’s
       exploration licence during the appeal process, with the exploration licence terminating either upon the delivery of the large scale
       exploitation licence in the case of a successful appeal or after a reasonable interval such as 60 or 90 days following the issuance of the
       final, non-appealable decision affirming the administrative decision to refuse the licence (in order to allow for closure of the exploration
       site).
Factors to be considered in designing the process for appeals of a refusal to grant a large scale exploitation licence include:

       Whether the applicant has the right to obtain the exploitation licence under the mining law, provided the applicant complies with the
        specified requirements, or whether the applicant has only the exclusive or priority right to apply for the exploitation licence, and the
        administration retains the discretion to grant the licence or not based on a variety of factors;
       Whether the applicant has invested substantially in exploration and development planning based on a reasonable expectation of obtaining
        the large scale exploitation licence;
       Whether there is a clause in the mining law or in an agreement signed with the applicant pursuant to the mining law that stabilizes the law,
        regulations and interpretations for a specified time period, in reliance upon which the applicant made a significant investment; and
        whether the law or agreement provides for resolution of any dispute as to the grant of a large scale exploitation licence by arbitration or
        some other alternative dispute resolution mechanism;
       The freezing of development work on the identified deposit during the appeal process (which suggests the need for timeframes to assure
        an efficient appeal process);
       The standard that the Regulatory Authority is held to in justifying its decisions;
       Whether the country has sufficient activity in the mining industry and related disputes to necessitate and justify the existence of an
        independent review board or a court specialized in mining-related appeals and disputes;
       Whether the refusal to grant the licence is due to a decision by a different authority, such as the Environmental regulatory authority, to
        deny an environmental permit or approval that is a prerequisite for the exploitation licence (in which case a provision for the suspension of
        the decision of the mining regulatory authority during an appeal of the decision of the other regulatory authority would be necessary); and
       The extent to which general administrative and judicial appellate procedures are adequate or need adjustment in order to accommodate the
        need for appellate procedures with respect to refusals to grant large scale exploitation licences.
The elements of best practice and factors to be considered in regard to appeals of a refusal to grant a large scale exploitation licence are important
in establishing the accountability of the regulatory authority and the governance of the licensing process by law. This is an aspect of mining law




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      184 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
that is generally in need of greater attention in the mining laws of African countries.
26.3. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]: Notice of decision on application for large-scale mining licence      Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision requires the
                                                                                   Regulating Authority to provide to the applicant the detailed reasons for a
(1) The [Regulating Authority] shall cause the applicant to be notified of, the    decision refusing to grant a large scale mining licence and affords the applicant
decision on the application and–                                                   an appeal to the High Court within 60 days after the decision. The High Court
(a)if the application is granted, of the details of the proposed large-scale       is to determine the issue “de novo? – i.e., the Court is not limited to reviewing
mining licence; or                                                                 the reasonableness of the Regulating Authority’s decision. The appeal
                                                                                   procedure provides the applicant with a second chance to win the licence.
(b) if the application is refused, of the detailed reasons for such refusal.

(2) With the exception of subsection (2) of section [_] (on appeals of a refusal
to grant an artisanal mining licence) any decision or order of the [Regulating
Authority] under this [Act][Code][Law] may be reviewed upon the
application of any affected party to the [Judicial Reviewer] which shall hear
and determine the issue de novo but such application must be made within
sixty calendar days of the date of such decision or order.

26.3. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from the mining law of the DRC (2002), these provisions provide a
(1) Should the granting of an operating licence application be refused,            robust right to appeal a decision of refusal to grant an exploitation licence,
reasons are to be given in writing and said refusal is subject to the right to     which refusal must be justified in writing. The provisions set standards for the
appeal as provided for in the provisions of Articles [_] and [_] (on               refusal to grant a licence and circumscribes the regulatory authority’s discretion
arbitration appeal) of the present [Code][Act][Law].                               by specifying the grounds on which the licence can be refused, and explicitly
                                                                                   limiting those grounds with respect to the three main elements of an application
(2) An operating licence may be refused only if:                                   for an exploitation licence: the feasibility study, the financial capacity of the
                                                                                   applicant and the environmental impact study.
the feasibility study has been rejected;
the applicant lacks sufficient financial ability;                                  The provision of the DRC mining law specifically authorizes appeals of
the EIA has been rejected in a final decision, in accordance with the below        decisions refusing to grant an exploitation licence by internal or international
provisions.                                                                        arbitration – in the latter case, pursuant to the ICSID rules for eligible investors,




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    185 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(3) A feasibility study may only be rejected for the following reasons:           or under the ICSID additional facility for ineligible international investors (from
                                                                                  non-ICSID member countries).
    -    it does not comply with the directive from [the Regulatory Authority]
         specifying its content in accordance with generally recognised           With respect to arbitration, the DRC mining law provides that the law to be
         international practices;                                                 applied is DRC law, that the arbitral award will be enforceable in the DRC, and
    -    the study contains manifest errors;                                      that the State renounces sovereign immunity as to both jurisdiction and
    -    it does not comply with the EIA.                                         execution. The renunciation as to execution of arbitral awards is perhaps overly
                                                                                  broad in the current context, since most countries permit the enforcement of
(4) Proof of the applicant's financial ability may only be rejected for one of    international arbitration awards against the commercial assets of sovereigns and
the following reasons:                                                            their parastatal entities, regardless.
    -    the financing plan does not comply with the feasibility study;           Ghana’s mining law (2006) takes a similar approach, but these DRC provisi ons
    -    there is clearly insufficient proof of the likely availability of the    appear to be the most specific and robust safeguards, among African mining
         financing which is to be obtained from the sources identified by the     laws, of the rights of exploration licence holders to a decision on their
         applicant.                                                               applications for an exploitation licence based on clear standards set forth in the
                                                                                  mining law.
(5) Proof of financial ability may not be rejected if, in the case of external
funding, the applicant has produced proof from the financial sources which
were identified, demonstrating the feasibility of the financing within the
parameters considered by the applicant, and, in the case of internal financing,
the financial statements of the person or company certified by a Chartered
Accountant or a Public Accountant recognised by the courts, demonstrating
their self-financing ability.

Article [_]
(1) Subject to the provisions relating to appeals to a higher administrative
authority and appeal proceedings, penalties and punishments provided for by
the present [Code][Act][Law], disputes which may result from the
interpretation or application of the provisions of the present
[Code][Act][Law], may be settled through arbitration as provided for in the
present Article.

(2) Disputes resulting from the interpretation or application of the provisions
of the present [Code][Act][Law], shall be the subject of arbitration according
to the procedure provided for in the provisions of Articles [_] to [_] of the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  186 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
[Code of Civil Procedure].

(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (2) of the present Article,
disputes which may arise during the interpretation or application of the
provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law] may, at either party's request, be
resolved through arbitration in accordance with [the Convention on the
Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of Other
States], provided that the holder is a national of another contracting State
under the terms of Article [_] of said Convention.

(4) When the mining or quarrying title is issued, the holder is to consent to
such arbitration in accordance with said convention and is to state this both
on their own behalf and on behalf of their affiliates. In addition, they shall
accept that such an affiliate shall be considered a national of another
contracting State.

(5) Holders who are not nationals of another contracting State may submit
disputes which arise during the interpretation or application of the provisions
of the present [Code][Act][Law] to any arbitration tribunal of their choosing,
but they must notify the State of the names, contact details and rules of
practice for the arbitration tribunal, on the day on which the mining title is
issued, to the Ministry of Mines.

Article [_]
(1) In accordance with the above Article, arbitration shall take place in
French, at the place agreed on by the State and the holder.

(2) For the purposes of arbitration, the arbitration authority shall refer to the
provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law], the laws of [Country] and its
own rules of procedure.

(3) Decisions made by the arbitrator shall be enforceable and an application
regarding enforcing said decisions may be brought before any court with
jurisdiction in the National Territory according to the procedures provided
for in the [Code of Civil Procedure] or in the holder's country.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                      187 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation

(4) Should the provisions of the above paragraph be applied, the State shall
waive any immunity relating to jurisdiction or enforcement.


                                                     26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                                                26.4 Area


Area refers to a provision that enumerates the physical boundary, marking the size of the space grantable for mining. Most laws only provide for
the maximum size permitted under the licence, but a law may also provide the minimum threshold allowed. The area of a mining licence must be
entirely within the area of the applicant’s licence and conform to the cadastral rules as to shape and orientation. In some cases, it is limited to the
area where the deposit is located and only such other area as is necessary for the extraction, processing, stockpiling and transportation of the
minerals, and related infrastructure for workers and management. There is often a limitation of the maximum surface area that can be held by a
single company and its affiliates.
26.4. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Draw from Chad’s mining law (1995), this provision provides that the area of a
The surface area covered by the operating licence shall be demarcated           large scale exploitation permit is a function of the commercial deposit and must
according to the deposit. It must be located entirely within the area for the   be entirely situated within the area covered by one or more exploration permits
prospecting licence or licences which belong to the same holder, from which     held by the same person.
it derives.

26.4. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision establishes the typical
The area of land in respect of which any Mining Lease is granted shall be       requirements of area size in relation to the orebody and necessary related
determined in relation to the ore body as defined in the feasibility study      workings, location within the exploration licence or small-scale mining lease of
submitted in respect of the Mining Lease together with an area reasonably       the holder, and also impose a size limit of 50 square kilometres.
required for the workings of the mineral resources; provided such area shall
not exceed fifty square kilometres.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                             188 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                             PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation

                                                 26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                   26.5 Specific Obligations of a Licence Holder


Provisions that lay out, for the holder of a large scale exploitation licence, the necessary responsibility or duty to undertake (or refrain from)
certain actions are collectively treated as obligations. Noncompliance with these obligations may lead to fines and/or ordered suspensions of
operations until the licensee is in compliance and ultimately revocation of the licence. Where suspension occurs, continued, uncured non-
compliance beyond a specified time period may result in revocation of the licence.
Examples of obligations in order to maintain the validity of the licence are: the obligation to commence exploration work within a specified
timeframe, the obligation to post and maintain adequate surety for environmental rehabilitation of the worked sites, and the obligation to pay
annual maintenance fees per unit area covered by the licence by a specific date each year. Failures to timely meet those obligations would result
in loss of licence. All other failures to meet obligations would be punished by fines or suspensions until cured, or ultimately by loss of licence if
uncured beyond a specified very reasonable cure period.
Many of the obligations for other types of licences apply to the obligations of large scale mining licence holders as well. The following specific
obligations are often included in addition to or in lieu of those for exploration licensees:
    ?   Commencement of mine development work within a specified time period;
    ?   Posting of a site rehabilitation surety (e.g., bank guarantee) and/or funding of an escrowed reserve fund for site rehabilitation and
        remediation of environmental damages during the life of the project;
    ?   Implementation of an approved Environmental and Social Management Plan, periodically reviewed and updated, including monitoring
        and reporting;
    ?   Implementation of an approved work plan;
    ?   Implementation of an approved local procurement plan;
    ?   Implementation of an approved local hiring, training and promotion plan;
    ?   Implementation of an approved community development agreement;
    ?   Implementation of approved worker health, safety and welfare training and regulations;
    ?   Implementation of approved infrastructure development, operation and maintenance plans;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    189 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
    ?    Maintenance of daily logs and registers of production, product shipments, equipment deliveries and shipments, accidents, and site visitors;
    ?    Implementation of accident and emergency preparedness and response measures;
    ?    Periodic filing of reports of operations, production, shipments, sales, costs and geological information;
    ?    Compliance with periodic and spot inspections and/or audits;
    ?    Timely and accurate declaration and payment of royalties, customs duties and taxes. (Fiscal terms are presented and discussed in another
         Part of this Guiding Template.)


It is essential that the obligations of licence holders be clearly stated in one or more chapters of the mining law and not be dispersed throughout the
document, in order to be sure that they are internally consistent. Careful consideration should be given to the definition of what constitutes
compliance with the requirement to commence work within a specified time period. If the law contemplates that certain plans (and/or agreements)
are to be prepared, submitted and approved after the licence is granted, allowance must be made for the time necessary to prepare and negotiate
those plans and/or agreements.
26.5. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]: Obligations for maintaining the validity of the right                 Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002) and other sources, this example deals
                                                                                   with obligations in two chapters. The first chapter establishes the principle that
(1) In order to maintain the validity of their mining or quarrying right, the
                                                                                   the holders of all mineral right holders must comply with two specific
holder must:                                                                       obligations that have specific time requirements in order maintain the validity of
(a) commence work within the period specified in Article [_] (on the               their rights:
obligation to commence work) of the present [Code][Act][Law];
                                                                                   • begin work within the time specified in the Code (three years for large scale
(b) pay the annual surface area fees per square relating to their title, each      exploitation licences); and
year before the deadline set in Article [_] (on the terms for annual surface
                                                                                   • pay the surface fee per square unit of area related to their licence before the
area fees per square) of the present [Code][Act][Law].
                                                                                   deadline set in the Code (i.e., by the end of the first calendar quarter).
(2) Should one or more of these obligations not be fulfilled, the holder shall
                                                                                   Failure to comply with either of these “licence maintenance? obligations results
lose their right in application of the procedure provided for in Articles [_] to
                                                                                   in the licensee being stripped of the licence.
[_] (on failure to comply with administrative obligations) of the present
[Code][Act][Law].                                                                  The obligations listed in the subsequent chapter of the DRC mining law are
                                                                                   conditions for operations under the licence, rather than conditions for the
Article [_]: The obligation to commence work
                                                                                   maintenance of the validity of the licence. The licensee’s failure to comply with




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  190 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
An Operating Licence holder shall be required to commence development and           such “operating obligations? will be penalized in the first instance by fines
construction work within three years from when the title establishing their         and/or orders to suspend operations until the noncompliance is corrected; and
right was issued. The Mining Regulations set out detailed terms for the             may result in the revocation of the licence if the fines are not paid or the cause
application of this provision.                                                      of the suspension is not remedied within stipulated timeframes.

Article [_]: The obligation to pay annual surface area fees per square              The operating obligations set forth in the example are numerous and are
                                                                                    grouped in the categories specified below, which generally correspond to those
(1) To cover costs for the services and management relating to the rights           cited in the introduction to this section of the Guiding Template.
established by mining titles, annual surface area fees per square, for each
mining or quarrying title which is issued, shall be collected for the Mining
Cadastre which shall redistribute a portion to the departments of [the
Regulatory Authority] responsible for the administration of the present
[Code][Act][Law].

(2) The Operating Licence holder is to pay the surface area fees for the first
year when the mining or quarrying title is issued.

(3) The holder is to settle the annual surface area fees per square for each
following year before the end of the first quarter of the calendar year.
However, annual surface area fees are to be paid pro rata per square, when
the initial title is issued, or in the last year during which the title is valid.

(4) Annual surface area fees per square are to be paid at the relevant counter
at the Ministry of Mines which issued the mining title, which shall issue the
holder with a receipt when payment is made.

Article [_]: Environmental Protection while Operations are Ongoing

(1) Any applicant for an Operating Licence shall be required to submit an
environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA), together with an                 Environmental and Social Protection
environmental management plan for the project (EMPP), and to obtain
                                                                                    Environmental and social protection is an essential obligation of every large
approval for their ESIA and EMPP, as well as implement the EMPP.
                                                                                    scale exploitation licence holder, whether the obligation is specified and
(2) Before any operations which were not provided for in the ESIA may begin,        regulated by the environmental ministry or agency or by the Regulating
the Operating Licence holder must revise their ESIA and EMPP, taking into           Authority for the mining sector. The obligation described in the example has




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   191 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
account the impact of the operations which were not previously provided for,       the following three components, which are now classic:
in order to obtain approval from [the environmental Regulatory Authority]
according to the same procedure as for the original approval. The financial            1) The obligation to have submitted an environmental and social impact
guarantees shall be subject to proportional adjustment.                                   study (EIES in the example), together with a project environmental and
                                                                                          social management plan (PGESP in the example), for approval by the
(3) The Operating Licence holder shall be required to carry out rehabilitation            environmental Regulating Authority, to have obtained the approval of
work on all or part of the Area, in accordance with their rehabilitation plan             the EIES and the PGESP by that authority and to implement the
as approved by [the environmental Regulatory Authority], before the                       PGESP. The environmental Regulating Authority could be the general
Operating Licence is surrendered, revoked, or expires.                                    environmental ministry or agency or it could be a mining sector
                                                                                          environmental regulatory unit, depending on the existing legislative
(4) The terms for the application of this Article, including financial
                                                                                          framework and institutional capacity of the country. In some countries,
guarantees, shall be laid down in the Mining Regulations.
                                                                                          the approval of the EIES and PGEP is required before the large scale
Article [_]: Financial guarantees for environmental protection                            exploitation licence can be issued. In others, those documents are
                                                                                          required to have been prepared and submitted with the application for
(1) Before starting any operations which shall affect the surface or subsoil of           the licence, but their approval by the environmental regulatory
the Area, the Operating Licence holder is to make a security deposit at a                 authority is a condition that must be satisfied prior to commencing
banking institution which is set up in the country, is to have a business stand           work under the large scale exploitation licence.
surety or is to obtain a commitment from an insurance company, or is to                2) The obligation to revise the EIES and the PGESP before commencing
deliver a financial guarantee sent by a major bank in order to cover the                  any work not contemplated by the original documents, and to obtain
rehabilitation work (each of these options shall hereafter be referred to as the          the approval of the modified plan by the environmental regulatory
"guarantee"). The type of guarantee must be approved by [the environmental
                                                                                          authority before commencing the work.
regulatory authority]. The total amount for the guarantee shall be decided on
                                                                                       3) The obligation to complete authorized environmental rehabilitation
and, if necessary, adjusted by the relevant authority, based on the extent of
                                                                                          work on any site prior to the relinquishment, the revocation or the
the work to be carried out in accordance with the approved rehabilitation
                                                                                          expiration of the large scale exploitation licence.
plan, and this amount may be increased or reduced based on the cost of the
rehabilitation work which remains to be completed.                                 The particulars of compliance with these obligations are to be spelled out in the
                                                                                   Regulation. In the current global context, it is essential that the Environmental
(2) From when a mining product which follows from an Operating Licence is          and Social Impact Study take into consideration the need to balance competing
first marketed, the holder shall set up a rehabilitation fund in a bank account    land uses and steps to meet climate change related commitments.
open with a commercial bank set up in [the country] and approved by [the
environmental Regulatory Authority], in the name of the holder and the State.      The third article of the second chapter in the example is very important. It
Money shall be paid into said fund from the holder's funds, and money shall        requires the licence holder to establish a financial surety or guarantee to assure
be authorised to be withdrawn exclusively to pay for rehabilitation work in        the completion of site rehabilitation work prior to the commencement of




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  192 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
accordance with the approved rehabilitation plan. Each year, the total                operations under the large scale exploitation licence. The article in the example
amount for the guarantee or surety referred to in the above paragraph shall           requires the posting of a financial instrument (surety bond, insurance policy or
be decreased by the annual funds paid into the rehabilitation fund. When the          corporate or bank guarantee) in the first instance, in a form and amount
holder withdraws funds from the rehabilitation fund, this shall be signed for         approved by the Regulating Authority. The surety article further provides that
by [the environmental Regulatory Authority] or by the latter in the event that        the licence holder will replace the approved surety gradually with annual
the holder fails to comply with their obligations with regard to rehabilitation.      payments into a rehabilitation fund in a local bank account opened jointly in the
                                                                                      name of the holder and of the State. The licensee will be able to draw on the
(3) If the holder of the Operating Permit does not rehabilitate the Area in           fund, subject to countersignature by the Regulating Authority, in order to pay
accordance with the requirements of the present [Code][Act][Law], [the                site rehabilitation expenses. If the licensee fails to perform such work, the
environmental regulatory authority] shall draw up a certified report in this          environmental regulatory authority is authorized to draw from the fund in order
regard and notify the holder of this by summoning them to appear in order to          to complete the site rehabilitation, after giving the licensee notice and an
be heard within ten (10) days. If the holder does not appear within the               opportunity to cure the deficiency. The licence holder remains liable for any
allotted period of time, [the environmental regulatory authority] shall               shortfall in the amount of the fund.
withdraw the required amount from the rehabilitation fund to pay for the
rehabilitation work which was not carried out, and, should there not be
sufficient funds in the rehabilitation fund, it shall request that the guarantee
be made available to it. If the holder appears within the allotted period of
time but does not agree with [the environmental regulatory authority] with
regard to a plan and deadline for corrective measures to be taken, or does not
carry out the agreed plan within the allotted time, [the environmental
regulatory authority] shall withdraw the required amount from the
rehabilitation fund to pay for the rehabilitation work which was not carried
out, and, should there not be sufficient funds in the rehabilitation fund, it shall
request that the guarantee be made available to it. Should there be any
shortfall in the funds for completing the required rehabilitation work, the
holder shall be responsible for this.

Article [_] The Agreement Relating to the Occupation of the Plot of Land

(1) Before any land may be occupied for more than a year, the Operating
Licence holder must identify the landowner, in particular at the relevant land
offices, to inform them of the holder's project and to negotiate an agreement
relating to occupation of the land.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    193 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(2) For plots of land which are part of State property, before they may be
occupied, the holder must request that this be put in order at the local land
offices.

Article [_]. Landowners                                                              Relations with Landowners

The following shall be considered to be landowners within the meaning of the         The relations between surface right owners and mining licence holders can be a
present [Code][Act][Law]: the registered owners with a title deed, or land           source of serious conflict if not addressed comprehensively in the law and
certificates, occupants whose ownership is likely to be recognised in land           implemented with sensitivity. A recent trend in mining law is to require mining
legislation, as well as the State and its various divisions, with their respective   licence holders to identify the lawful owners or users of the land to be subject to
public and private State property, in accordance with the laws and                   mining operations, and to obtain their consent to the terms and conditions of
regulations in force.                                                                occupation of the surface area by the licence holder. The example includes
                                                                                     provisions to this effect from a draft amendment to the mining law of
Article [_]. The Temporary Suspension of Land Registration                           Madagascar, which includes the following elements:

As soon as the [Land Office of the Ministry responsible for Regional                         Prior to occupying any land area for more than one year, the licence
Development] has been notified by [the Regulatory Authority] that the                         holder must identify the owner of the land, notify him of the mining
Operating Licence has been granted, all applications for land certification                   project, and negotiate an occupancy agreement with the landowner. If
and registration for plots of land within the mining area as well as for any                  the State is the landowner, arrangements are made through the local
other sector-based activities which involve occupying the land, shall be                      land registry.
suspended for a maximum of two (2) years, until the agreements provided for                  The definition of landowners for purposes of the mining law includes
in the provisions of the articles in the present [Code][Act][Law], on                         the registered owners, the persons named on a deed, the occupants
agreements relating to occupation by the holder, have been concluded.                         whose rights are subject to recognition by the real property legislation,
Article [_]. The Role of Local Authorities                                                    as well as the State and its subdivisions.
                                                                                             In order to avoid people claiming new property rights in order to
(1) Local authorities shall serve as facilitators, as far as is required, for                 negotiate compensation from the licence holder, the example provides
reaching and complying with the necessary agreements.                                         that the land registry will be closed to new land claims for a period of
                                                                                              two years after notification is given to the land registry service of the
(2) In the event that the landowner does not reside in the area which was
                                                                                              grant of a large scale mining licence, so that the licence holder can
granted to the holder, and in the event that the holder is unable to contact
                                                                                              negotiate the necessary occupancy agreements.
said owner, the holder is to inform the local authorities with jurisdiction that
                                                                                             The local administrative authority is required to facilitate the
this is the case. They shall then be responsible for bringing the holder and
the owner into contact, at the holder's expense.                                              conclusion and respect of the necessary agreements. Provisions are
                                                                                              included to deal with the case of a landowner who cannot be located.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     194 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(3) Where it is still not possible to find or identify the owner, a provisional      The occupancy agreement will generally be in the form of a lease, but
administrator shall be appointed to represent them. The rules and procedures          can be in any other legal form agreed upon by the parties.
applicable to this shall be laid down in the regulations.                            The occupancy agreement must be equitably and transparently
                                                                                      negotiated to protect the landowner and the licensee from abuse.
Article [_]. The Type of Agreement Relating to the Occupation of the Plot of
Land                                                                                 If the parties are not able to reach agreement, mechanisms for
                                                                                      mediation and conciliation are provided.
(1) In general, the agreement between the mining licence holder and the              The licensee is responsible for any damage to property, but his
landowner is to be drawn up as a lease agreement, indicating their respective         responsibility is limited to the payment of an indemnity in an amount
rights and obligations, and more specifically, the fees or rent, indemnity, and       equal to the approximate value of the damage caused.
compensation payable for occupying the land.

(2) The parties may agree on other types of contracts, showing their
agreement as regards the occupation by the holder, with their respective
rights and obligations.

Article [_]. The Standards for Negotiating an Agreement

The preliminary agreement is to be negotiated in a fair and transparent
manner, and must aim to prevent the owners from any form of dispossession
and the holder from misuse.

Article [_]. Indemnity and Compensation as regards the Landowner

Rent, indemnity and fair compensation paid to the owners by the holder must
be adequate, in accordance with any loss of enjoyment of property or loss
which the owners may suffer as a result of the holder's activities.

Article [_]. Conciliation and Mediation in Order to Reach an Agreement
Relating to Occupying the Plot of Land

(1) Failing an amicable agreement being reached, and before any arbitration
appeal or appeal proceedings, disputes between mining licence holders and
landowners, shall first be subject to either conciliation or mediation at the
initiative of either party.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                         195 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(2) Conciliation shall be carried out with the [national committee for
consultation and dialogue relating to mines].

(3) Mediation shall be carried out by the mediation institution for protecting
the rights of property owners.

Article [_]. The Conciliation Procedure between the Holder and the
Landowner

(1) The [national committee for consultation and dialogue relating to mines]
shall have three months to reconcile the parties and shall officially report on
the content of the agreement on a deal, even if only partial, or shall report
non-conciliation, as the case may be.

(2) The report is to be signed by the parties and the conciliator. If they do not
know how to sign their name, this shall be noted.

(3) Either party may file an original copy of the report with the Chief
Registrar of the Court of First Instance for the area, which shall include it in
its registers. It shall issue execution copies of it and append an order for
execution to it, and they count as a writ of execution.

Article [_].    The Mediation Procedure between the Holder and the
Landowner

(1) Mediation shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions relating
to institutional mediation in the [Code of Civil Procedure].

(2) The organisational structure, functioning and the establishment of the
mediation institution for protecting the rights of property owners at the level
of local communities shall be defined in the regulations.

Article [_]. The Holder's Responsibility to Compensate the Landowner

(1) The holder shall be required to compensate the landowner for any damage
which the work may cause to the surface of the public or private property, as




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                      196 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
well as to the environment.

(2) The holder is only obliged to compensate then landowner for damage
suffered as a result of the mining/prospecting operations.

Article [_]. Temporary suspension on the basis of financial ability

With effect from a written notification (from the Finance Minister charged
with the function) by (the Regulatory Authority), all activities within the
perimeter of the mining license will be suspended for a maximum period of 2
years, until the agreements contemplated in articles [_] of [code] [Act] [law]
have been complied with regarding the financial ability of the holder.

Article [_]. Role of the Local Authority                                          Sustainable Development Obligations

(1) As and when required, the Local Authority shall act as a mediator in          The concept of Corporate Social Responsibility is increasingly becoming
respect of the obtaining and maintaining of the requisite agreements.             codified in mining laws as a responsibility to negotiate and implement a
                                                                                  community development agreement with the community or communities that
(2) In the event that he landowner does not reside within the area of the         will be impacted by mining operations. The example requires the large scale
mining permit and the rights holder is unable to contact the landowner, the       mining licence holder to negotiate a community development agreement with
local authority must be informed of this fact by the rights holder, and will at   the affected communities after issuance of the exploitation licence, as a
the rights holder's cost establish contact between the rights holder and the      condition of the grant of the required authorization to commence operations
landowner.                                                                        under the licence. The negotiated community development agreement must be
(3) In the event that it proves impossible to locate the land owner, or he is     submitted to the Regulating Authority for its review and approval, to assure that
unidentifiable, a provisional administrator will be appointed on the              the agreement focuses on making a contribution to sustainable development and
landowner's behalf. The procedures for such appointment are set out in the        not just the construction of facilities that may not be useful over the long term.
regulations.

Article [_]. Land use agreements

(1) In general, land use agreements between the land owner and rights holder
takes the form of a lease, setting out their respective rights and obligations
and more specifically compensation, rental payments and indemnification for
the use and occupation of the land.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 197 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(2) The parties may agree to different forms of land use agreements governing
the right holder's use and occupation of the land and the parties' respective
rights and obligations.

Article [_]. Manner of negotiation

The land use agreement must be negotiated on an equitable and transparent
basis ensuring the landowner's entitlement to evict the rights holder for just
cause.

Article [_]. Indemnification and compensation of the Landowner

The indemnity and compensation payable by the rights holder must be
adequate in all respects to ameliorate the loss of use or damage caused by the   Labour and Employment Obligations
mining activities to the landowner.
                                                                                 In addition to requiring compliance with the national labour legislation, the
Article [_]. Conciliation and Mediation of disputes regarding land use           example requires the licence holder to develop, in consultation with the national
agreement                                                                        labour authority, a National Recruitment, Training and Promotion Plan designed
                                                                                 to increase the employment of nationals of the host country at all levels. This
(1) Prior to any judicial intervention being instituted, all disputes between    provision makes the approval of such a plan by the Regulating Authority a
landowners and rights holders must be submitted by either party to               precondition for the grant of visas and work permits for the expatriate
conciliation and failing which mediation.                                        employees of the licence holder. The Regulating Authority is to supervise the
(2) Conciliation must be held under the auspices of [the National Committee      implementation of the approved Plan.
for Consultation and Dialogue in mining].

(3) Mediation must be held under the auspices of the Institute for Mediation
for the Protection of Fundamental Rights.
                                                                                 Local Procurement Obligations
Article [_]. Procedure for conciliation between the landowner and rights
holder                                                                           Similar to the obligation to develop a National Recruitment, Training and
                                                                                 Promotion Plan, the example also requires the licence holder to develop, in
(1) [The National Committee for consultation and Dialogue in Mining] shall       consultation with the national Commerce department, a National Procurement
attempt to settle the dispute within 3 months of the referral by means of an     Plan designed to maximize the procurement by the licence holder of services,
oral process to determine the terms of the land use agreement.                   material and equipment from national providers. The Plan must be filed with
                                                                                 the Regulating Authority for approval, as a precondition to the grant of the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               198 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(2) The minutes of the oral process will be signed by the parties and the        required authorization to commence operations under the licence.
Conciliator. If a party cannot sign, mention will be made of this in the
minutes.                                                                         Approval of the licensee’s Na tional Procurement Plan is also a precondition to
                                                                                 the grant of import licences for the material and equipment needed to build and
(3) Either party may place an original minute of the oral process before the     operate the mine.
Registrar of the Court of First Instance and have it registered. The Registrar
will deliver a legally binding decision and manner of execution of the           The provision requires the licensee to file annual reports on the implementation
decision.                                                                        of the National Procurement Plan.

Article [_]. Procedure for Mediation between the landowner and Rights
holder

(1) Mediation will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
institutional mediation in [The Civil Procedure Code].
                                                                                 Cultural Heritage Protection
(2) The organisation, functioning and constitution of the mediation of the
protection of fundamental rights at a local community level is governed by the   Consistent with best practice concerning any construction project affecting the
Regulations.                                                                     area below ground, the article on protection of cultural heritage requires the
                                                                                 licence holder to inform the local administrative authority and the national
Article [_]. Responsibility of rights holder to remedy damage                    authority responsible for art and culture of any cultural artefacts revealed in the
(1) The rights holder is obliged to remedy all damages caused by the mining      course of digging. The licence holder is required to leave the artefacts in place
operations to the surface, underground, public or private land and the           for inspection and disposition by the cultural authorities; but if the latter do not
environment.                                                                     remove or secure them or declare the site reserved for archaeological
                                                                                 investigation within 60 days of notification, the licence holder is authorized to
(2) The rights holder must provide the landowner with an indemnity               remove the artefacts and preserve them for the State while continuing mining
equivalent in value to the estimated damage that will be caused.                 operations.

Article [_]. The Obligation to Consult Local Communities

All Operating Licence holders shall be required to consult with
representatives from local communities likely to be affected by said holder's
mining operations.

Article [_] The Negotiation of a Community Development Agreement                 Security and Hygiene




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 199 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
All Operating Licence holders shall be required to negotiate a Community           In the area of security and hygiene, the example provides that:
Development Agreement with representatives from communities likely to be
affected by said holder's mining activities.                                               Exploitation is subject to protective measure set forth in special
                                                                                            regulations;
Article [_]. A Community Development Agreement as a Condition for                          The licence holder must comply with the measures prescribed by the
Authorisation to Commence Operations under the Operating Licence                            Regulating Authority in order to prevent or eliminate the dangers that
                                                                                            exploitation work may pose to the state of public health, conservation
(1) The conclusion of a Community Development Agreement with the
                                                                                            of mineral deposits, water sources and public ways;
communities likely to be affected by the holder's mining activities is a
prerequisite for authorisation being granted to commence operations under                  In an emergency or in the event of refusal of the licensee to comply
the Operating Licence.                                                                      with prescribed safety measures, the latter are to be implemented by the
                                                                                            Regulating Authority at the expense of the licensee;
(2) The Operating Licence holder must, after obtaining the Licence, submit                 In cases of imminent peril, authorized agents of the Regulating
the Community Development Agreement, signed jointly with representatives                    Authority may immediately take the measures necessary to eliminate
from communities likely to be affected by the holder's mining activities and all            the danger;
other invested and affected parties, to the Regulatory Authority.                          Any serious or mortal accident in the mine or its dependencies is to be
Article [_]. The Obligation to Perform according to the Community                           reported to the local administrative and judicial authorities without
Development Agreement                                                                       delay;
                                                                                           The licence holder is required to publish safety instructions for the
The Operating Licence holder shall be required to fulfil its obligations under              particular aspects of his mine. These instructions must be delivered to
the Community Development Agreement.                                                        the [Mines Department], and presented to the licensee’s personnel and
                                                                                            any other public persons able to access the mine. The details of how
Article [ ]. The Obligation to Comply with National Legislation
                                                                                            the safety instructions must be publicized will be set forth in the
All Operating Licence holders shall be required to comply with the national                 regulations.
labour legislation which is then in force.                                                 The use of explosives is subject to special conditions set forth in an
                                                                                            appendix to the Mining Regulation.
Article [_]. Recruitment, Training and Promotion Plan

(1) All Operating Licence holders must prepare a Recruitment, Training and
Promotion Plan for national staff, in consultation with [the Ministry
responsible for Labour]. The purpose of said plan must be to increase the
number of national staff employed at all levels in the operation, and it must be
submitted to the Regulatory Authority for approval.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    200 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(2) Once the recruitment plan has been approved, the State shall make all
licences and permits available to the holder, including entry visas required
for expatriate staff hired in accordance with said plan.

(3) The implementation of the Recruitment, Training and Promotion Plan for
National Staff shall be regularly monitored by the Regulatory Authority.

Article [ ] National Procurement Plan

(1) All Operating Licence holders shall be required to draw up a National
Procurement Plan in consultation with [the Ministry of Trade and Industry].
The purpose of said Plan must be to maximise procurement in services,
material and equipment sourced nationally, and it must identify all services,
materials and equipment required to construct and operate the mine, as well     Infrastructure
as providers and suppliers. Said plan must be submitted to the Regulatory       In the area of infrastructure, the example provides that:
Authority for approval before authorisation to commence operations under
the operating licence is granted.                                                       The plans for any project infrastructure must be reviewed and approved
                                                                                         by the competent administrative authority, after consultation with the
(2) Once the National Procurement Plan has been approved, the State shall                local territorial authority.
give the holder authorisation to import the material and equipment required             Roads created within and outside of the licence area may be utilized,
to construct and operate of the mine under the Operating Licence, if
                                                                                         provided that there is no interference with mine operations and that the
necessary.
                                                                                         licence holder so agrees, by neighbouring mining, commercial and
Article [_] The Annual Report on the Implementation of the National                      industrial establishments, subject to mutually agreed upon just
Procurement Plan                                                                         compensation of the licensee and contribution to the maintenance costs
                                                                                         of the roads.
All Operating Licence holders must submit an annual report on the                       Such roads may also be open to use by the public on similar terms as
implementation of the approved National Procurement Plan to the Regulatory               established in an agreement with the local community whose residents
Authority. In addition, the Regulatory Authority may require that the report             make use of the roads.
be independently audited.
                                                                                        Unless otherwise agreed in writing between the licence holder and the
Article [_] The discovery of artefacts of national cultural heritage                     State, any infrastructure remaining in place at the termination of the
                                                                                         licence falls within the public domain of the State.
(1) In the event that artefacts of national cultural heritage are discovered,
whether movable property or not, the holder is prohibited from moving these




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              201 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
objects. In this case, the holder is to inform the local administrative
authorities and the authorities responsible for [Culture, the Arts and
Museums], in writing and without delay.

(2) Depending on the prevailing circumstances, the holder may be required to
remove, secure and keep these artefacts of national cultural heritage, and to
do so on behalf of the State and at the State's expense, if the local
administrative authorities and the relevant authorities responsible for
[Culture, the Arts and Museums] do not remove or secure them, and do not
declare that the site is to be reserved for an archaeological study to be
conducted, within sixty days of notice being given regarding the discovery.

Article [_] Special regulations                                                   Miscellaneous Obligations
Any operating of mines shall be subject to the measures for health, safety, and   The example provides that the large scale exploitation licence holder is subject
protection laid down in special regulations.                                      to the following obligations in this area:
Article [_] The jurisdiction of [the Regulatory Authority]                               Before commencing mining activities, the holder must meet with the
(1) An Operating Licence holder must comply with the measures ordered by                  local authorities and present them with a copy of the licence.
[the Regulatory Authority] in order to prevent or eliminate the causes of                The holder must maintain the registers and file the reports of activities
hazards which the work poses to public health and safety, the conservation of             as required by the Regulation.
deposits, and to public roads and waterways.                                             The licence holder is subject to inspections by authorized agents of the
                                                                                          Administration, which inspections shall take place during the hours
(2) In the event of an emergency, or should the holder and their affiliates or            when the offices, shops and work sites are open, and in accordance
subcontractors refuse to comply with these measures, the measures shall be                with the regulations.
undertaken and carried out by [the Regulatory Authority] at the holder's                 The opening or closing of any mining site must be notified without
expense.                                                                                  delay to the Regulating Authority in accordance with the regulations.
(3) In the event of imminent danger, duly authorised officials of [the
Regulatory Authority], shall immediately take the necessary measures to avert
the danger and, wherever necessary, may make demands of local authorities
and operators.

Article [_] The declaration of an accident in a mine or quarry




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                202 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
Any serious or fatal accident which occurs in a mine or its outbuildings, must,
without delay and using the fastest method of communication available, be
brought to the attention of [the Regulatory Authority] and the administrative
and judicial authorities with jurisdiction.

Article [_]: The publication of safety instructions

(1) All Operating Licence holders shall be required to publish safety
instructions in terms of the specific conditions of their operations. Said
instructions are to be sent to the [Mining Division] and brought to attention
of the holder's staff and the public which is able to access the holder's
operating site.

(2) The Mining Regulations shall determine how the safety instructions are to
be published.

Article [_]: The use of explosives

All Operating Licence holders who make use of explosives shall be subject to
special regulations on the use thereof, annexed to the Mining Regulations.

Article [_]: Building authorisation and infrastructure planning

(1) An Operating Licence holder shall be required to build and maintain any
infrastructure necessary for the activities connected to their titles or to the
related environmental authorisation, in accordance with the provisions of the
present chapter.

(2) A plan for any infrastructure which is to be built by the holder is to be
submitted to the relevant administrative authority for approval, after
consulting with the local authorities with territorial jurisdiction.

Article [_]: The use of project infrastructure

(1) Transportation routes created by the holder within or outside of the
mining Area may, when this does not hinder the operations, and subject to the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                      203 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
holder agreeing to this, be used for operations by neighbouring mining,
industrial and commercial establishments, at their request, and fair
compensation is to be set by common agreement between the parties, and
shall include interested parties contributing to the maintenance of said routes.

(2) Transportation routes created outside of and within the Area may be open
to the public under the conditions provided for in the above paragraph,
subject to fair compensation to be agreed on between the holder and the local
community whose inhabitants use said transportation routes.

Article [_]: The State's rights over the infrastructure

Unless otherwise expressly agreed in writing between the State and the
holder, any infrastructure which is beneficial to the public at a large which is
built by an Operating Licence holder, and which remains onsite when the
holder's right expires or is no longer valid, shall belong to the State.

Article [_]: Relationship with local authorities

Before beginning activities, an Operating Licence holder shall be required to
appear before the local authorities with jurisdiction and give them a copy of
the holder's mining title, and obtain an acknowledgement of receipt.

Article [_]: Registers and reports

An Operating Licence holder shall be required to keep registers, and prepare
and file reports of their activities in accordance with the Mining Regulations.

Article [_]: Inspections

(1) An Operating Licence holder must submit to inspections carried out by
officials in charge of inspecting mining or quarrying operations.

(2) In all instances, these inspections shall take place during work hours for
offices, workshops or building sites.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                       204 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(3) The Mining Regulations shall determine the conditions under which these
inspections shall be carried out.

Article [_]: The opening and closure of a prospecting or operations centre.

Whenever a mining operations centre is opened or closed down, this must be
reported to the Mining Department, without delay, according to the terms laid
down in the Mining Regulations.

26.5. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Adapted from, Guinea’s mining code (2011), this provision contains extensive
The present [Code][Act][Law] requires the holder of a very large-scale            and comprehensive obligations of large-scale exploitation licence holders that
exploitation licence (a concession, when the amount of the investment is at       include - in addition to work, reporting, health, safety and environmental
least USD 1 billion) that did not discover the commercial deposit for which its   requirements and fee payments:
concession is granted to indemnify the third party that discovered the deposit,
for its costs incurred in that effort.                                            a)   local procurement, hiring and training requirements with target percentages;
                                                                                  b)   compensation of lawful occupiers of land within the licenced area;
Article [_]                                                                       c)   signature of an anti-corruption code of conduct; and
The holder of a concession must commence development work within 1 year           d)   disclosure of all interested persons.
after the issue of the concession, after which increasing monthly monetary
penalties will be assessed if work has not commenced. If development work is      These are perhaps the most comprehensive and extensive obligations on large-
not commenced within 2 years, the concession may be cancelled.                    scale exploitation licensees in Africa. (Many of the same obligations also apply
Commencement of development work is defined as the engagement of                  to holders of exploration licences and small scale mining permits, as well.)
preparatory, development and construction work in the amount of at least 10-
15% of the total investment.                                                      The articles of the Guinean mining code on the obligations of concession
                                                                                  holders (for large-scale exploitation) cited in the example are paraphrased from
Article [_]                                                                       the original text in French.
The holder of a concession must deliver reports and supporting
documentation in accordance with regulations fixing the content and
periodicity of the reports. (This is a general obligation of all mineral right
holders.)

Article [_]
The holder of a large scale exploitation licence must file with the [Regulating




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                205 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
Authority] a final report of the work accomplished upon termination of the
licence.

Article [_]
All mineral rights holders must carry out their operations using techniques
confirmed by the mining industry and in accordance with the terms of the
[Code][Act][Law], the [relevant environmental legislation] and the
respective implementing regulations of each law.

Article [_]
All mineral right holders shall give preference to qualified local PMEs, PMIs
or [Country nationality] owned companies in their contracting for goods and
services, to achieve specified percentages of such entities among their
contracts, to require their subcontractors to subscribe to the same plan, and
to file an annual report of their progress towards meeting the applicable
standard.

Article [_]
Consistent with article [_] above, all mineral rights holders are required to
prioritize the employment of qualified [Country nationals], based on target
percentages for each category of worker and annual reporting requirements.
These target percentages will be determined in subsequent regulations.

Article [_]
All mineral rights holders are obliged to develop and submit to the [National
Office of Training and Professional Improvement] a plan for the transfer of
technology and responsibility to [Country national] companies and personnel
and a “[Country] Plan? that meets specified criteria.

Article [_]
All mineral rights holders must comply with [Country]’s international
agreements, including in particular with ECOWAS, the Kimberley Process
and the EITI.

Article [_]




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    206 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
All mineral rights holders shall pay an indemnity to the legitimate occupants
of the areas necessary for their activities, determined in accordance with the
provisions of the mining [Code][Act][Law].

Article [_]
All exploitation licence holders must enter into a Community Development
Agreement (CDA) with the local community situated in proximity to the
concession. The CDA must be consistent with principles specified in the
regulations of this [Code][Act][Law]. The exploitation licence holder must
contribute annually either 0.5% or 1 % of its gross revenues, depending on
the category of mineral for which its concession was issued, to a Local
Development Fund in order to finance local community development
activities.

Article [_]
Exploitation licence holders shall inform the local community 12 months in
advance of mine closure and formulate a plan acceptable to the local
authorities for the restoration of the mine site at closure in a manner
acceptable to the community, eliminating or mitigating all environmental
risks and re-establishing the native vegetation at the site.

Article [_]
All mineral licence holders must comply with the [national Insurance Code]
and maintain all required coverages with approved companies in [Country].


Article [_]
Exploitation licence holders must submit a prior declaration to the
[Regulating Authority] for all purchase, sale, import or export transactions in
mineral substances, as well as all beneficiation and transformation
operations, including the fabrication of metals, alloys and concentrates.

Article [_]
All mineral licence holders have a general obligation to comply with
environmental protection and health regulations, as well as utilize adapted




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     207 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
techniques and methods to protect the environment, workers and the nearby
populations in accordance with the [relevant Environmental legislation] and
international best practices.

Article [_]
All mineral rights holders are obliged to protect against listed potential harm
or dangers to the environment, workers and the local populations.


Article [_]
Exploitation licence holders must establish and fund a trust account to
guarantee the financing of mine closure and site rehabilitation at the
conclusion of mining operations.

Article [_]
All mineral rights holders must establish environmental health and safety
regulations that meet the higher of (a) national [[Country] standards adopted
by the respective [Ministries of Public Health, Labour and the Environment],
or (b) such higher standards as are met by the licence holder elsewhere. The
regulations must be approved by the [Regulating Authority] after favourable
recommendation by the [Committee for the Evaluation of Health and
Environmental Impacts]. Once approved, they must be posted on the most
visible sites for workers.

Article [_]
The usage of explosives is subject to regulation by joint orders of the
[Regulating Authority] and the [Ministries of Defence and Security].
Article [_]
All mineral rights holders must disclose to the technical department of the
[Regulating Authority] the identity of all parties with an interest in them,
including shareholders, affiliates, directors, senior executives and control
persons.

Article [_]
All mineral rights holders shall sign a Code of Conduct with the [Regulating




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     208 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
Authority] containing anti-corruption measures and an engagement to comply
with the twelve EITI principles.

Article [_]
The holder of an exploitation licence shall file annually with the [Regulating
Authority], within 90 days after the end of the calendar year, a Plan of
Surveillance against Corruption, containing the elements specified in this
article.

Article [_]
Exploitation licence holders shall pay the specified annual surface fees per
square kilometre of area covered by their concession.

Article [_]
Exploitation licence holders must make payment of the mining tax for each
substance mined, at the time when it is removed from stockpiles.

Article [_]
(1) Exploitation licence holders must prepare and submit for approval by the
[Regulating Authority] and the [Ministry of Finance], respectively, lists of the
goods and equipment that they intend to import, in order to enjoy the benefit
of the special import regimes under this [Code][Act][Law].

(2) Mineral licence holders are subject to the various declaration, reporting
and payment obligations in the chapters of this [Code][Act][Law] on fiscal
obligations, customs and exchange controls.

                                                       26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                           26.6 Protection of Open Pit/Shaft Mines


Protection of open pit/shaft mines refers to provisions that specify the steps required by a mining licence-holder to secure the area in and around




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                  209 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                             PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
mines for the duration of mining activities. Mine sites are potentially dangerous places. The machinery and equipment used in large scale
exploitation projects for excavation and hauling is enormous and in nearly constant use in and around the mines during production. Dynamite is
used to free ore from rock formations. Subsidence and cave-ins are a constant risk. Mine waste in tailings piles and tailings ponds may be highly
toxic. Therefore, mining laws often do, and should, require large scale exploitation licence holders to implement comprehensive plans to secure
the mine site, including the processing facilities, waste piles, tailings ponds, access roads and equipment storage and maintenance facilities, etc.
and restrict access to authorized, trained personnel.
The provisions of the mining law requiring mine security and safety planning aim to protect both mine workers and members of the surrounding
communities as well as other visitors from harm. Such provisions may require the licence holder to develop a site security and safety plan that
meets standards set out in the regulations. Submission and approval of the plan may be required as a prerequisite to the commencement of
operations; and the site security and safety measures will typically be subject to periodic inspections and adjustments as conditions at the mine
change over time.
These obligations are singled out here because of their importance, although the requirements are often spelled out in regulations rather than in the
mining law itself. Depending on the jurisdiction, the responsible administrative authority may be different than the Regulating Authority for the
mining sector. These obligations are covered as part of the environmental topics in Part D of the Guiding Template.

                                                  26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                             26.7 Rights of a Licence Holder


Provisions that address what possession of a mining licence allows the licence holder to do or what the licence holder may be entitled to are
collectively treated as rights. In addition to the right to explore for and mine the minerals under the licence, a large scale exploitation licence may
include most of the following rights (subject to applicable permits and regulations) with respect to the specified minerals in the area for which the
licence is granted:
    ?   to build the mine, erect structures and install equipment necessary for the mining, processing, storage and shipment of the mineral
        products;
    ?   to build or install structures and facilities for the mine staff and their families;
    ?   to utilize ground-water within the licenced area for uses related to the mine activity;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     210 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
    ?    to utilize timber resources at the site for uses related to the mining operation;
    ?    to utilize any natural hydropower resources within the licenced area for uses related to the mining operation; and
    ?    to build infrastructure for the delivery of the mineral products from the mine to points of sale;
    ?    to obtain the extension of the exploitation licence to other minerals discovered in commercial quantities within the licence area; and
    ?    to obtain the renewal of the exploitation licence if the holder is in compliance with its obligations.
    ?    Reasonable non-interference in use and exercise of the licence;
    ?    to beneficiate, process, and transform the minerals for which the licence is granted into marketable commodities;
    ?    to transport and sell the minerals (possibly with restrictions on sales of unprocessed minerals);

These rights are not necessarily expressed in a single section of the mining law; but it would facilitate understanding and implementation if they
were.
26.7. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision is a succinct statement
(1) A mining lease confers on the holder the right within the mining lease     of the typical rights of holders of exploitation rights. The right to access and
Area to-                                                                       enter the mining lease area is actually subject to further conditions and a process
                                                                               developed elsewhere in the Act.
(a) obtain access and to enter the mining lease area;

(b) exclusively use, occupy and carry out mineral exploitation within the
mining lease area;

(c) exclusively carry out exploration within the mining lease area;

(d) utilise the water and wood and other construction materials as necessary
for mineral exploitation in accordance with the permit and regulations;

(e) use such portions as may be required for the purposes of growing such
plants and vegetables, or keeping such animals, poultry and fish as may be
reasonable for use of the employees at the mine;

(f) store, remove, transport, submit to treatment, transform and process the
mineral resources, and dispose of any waste; and




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               211 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(g) market, sell, export or otherwise dispose of the mineral products resulting
from the mining operations.

26.7. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Côte d’Ivoire’s mining law (2014), this provision similarly lists the
(1) An operating licence confers on the holder an exclusive right to exploit the   typical rights of the holder of an exploitation permit. It includes the
deposits that are located within their area.                                       specification that the exploitation permit is a right that can be mortgaged with
                                                                                   the prior approval of the Regulating Authority (see Transfer of Rights below for
(2) In accordance with the laws and regulations in force, an operating licence     considerations that relate to mortgage rights).
includes authorisation to transport the extracted mining materials, their
concentrates or their primary by-products as well as the metals and alloys for
these materials, or have them transported, to a storage, processing or loading
area, to dispose of them on the foreign or domestic market, and export them.

(3) An operating licence also authorises the holder to set up facilities for the
packaging, processing, refining and conversion of mining materials related to
the purpose of the licence, in accordance with the regulations in force.

(4) An operating licence constitutes an immovable and indivisible right. It
may be the subject of a mortgage, subject to prior approval from [the
regulatory authority] and under the conditions provided for by decree.

                                                       26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                                          26.8 Term of Licence


The term of a large-scale exploitation licence is typically either the expected life of the mine as estimated in the feasibility study, possibly subject
to a limit, or a fixed term of typically 15-30 years. The term of a large scale exploitation licence is typically much longer than other types of
licences due to the more extended, time consuming nature of the mining activities.
In establishing the term of the licence, consideration should be given to the reasonable amount of time necessary to complete pre-mining




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                212 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
consultations and work, particularly in connection with local community relations and resettlement, if necessary, as well as to the reasonable time
necessary to close the mine and rehabilitate the site after the closure of mining operations.
26.8. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision sets the term of the
A special mining licence granted to an entitled applicant shall be for the          large scale exploitation licence as the life of the ore body. This is reasonable,
estimated life of the ore body indicated in the feasibility study report, or such   but it does not explicitly account for the period of development, construction
period as the applicant may request whichever period is shorter.                    and testing or the mine closure and site rehabilitation period at the close of
                                                                                    production. That could be clarified in the regulations, however.

                                                                                    This type of provision runs the risk of becoming a licence in perpetuity,
                                                                                    particularly as it pertains to terms and conditions, new fiscal regime. If
                                                                                    governments use this route, it is best to provide for periodic review or time
                                                                                    constrained stability clauses as well as a provision under savings provisions in
                                                                                    the event of a new mining law.

26.8. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this provision sets a fixed term of
(1) A large scale mining licence shall be valid for the period specified in the     twenty years for large scale mining licences in its Mining Operations
licence; provided however, that such period shall not exceed 20 years.              Proclamation of 2010. This term may be long in the case of a modest-sized gold
                                                                                    mine, but the holder can surrender the licence prior to the end of the term. The
(2) A large scale mining licence may be renewed for a period not exceeding          licence term may be short for major projects, but the article provides for
10 years each subject to sub-article (3) of this Article.                           unlimited renewals of up to ten years each if the holder is in compliance with its
                                                                                    obligations.
(3) The licensee shall have the right to renew the licence provided that he can
demonstrate the continued economic viability of mining the deposit, has
fulfilled the obligations specified in the licence, and is not in breach of any
provision of this [Code][Act][Law], regulations or directives which constitute
grounds for suspension or revocation of the licence.

                                                       26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   213 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
                                                                      26.9 Renewal of Licence


Addressed often at the same time as the term of licence, renewal of the licence refers to provisions determining when, for how long, and how
many times a licence holder may extend the initial duration of the mining licence. In the case of large scale licences, once a mine has been
developed and exploration of the deposit has continued, geological risk is diminished and further development or expansion of a mine can be
planned with greater accuracy than in the initial feasibility study. Near the end of the initial and subsequent terms of the large scale exploitation
licence, the licensee has a track record of performance. If the performance is satisfactory – i.e., the licensee is not subject to any notice of
suspension or grounds for revocation of the licence – renewal of the licence should be virtually automatic, provided that an updated ESIA
(Environmental and Social Impact Assessment) for the project is approved and any other required plans or agreements are likewise updated and
approved.
The length of the renewal term may be a function of the feasibility study for the expansion or extension of the mine (if the initial term was a
function of the initial feasibility study) or a fixed number of years. Typically, the renewal term is shorter than the initial term. However, some
mines have been in operation for centuries – which could not have been predicted initially or in connection with any early renewals.
Where there is language for the exercise of discretion by the regulatory authority when addressing renewal, provisions should include some
general objective criteria including compliance with existing legislation. Parties may want to use this opportunity to negotiate new terms and
conditions in order to reflect material change circumstances in addition to renewal process language. Denial should be subject to a review process
given the extensive nature of the investment in Large Scale Exploitation.
26.9. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Cote d’Ivoire’s mining law (2014), this provision provides for
(1) An operating licence shall be granted for the entire operating life of the    successive ten year renewals to which the exploitation permit holder is entitled
mine as indicated in the feasibility study, and this period of validity may not   if in compliance with the obligations of the licence. Whereas the initial term of
exceed twenty (20) years.                                                         an exploitation licence is based on the life of the mine as indicated by the
                                                                                  feasibility study, but limited to a maximum of 20 years, renewals are for a fixed
(2) It shall be renewable for successive periods of a maximum of ten (10)         term of ten years.
years.
                                                                                  The number of renewals is not limited. Moreover, the exploitation licence
(3) The mining title shall be renewable on an application from the holder,        holder has the right to the renewal of its licence if in compliance with its




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                214 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
submitted at least three months before the current period of validity expires.   obligations (although this standard is open to interpretation and ideally could be
                                                                                 more specifically limited).
(4) The renewal of the mining title shall be automatic when the holder has
fulfilled their obligations.                                                     Because Ivory Coast requires a feasibility study as a key element of the
                                                                                 application for an exploitation licence, it has chosen to base the initial term of
(5) The rights remain valid pending the outcome of the renewal application       the exploitation licence on the life of the mine projected by the feasibility study.
notified to the holder in writing.                                               It makes sense since to fit the licence term to the life of the mine, since some
                                                                                 mines will be fully depleted in less than ten years while others may continue
(6) The conditions for the renewal of the mining title shall be specified by     operating for decades. The twenty-year limit of the initial term reflects the
decree.                                                                          reality that any mine must be demonstrated to be acceptably profitable within
                                                                                 that timeframe or else it will not be developed. And from the perspective of the
                                                                                 State, the mining law may change within that timeframe.

                                                                                 The investor in a mine that proves to have a life longer than the initial licence
                                                                                 term is protected by the virtually automatic renewal provision. The renewal
                                                                                 term is fixed rather than flexible because no feasibility study is required for
                                                                                 renewal. While the renewal term is potentially shorter than the initial term of
                                                                                 the licence, the licence holder is protected by its right to virtually automatic
                                                                                 renewals and the absence of any limit on the number of renewals.

                                                                                 As in most mining laws, the licence holder must apply for the renewal by a
                                                                                 stated time before the expiration of the initial term of the licence – in this case, 3
                                                                                 months. That is potentially a short processing time for an exploitation permit
                                                                                 renewal; however, Article 40 provides that the expiring licence continues in
                                                                                 effect so long as the holder has not been notified of a refusal of the renewal
                                                                                 request. It would be preferable for the law or the regulations to specify that the
                                                                                 initial licence continues in effect during any appeals of a refusal to renew, and
                                                                                 for a sufficient period of time following a final decision of refusal on appeal –
                                                                                 e.g. 6 months – in order to allow for the completion of site closure and
                                                                                 rehabilitation work that probably will not have been undertaken beforehand.

                                                                                 See also Option 2 under the preceding sub-topic, for Ethiopia’s similar
                                                                                 provision.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   215 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
26.9. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this provision similarly requires that
(1) A holder of a mining lease may, at any time but not later than three           the renewal application be filed at least three months before the expiration of the
months before the expiration of the initial term of the mining lease or a          existing licence, that the latter is extended if necessary during the processing of
shorter period that the [Regulating Authority] allows, apply in a prescribed       the application, and that the licence holder is entitled to the renewal if in
form to the [Regulating Authority] for an extension of the term of the lease for   compliance with the obligations of the licence. The automatic extension of the
a further period of up to thirty years in respect of all or any number of          licence is a necessary element of renewal provisions that require administrative
contiguous blocks the subject of the lease and in respect of all or any of the
                                                                                   action on the part of the regulatory authority that may or may not be completed
minerals the subject of the lease.
                                                                                   within the three month (or more) period between a timely renewal application
(2) An application made under subsection (1) shall be accompanied with a           and the date of termination of the initial term of the licence.
proposed programme of mineral operations.                                          The renewal term available under Ghana’s law is the same as the initial term of
(3) On an application duly made under subsection (1) and if the holder has         the exploitation licence - up to 30 years – and is substantially longer than the
materially complied with the obligations imposed by this [Act][Code][Law]          renewal term provided for under the mining law of Côte d’Ivoire, above.
with respect to the holding of and activities pursuant to the mining lease, the    However, Ghana’s mining law provides for only one renewal term, whereas the
[Regulating Authority] shall grant the extension of the term of the lease on       mining law of Côte d’Ivoire provides for unlimited renewals. The maximum
                                                                                   initial and renewal term under Ghana’s law is sixty (60) years. That is the
conditions specified in writing.
                                                                                   equivalent of the maximum initial term plus four renewals under the law of Côte
(4) Where the holder has made an application for an extension of the term of       d’Ivoire. Ghana’s mining law does not provide for the unusual case of a mine
the lease, and the term of the lease would but for this subsection, expire, the    that continues in operation for more than sixty years, whereas Côte d’Ivoire’s
lease shall continue in force in respect of the land the subject of the            mining law does. Such mines do exist (e.g., Potosi, Bolivia; Almaden, Spain,
application until the application is determined.                                   and salt mines in Canada and Germany have been in operation for centuries).
                                                                                   An extension of the exploitation licence term beyond 60 years for a long-life
                                                                                   mine would require special legislation in Ghana.

                                                       26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                                    26.10 Suspension of Licence


Suspension of a licence may be a temporary sanction against a licence holder or a de facto extension of the licence term due to a force majeure




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   216 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
event preventing the holder from conducting operations.
A distinction should be made between suspension of a mineral licence, on the one hand, and suspensions of operations, on the other hand. When
the mineral licence is suspended, the rights of the holder of that licence, as well as the term, are suspended; and this may, depending on the nature
of the breach, complicate the remediation of the breach that the suspension requires (e.g., if the breach relates to operations on the mine). It also
raises collateral issues to be addressed such as whether and on what conditions a third party application for the area that is subject to the suspended
licence can be submitted or accepted. The suspension of operations, on the other hand, prohibits the mineral activity under the licence but does not
alter the holder’s right to occupy the licenced area and undertake whatever is necessary in order to remedy the breach of an obligation; and the
term of the licence continues to run. There are instances in which it is appropriate to suspend the mineral licence with an allowance for solely
carrying out the activities necessary to remediate the breach. A mining law should also, where appropriate, address rules that apply to regulate the
suspension of the licence or operations at the request of the licence holder.
In all cases, suspension provisions should clearly state the consequences of suspension and the procedure for the lifting of the suspension.
26.10. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]. Suspension of Mineral Exploitation Rights                           Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this example provides for the
(1) Subject to sub-articles (2) and (3) of this Article, the [Regulating         Regulating Authority to suspend mining operations of a licence holder in cases
Authority] may suspend mineral exploitation rights partially or fully where it   where continued operation “is likely to become an imminent danger.? The
believes that the activity of the Licensee is likely to become an imminent       provision requires prior written notice to the licence holder specifying the
danger to the local community, the environment or its employees, provided        reasons for the suspension, the measures to be taken, and a prompt opportunity
that such suspension is the only remedy under the prevailing circumstances.      to be heard in opposition. The example also stipulates the grounds for the lifting
The [Regulating Authority] shall inform the licensee the date by which the
                                                                                 of the suspension.
suspension lapses and it may resume operation.
                                                                                 This example is geared to the prevention of harm rather than the sanctioning of
(2) Before acting under sub-article (1) of this Article, the [Regulating         any violations. It provides due process safeguards for the rights of the licence
Authority] shall give notice in writing to the Licensee:                         holder.
a) setting out the grounds for considering the suspension of the licence;
b) directing the licensee to take specified measures to remedy any
contravention, breach or failure; and

c) specifying a reasonable date of not less than 5 working days, before which
the licensee may, in writing, submit any matter for the [Regulating Authority]




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                217 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
to consider.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] may lift the notice for suspension of a mineral
right where:

    a) the licensee complies with the notice contemplated in sub-article 2(b)
         of this Article by rectifying, removing, or as appropriate by
         mitigating the grounds for suspension, or by preventing the
         recurrence of such grounds within the time specified in the notice; or
    b)
b) where it accepts the reasons supplied by the licensee in accordance with
sub-article 2(c) of this Article for the lifting of the suspension.

26.10. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]: Suspension of production                                             Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this example includes provisions for
(1) The holder of a mining lease shall notify the [Regulating Authority] three    both a voluntary suspension of production by the licence holder and the
months in advance where the holder proposes to suspend production from the        mandatory suspension of the licence by the Regulating Authority.
mine and shall in each case, give reasons for the suspension.
                                                                                  The first section in the example requires the licence holder to give prior notice
(2) Where the holder is unable to give the required notice as provided under      of any suspension of production to the Regulating Authority, which will
subsection (1) for reasons beyond the holder’s control including, without         investigate the causes of the suspension of production and either approve or
limitation, market conditions and the holder suspends production from a           require resumption of full production by a certain date. Voluntary suspensions
mine, the holder shall, within fourteen day of the suspension notify the          are limited to a duration of 12 months, which may possibly be extended for
[Regulating Authority].                                                           another 12 months. The Regulating Authority may attach conditions to its
                                                                                  approval of a suspension.
(3) The suspension of production shall not exceed twelve months and the
holder may apply in writing to the [Regulating Authority] for extension for a     This provision only applies in the case of regimes that require the licensee to
period not exceeding twelve months.                                               operate at a certain level of production, which some countries require in order to
                                                                                  assure a revenue stream from the exploitation of the mineral resource, rather
(4) On receiving the notification under subsection (1) or on the [Regulating      than allowing the licence holder to operate freely based solely on corporate
Authority] becoming aware of a suspension of production, the [Regulating          strategy. The example recognizes that market conditions or other factors
Authority] shall cause the matter to be investigated and shall, subject to any    beyond the licence holder’s control may require a suspension of production at
relevant requirement contained in the mining lease -                              times.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 218 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(a) give approval for the suspension, or                                          The second and third sections in the example set out the grounds and procedures
                                                                                  for mandatory suspensions or cancellations of all mineral rights and mining
(b) direct the holder of the mining lease to resume full production at the mine   leases (i.e., large scale exploitation licences), respectively. Those sections give
by a specified date.                                                              the Regulating Authority the latitude to decide whether to impose a suspension
(5) Approval of suspension may be given subject to conditions that the            of the licence or to cancel the licence in any particular circumstance. Ideally,
[Regulating Authority] may on the advice of the [Commission] determine.           where a failure of compliance can be corrected by the licence holder, temporary
                                                                                  suspension should be the sanction rather than cancellation. The implementing
Article [ ]: Suspension of a mineral right                                        regulations should clarify in what circumstances suspension will be imposed
(1) The [Regulating Authority] on the recommendation of the [Advisory             and in which circumstances an exploitation licence will be cancelled. There is
Body] may suspend or cancel a mineral right if the holder,                        also a need to clarify in the regulations the procedure for lifting a suspension of
                                                                                  the licence.
(a) fails to make payment on the due date, whether due to the Republic or
another person, required by or under this [Act][Code][Law],

(b) becomes insolvent or bankrupt, enters into an agreement or scheme of
composition with the holder’s creditors, or takes advantage of an enactment
for the benefit of its debtors or goes into liquidation, except as part of a
scheme for an arrangement or amalgamation,

(c) makes a statement to the [Regulating Authority] in connection with the
mineral right which the holder knows or ought to have known to be materially
false, or

(d) for a reason, becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under this
[Act][Code][Law].

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall, before suspending or cancelling a
mineral right under subsection (1), give notice to the holder and shall in the
notice, require the holder to remedy a breach of the condition of the mineral
right within a reasonable period, being not less than one hundred and twenty
days in the case of a mining lease or restricted mining lease or sixty days in
the case of another mineral right and what the breach cannot be remedied, to
show cause to the reasonable satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority] why
the mineral right should not be suspended or cancelled.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  219 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(3) On cancellation of a mineral right under this section, the right of the
holder shall cease but without prejudice to the liabilities or obligations
incurred by another person in relation to the mineral right prior to the date of
the cancellation.

Article [_]: Suspension or cancellation of mining lease
(1) Without limiting the scope of the preceding section, the [Regulating
Authority] may on the recommendation of the [Advisory Body] suspend or
cancel a mining lease if the holder has failed other than for good cause, for a
period of two years or more, to carry out any or a material part of the
holder’s programme or mineral operations.

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall before suspending or cancelling a
mining lease give notice to the holder and shall in the notice, require the
holder to remedy the breach within a reasonable period, being not less than
one hundred and twenty days, and where the breach cannot be remedied, to
show cause to the reasonable satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority] why
the mining lease or restricted mining lease should not be suspended or
cancelled.

(3) A dispute between the [Regulating Authority] and a holder of mining lease
in respect of a matter arising under subsection (2) shall be referred for
resolution under section [_] (on dispute resolution).

                                                       26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                                    26.11 Termination of Licence


A mining law should state clearly in one place the various ways in which an exploration licence can terminate, which would include expiration of
the term, surrender by the holder, and cancellation or withdrawal by the issuing authority. The law should make clear what the status of the
licenced area is upon termination in each manner and any remaining potential liabilities or incapacities that the licence holder may have upon




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                               220 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
termination. Additionally, a mining law should clearly note instances where an exploration licence is automatically extended during the
application process for a mining licence once a timely application by the holder has been filed.
In countries where the mining law provides that the State and the licence holder will enter into an agreement covering the exploitation stage, the
agreement may specify that the licence will terminate in the event of a serious breach of the agreement that is not remedied after notice and
opportunity to sure.
26.11. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision states all of the
(1) Any right, permit, permission or licence granted or issued in terms of this     different ways in which a mineral right granted pursuant to the Act may
[Act][Code][Law] shall lapse, whenever –                                            terminate. However, it does not go on to specify the consequences for the area,
                                                                                    any installed structures and equipment, or the licence holder under each form of
(a) it expires;                                                                     termination.
(b) the holder thereof is deceased and there are no successors in mineral
right;


(c) a company or close corporation is deregistered in terms of the relevant
Acts and no application has been made or was made to the [Regulating
Authority] for consent or such permission has been refused;

(d) save for cases referred to in section [_] (providing for exceptions to
liquidation/sequestration rules), the holder is liquidated or sequestrated;

(e) it is cancelled in terms of section [_] (addressing cancellation of licence);
or

(f) it is abandoned.

26.11. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision details what happens
(1) Where the holder of a mineral concession intends to cease operations            to several key items connected to the licence upon termination: assets, records,




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 221 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
either during the period of or on termination of his licence, he shall, not less   ownership of the area under the licence, water resources, and maps describing
than three months or such other period as the [Regulating Authority] may           the area. Similar to South Africa, Botswana addresses the different ways in
allow before such cessation or termination, furnish to the [Regulating             which termination occurs elsewhere in the law, but this provision goes further to
Authority a full register of assets showing those assets which he intends to       explicitly spell out the effect of termination beyond simply the end of the right
remove and those which he intends to leave in the concession area, and shall       to mine under the licence.
further notify the [Regulating Authority] of any potentially hazardous
substances, erections or excavations in the concession area.

(2) On receipt of a notice in terms of subsection (1) above, [Regulating
Authority] shall, if he deems it necessary—

(a) certify that specified items of fixed machinery are necessary for the care
and maintenance of the concession area and such items and machinery shall
not be removed;

(b) require that specified buildings and other items of fixed machinery shall
be removed; or

(c) require that potentially hazardous substances, erections and excavations
be removed or made safe in such manner as he may direct.

(3) If removal of specified assets which the holder has indicated that he
wishes to remove is prohibited under subsection 2(a) above, the Government
shall pay reasonable compensation to the holder for such assets and any
person who acquires a mineral concession over the area concerned shall
reimburse the Government the sum equal to the compensation so paid.

(4) Upon cessation of operations by the holder of a mineral concession in
terms of this clause, the mining area shall revert to the owner thereof
provided that should the [Regulating Authority] determine that the area
should be retained, it shall be so retained by the Government subject to
payment of fair compensation to the owner for such right of retention.

(5) Any fresh water dam and the waters impounded thereby shall be left intact




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 222 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
on cessation of operations in or termination of a mineral concession.

(6) Upon termination of any mineral concession the holder thereof shall
deliver to the [Regulating Authority] —

(a) all records which the holder is obliged under the provisions of this
[Act][Code][Law] to maintain; and

(b) all plans or maps of the area covered by the mineral concession prepared
by the holder or at his instructions.

(7) Any person who fails to deliver any document required to be delivered
under the provisions of subsection (1) within 14 days of being called upon to
do so by the [Regulating Authority] shall be guilty of an offence.

(8) Where the holder of—

(a) a prospecting licence has made application for a renewal thereof or for
either a retention licence or a mining licence over part of the area covered by
his prospecting licence;

(b) a retention licence has made application for a renewal thereof or for a
mining licence; or

(c) a mining licence or a minerals permit has made application for a renewal
thereof, the [Regulating Authority] may extend the period of validity of such
prospecting licence, retention licence, mining licence or minerals permit, as
the case may be, pending his decision on the application.

                                                      26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                                    26.12 Revocation of Licence




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                 223 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                             PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
A provision in which a licence is withdrawn and/or taken away by the Regulating Authority is referred to as revocation of the licence. Whereas
suspension or monetary penalties may be imposed for various failures to comply with health, safety, environmental protection and other qualitative
obligations – thereby providing an incentive to comply while protecting workers and communities from the consequences of such breaches -
revocation of the licence is the ultimate penalty, the grounds for which should be limited and clearly stated.
The revocation provisions of the law should also state whether the ground for revocation is one that can be cured and, if so, within what timeframe
after notice. One approach shown below is to differentiate between licence maintenance obligations, on the one hand, and operating obligations,
on the other hand. Licence maintenance obligations are limited to a small number of very objective obligations that must be performed by specific
deadlines – such as the commencement of work within a specified period after issuance of the licence and annual payment of licenced area fees.
These obligations may be strictly enforced. That is, a failure of timely compliance cannot be remedied (although it may be excused on grounds of
force majeure). All other obligations are operating obligations under this approach. Failures to meet those obligations are generally sanctioned by
orders to suspend operations until the failures are remedied. Depending on the type of obligation involved, the sanction may be a fine in lieu of or
in addition to an order to suspend operations. This approach provides security of tenure to investors in mining projects by not endangering the
validity of their licence, while motivating them to remedy compliance failures by preventing them from operating the licenced mine until the
failure is cured, and/or imposing financial penalties. A variation on this approach is to provide that if operations are suspended for more than a
certain time limit – such as 6 months or one year – without remedy of a compliance failure, then that situation becomes grounds for termination of
the licence.
Another approach to revocation is to describe or list the types of major compliance failures that may lead to revocation of the licence. These may
include, among other things, failure to commence production within a certain number of years after the issuance of the licence or a voluntary
suspension of operations for more than a specified period of time. Such safeguards are often included in mining laws in order to prevent
companies from “sitting? on a deposit without developing it or marketing the resources for reasons of corporate strategy that are inconsistent with
the State’s development goals. Under this second approach, the revocation p rocedure should, and virtually always does, provide for notice to the
licence holder in writing of the compliance failure, a reasonable statutory period of time within which the holder has the opportunity to present
evidence that compliance was in fact made or to remedy the deficiency, and a second notification that either the condition has been remedied or
that it has not and the licence will be revoked. This approach presents the licence holder with greater risk of loss of licence, but seeks to balance
that with a greater opportunity to cure any and all compliance failures.
A third approach is to provide that the licence may be revoked for a much broader variety of compliance failures. This approach vests greater
discretion in the Regulating Authority to determine whether to revoke the licence for a particular failure, accumulation of failures, or pattern of
repeated failures. Notice in writing to the licence holder and an opportunity to present evidence of compliance or to remedy the failure within a




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                   224 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
reasonable period of time is always an essential element of this approach. Its advantage is flexibility. The regulatory authority need not revoke the
licence for failures considered minor, but may revoke the licence for consistent repeat failures that cumulatively amount to unsatisfactory
compliance by a deficient operator. This approach is generally considered by investors to provide insufficient security of licence unless the
regulatory authority has an established track record of reasonable enforcement in which they have confidence.
26.12. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] Reasons for the Withdrawal of an Operating Licence                      Drawn from the DRC’s mining law (2002), this example provides for revocation
(1) The failure to comply with Article 286 (on the non-payment of annual            of the licence for failure to strictly comply with two specified licence
surface area fees and failure to commence work within the legal time period)        maintenance obligations. This is a safeguard against speculation. If licence
shall constitute grounds for the operating licence to be withdrawn.                 holders cannot commence operations within the required timeframe, or fail to
                                                                                    pay the required annual licence maintenance fees on time, their licences are
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles [_] to [_] of the present       revoked.
[Code][Act][Law] (on offences and penalties), any failure to comply with
obligations relating to the operations listed in chapter [_] of title [_] of the    Whereas failures by licensees to comply with the numerous other operating
present [Code][Act][Law] shall be penalised firstly with fines and/or possibly      obligations are penalized in the first instance by suspensions of operations or
with an order to suspend operations or, in the event of an offence, by              monetary fines, if the fines are not paid or the cause of the suspension is not
prosecution.                                                                        corrected within stipulated timeframes, then the exploitation licence will be
                                                                                    revoked.
(3) However, the following acts shall result in the operating licence being
withdrawn:                                                                          This bifurcation of obligations and the related sanctions into two categories
                                                                                    (licence maintenance obligations and operating obligations, respectively), and
(a) fines imposed for failing to comply with obligations relating to the            the clarity and objectivity of the two obligations that are strictly enforced by
operations are not paid within a period of [three months] from when the
                                                                                    revocation of the licence, provides security of licence to licensees by
operating licence holder is notified of the fine, or
(b) an order to suspend operations being carried out under an operating             minimizing their risk of loss of the licence. It also ensures prompt and complete
licence is not lifted within a period of [twelve months] from when the              payment of the fees that fund the work of the Regulating Authority.
Operating Licence holder is notified of the order of suspension, due to the fact
                                                                                    Enforcement of the various operating obligations by means of fines and
that they still have not rectified the failure to comply referred to in the order
                                                                                    suspension orders requires attentive monitoring by the authorities, but
of suspension in question,
                                                                                    incentivizes licence holders to correct the deficiencies in their operations while
Article [_]: The Procedure for the Withdrawal of an Operating Licence               maintaining their licences. Because some licensees will be unable to pay the
(1) The Mining Cadastre shall immediately notify the holder of the decision to      fines or make the necessary corrections, the example provides that they will lose
withdraw the licence or permit and shall post an announcement in a room             their licences if they have not paid their fines within three months or made the
indicated in the Mining Regulations.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   225 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
                                                                                   necessary corrections within one year of a suspension order.
(2) Notification of the decision to withdraw the licence or permit creates a
right to appeal as provided for in Articles [_] of the present                     The example includes due process procedures for the revocation of the licence,
[Code][Act][Law] (on arbitration appeal).                                          including a right of appeal during which the status quo is preserved.

(3) Such appeals must be brought within thirty days of the decision being
posted in the Ministry of Mines with jurisdiction.

(4) Should an appeal not be brought within the time period given above, the
decision to withdraw the licence or permit shall be registered in the
appropriate register and published in the [Official Gazette].

(5) Where an appeal is brought against a decision to withdraw a licence or
permit, the mining right shall remain valid for the duration of the
proceedings. However, there shall be notice of the decision and the appeal
proceedings which have been brought, in the register of granted licences and
permits.

Article [_]: The Cancellation of Mining Rights
(1) Mining rights shall be cancelled by [the Regulatory Authority] when the
holder has not brought an appeal against the decision to withdraw the licence
or permit and when the time period for an appeal has lapsed or the appeal
has been dismissed.

(2) The decision to cancel a licence or permit shall be made on the day the
appeal is dismissed or the last day of the period within which the appeal
should have been brought.

(3) The Ministry of Mines shall be notified of the decision of the to cancel the
licence or permit and shall register it in the register of cancelled titles.

(4) The area which is the subject of a mining or quarrying right which has
been cancelled shall return to the State.

Article [_]




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 226 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(1) Holders of mining rights who have lost their rights and whose titles have
been cancelled may not obtain new mining rights for a period of five years
from the date on which the cancellation was registered in the register kept by
the Ministry of Mines.

(2) In addition, the cancellation of mining rights does not have the effect of
releasing the holder from their environmental and tax obligations.

26.12. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision provides the
(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the [Regulating Authority] may      Regulating Authority with discretion to suspend or cancel a licence (or not) for
suspend or cancel a mineral concession if the holder thereof—                      any of the grounds stated in Article 76. This form of the third approach
                                                                                   described in the introduction above is in contrast to the approach under the 2002
(a) fails to make any of the payments required by or under this                    Mining Code of the DRC which makes a distinction between the grounds for
[Act][Code][Law] on the due date;                                                  cancelation and the grounds for suspension. The DRC Code requires
                                                                                   cancellation for failure to comply with the two requirements stated in Article
(b) contravenes any provision of this [Act][Code][Law] or the conditions of        286, and provides for possible fines and suspensions for everything else. By
his mineral concession or the provisions of any other written law relating to      contrast, the regulatory authority in Botswana may, but is not required to,
mines and minerals;                                                                revoke a licence for any violation of the mining law or licence conditions or any
                                                                                   other related law.
(c) dies, becomes of unsound mind, becomes insolvent, commits any act of
bankruptcy, enters into any agreement or scheme of composition with his            Whereas on paper this provision does not appear to provide security of licence
creditors, takes advantage of any written law for the benefit of debtors, or, in   to licence holders, in fact Botswana is consistently the most highly rated mining
the case of a company, goes into liquidation, except as part of a scheme for its   country in Africa in the Fraser Institute surveys, due to the confidence of
reconstruction or amalgamation.                                                    investors in the fair and reasonable implementation of the mining law by the
                                                                                   regulatory authority, together with a generally good business climate.
(d) makes any statement to the Government in connection with his mineral           Thus, matching the type of revocation terms with the country’s administrative
concession which he knows or ought to have known was false; or                     capability and reputation is important. In the DRC, where the general business
                                                                                   climate is considered poor and there is a low level of trust in the administration
(e) for any reason is or becomes ineligible to hold a mineral concession under     generally, an approach that circumscribes administrative discretion has worked
the provisions of section 6 (on the types of individuals and companies that are    in attracting investment and developing the sector. In Botswana, where the
                                                                                   general business climate is considered favourable and there is a high level of




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  227 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
not eligible to receive mineral rights).                                           confidence in the administration, a more flexible discretionary approach to the
                                                                                   grounds for revocation of licence (coupled with a procedure for notice and an
(2) Before suspending or cancelling a mineral concession under paragraphs          opportunity to cure) has worked well.
(a) and (b) of subsection (1), the [Regulating Authority] shall give the holder
                                                                                   Elsewhere, Article 47 of the South African MPRDA of 2009 is similar to the
thereof notice in writing specifying the particular failure or contravention and
                                                                                   approach under Botswana’s law, but the powers of the Regulating Authority are
calling upon the holder to remedy the same within such period, being not less
                                                                                   more circumscribed in the South African law.
than 30 days, as may be specified in such notice.

(3) If the holder of a mineral concession fails to remedy any failure or
contravention specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1) within the
period specified in a notice issued under subsection (2), the [Regulating
Authority] may, by notice to the holder thereof, suspend or cancel the mineral
concession forthwith.

                                                       26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                                     26.13 Surrender of Licence


A provision in which the licence holder gives up the mining right voluntarily before the duration of the licence has run out is referred to as
surrender of the licence. Surrender of a large scale exploitation licence may be total or partial. Partial surrender will require the issuance of a new
licence for the area not surrendered. Surrender may be automatic at the option of the licence holder upon notice to the Regulating Authority, or it
may require a decision of the issuing authority.
26.13. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_] Abandonment of land subject to mineral rights                          Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision requires the
(1) The holder of a mineral right who wishes to abandon all or any part of the     acceptance of the surrender by the issuing authority. The reasons why the
land subject to licence shall apply to [Regulating Authority], not later than      issuing authority may decide not to accept the surrender and not issue the
ninety days before the date on which he wishes the abandonment to have             certificate are not specified. It would be preferable to state those grounds in the
effect, for a certificate of abandonment.                                          law. They might include:




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    228 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
(2) Subject to this section, [Regulating Authority] shall issue to the applicant           The proposed partial surrender of area does not comply with cadastral
a certificate of abandonment either unconditionally or subject to such                      rules as to the size and form of the retained area and the surrendered
conditions relating to the abandoned land as [Regulating Authority] may                     area;
determine.                                                                                 Failure to remove installations and equipment as required; and
(3) An application under this section-                                                     Inadequate demonstration of required site rehabilitation or of the
                                                                                            absence of needed rehabilitation due to lack of work on the site
(a) shall identify the land to be abandoned and, if the application applies to              proposed for surrender.
only a part of the land subject to the licence, shall include a plan clearly
                                                                                   Note that the Tanzanian provision stipulates that acceptance of the surrender of
identifying both the part to be abandoned and the part to be retained;
                                                                                   area does not affect any liability incurred before the date of surrender. Drafters
(b) shall state the date on which the applicant wishes the abandonment to take     may wish to go further and clarify that the acceptance of the surrender does not
effect;                                                                            release the licence holder from liability for subsequently discovered damage
                                                                                   caused by activity of the holder.
(c) shall give particulars of the operations which have been carried on under
the licence on the land to be abandoned; and

(d) shall be supported by such record and reports in relation to those
operations as [Regulating Authority] may reasonably require.

(4) A certificate of abandonment shall take effect on the date on which it is
granted to the applicant, and-

(a) where the certificate relates to the whole of the land subject to the
holder`s licence, the licence shall be cancelled with effect from the same date;
and

(b) in any other case, the licence shall be amended to take account of the
abandonment.

(5) The abandonment of any land does not affect any liability incurred before
the date on which the abandonment has effect in respect of the land, and any
legal proceedings that might have been commenced or continued in respect of
any liability against the applicant for the certificate may be commenced or
continue against that applicant.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   229 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
26.13. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]: Surrender of a mineral right                                           Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (1999), this provision, though similar to the
(1) A holder of a mineral right who wishes to surrender all or a part of the        previous example, goes further in several areas. In particular, it details
land subject to the mineral right shall apply to the [Regulating Authority] for     conditions under which the Regulating Authority may not permit surrender of a
a certificate of surrender not later than two months before the date on which       mineral right and also provides for amendment of the area size under any
the holder wishes the surrender to take effect.                                     relevant licence where surrender has occurred over some, but not all land under
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be in accordance with                 the licence.
prescribed Regulations.

(3) Subject to subsection (4), upon an application duly made under subsection
(1), the [Regulating Authority] shall issue a certificate of surrender in respect
of the land to which the application relates.

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not issue a certificate of surrender

(a) to an applicant who is in default,

(b) to an applicant who fails to give records and reports in relation to the
applicant’s mineral operations,

(c) where the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied that the applicant will
surrender the land in a condition which is safe and accords with good mining
practice, or

(d) in respect of land, if the remaining area of the land after the surrender
would not be less than one block.

(5) Where a certificate of surrender is issued under this section, the
[Regulating Authority] shall, where only part of the land subject to the
mineral right is surrendered, amend the relevant licence accordingly or
cancel the mineral right where the surrender is in respect of the whole area




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 230 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                              PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
covered by the mineral right.

(6) Land in respect of which a certificate of surrender is issued, shall be
treated as having been surrendered with effect from the date on which the
certificate of surrender is issued under subsection (3).
(7) The surrender of land under this section shall not affect a liability
incurred by a person in respect of that land before the date on which the
surrender took effect.

                                                   26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                          26.14 Transfer/Assignment of Rights


Transfer and assignment of rights refers to provisions that deal with whether a licence holder may hand over, sell, rent (either part or the whole) or
in any way encumber/place a lien or mortgage on the licence for the benefit of another person or entity. Mining companies generally need the
ability to transfer their licence rights either (1) conditionally, in the form of a mortgage or other form of security interest in order to obtain
necessary financing, or (2) in whole or in part, in the event of a sale of assets to another company, or (3) in whole in the case of a merger into a
new entity. Provisions in the mining law that facilitate transfers of and security interests in exploitation licences are significant components of an
investment promotion strategy.
If the licence rights are not transferable (and even if they are transferable), then the investor may seek to achieve the same result as a transfer of the
licence by transferring the ownership of the company that holds the licence – often indirectly through the sale of an offshore holding company that
is the sole shareholder of the company that holds the licence. Accordingly, the drafters may wish to consider language that reaches indirect as well
as direct transfers.
The key issue for the licensing authority with respect to transfers is to assure that the transferee possesses, or will possess at the time when the
transfer becomes effective, the capability to conduct the mining operations pursuant to the large scale exploitation licence, in accordance with the
applicable law and regulations. The law should also specify that the transferee must assume all of the obligations of the transferor under the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        231 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
licence, and also specify whether the transferor continues to be responsible under the licence after the transfer.
Provisions on the transfer of licence rights should deal with the consequences of securitization of these rights and the requirement for the
transferee, in the event of default by the licence holder, to meet the same eligibility requirements as were applicable for original allocation of the
licence, subject to the need to contemplate that financial institutions holding a mortgage (if possible under the mining law) or other form of
security interest in the licence may meet the eligibility requirements either by substituting a qualified operator for a licence holder in default or by
transferring the licence to an eligible and qualified mining company within a specified period of time. Such provisions should involve a procedure
for the approval of a proposed mortgage or other negotiated lien at the time when it is entered into in order to enable financing of large scale
exploitation projects.
The mining law should specifically require the registration of all mortgages or other liens on the books maintained by the mining cadastre service
or licence registry in order for such conditional transfers to be enforceable against third parties, including the State.
Another form of transfer that may be contemplated by the mining law is a sublease (“amodiation? in French) pursuant to which a third party
conducts operations under the exploitation licence and shares the benefits with the licence holder. Provisions approving such practices generally
require proof of the eligibility of the sublessee as a condition for required administrative approval of the sublease, continuing responsibility of the
licence holder for all obligations and potential liabilities under the licence, and registration of the approved sublease on the books of the mining
cadastre or licence registry.
26.14. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision provide s for transfer
(1) No mining licence or any interest therein shall be transferred, assigned,   but only with the approval of the Regulating Authority, which is based on a
encumbered or dealt with in any other way without the approval of the           review by the Regulating Authority of the particulars concerning the transferee
[Regulating Authority].                                                         as would be required in an application for a mining licence. Except in the case
                                                                                of diamond mining, the Regulating Authority must approve the transfer if the
(2) In any application to the [Regulating Authority] for his approval under     transferee is not a disqualified person or entity and the Regulating Authority is
subsection (1), the applicant shall give such particulars concerning the        satisfied as to all of the criteria for the grant of an initial mining licence.
proposed transferee, assignee, or other party concerned as would be required
in an application for a mining licence.                                         In the case of the proposed transfer of a licence to mine diamonds, approval of
                                                                                the transfer is subject to the conclusion of a successful negotiating process
(3) Subject to section [_] (requiring the negotiation with the Government of    between the transferee and the Government on issues such as technical,
the terms and conditions of a diamond mining licence, including Government      financial and commercial aspects related to the project, including Government




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              232 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
participation), the [Regulating Authority] shall grant approval to the transfer,   participation. This provision protects Botswana’s privileged state participation
assignment, encumbrance or other dealing with any mining licence or interest       interest in the diamond mining industry, which is a situation particular to that
therein provided the transferee is not disqualified under any provision of this    country.
[Act][Code][Law] from holding a mining licence and the [Regulating
Authority] is satisfied in accordance with section [_] (stating the grounds on     Note that this provision explicitly applies to transfers of a controlling interest in
which the [Regulating Authority] must be satisfied in order to grant a mining      the licence holder. The term “controlling interest? is not defined in this
licence).                                                                          provision, but it is clear that the intent is to require disclosure of the transferees
                                                                                   and approval of the transfer by the Regulating Authority in the case of offshore
(4) For the purposes of this section, “interest? in a mining licence shall mean    transfers of the shares of the licence holder (the situation described in the
in the case of a holder who is a private company, a controlling interest in        introduction to this section).
such holder.

 (5) Any application for the issue, renewal, transfer or amendment of a
licence to mine diamonds shall initiate a negotiating process, in good faith,
between Government and the applicant covering all technical, financial and
commercial aspects of the proposed project including Government
participation.

(6) Should the negotiations not lead to agreement within six months or such
extended period as the [Regulating Authority] may allow, the application
shall fail.

(7) Upon successful conclusion of the negotiation under subsection (1), the
[Regulating Authority] shall issue a licence reflecting the terms and
conditions agreed.

26.14. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_] Assignment and Transfer of Mineral Rights                              Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), in this provision the Regulating
Mineral rights may be assigned only upon the approval of the Government,           Authority requires approval by the Government for all transfers of the licence,
except for an assignment to an affiliate of the holder of the mineral right. Any   except transfers to an affiliate of the licence holder, which are allowed without
purported assignment in contravention of this section shall be null and void,      approval of the Regulating Authority. In contrast to Botswana’s provision
and shall constitute a material violation of the [Law][Act][Code]. The death       above, the provision in this example does not state the grounds for approval or
of an individual holder of a mineral right, or dissociation or termination of      denial of such transfers and in that sense does not provide any assurance of the
existence of any holder, shall result in the termination of the mineral right




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     233 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
unless, within a reasonable period of time to be prescribed in the regulations,   approval of such transfers.
an assignment of those mineral rights is made to a person who is an eligible
applicant.                                                                        On the other hand, for transfers of security interests, the Liberian provision
                                                                                  provides a very good example of the type of provision necessary to facilitate
Article [_] Assignment as Security                                                financing of a large scale exploitation project, as described in the Introduction to
Mineral rights may be assigned to a creditor as security for an obligation or     this Section 26.14. It allows for the creation of security interests in the mineral
indebtedness, upon notice to the [Regulating Authority] and pursuant to the       licence to secure debt; and only requires notice of such security interests to the
laws of [Country]. The holder’s right in any such mineral right thus assigned     Regulating Authority. If a security interest is enforced in accordance with the
shall terminate upon any foreclosure thereof pursuant to judgement of a court     relevant statutory procedures governing security interests, the Liberian provision
having competent jurisdiction over the persons and the subject matter, or         states that the Regulating Authority will transfer the licence to the judgment
otherwise pursuant to the laws of [Country], provided that the judgement          creditor if it is eligible to hold the licence. If the judgment creditor is not
creditor or lien creditor shall have no right to conduct operations under any     eligible to hold the mineral right, it may assign its rights to another person who
such mineral right unless, within one hundred and twenty (120) days after
                                                                                  is eligible, in which case the Regulating Authority will transfer the licence to
such foreclosure or other judgement in its favour, the judgement creditor or
lien creditor either demonstrates the [Regulating Authority] that it is an        that eligible person.
eligible applicant for that mineral right under this [Law][Act][Code], in         This provision does not go as far as the preceding Botswana provision in that it
which case the [Regulating Authority] shall grant the judgement appropriate
                                                                                  does not attempt to apply to indirect transfers of interests in the exploitation
mineral right for its remaining term, or assigns that mineral right to another
                                                                                  licence by transfers of share interests in the licence holder or in the offshore
person that is an eligible applicant, in which case the [Regulating Authority]
shall grant the mineral right to that person.                                     holding company that owns the latter.

Article [_] Condition for Transfer
Where there is more than one Holder of Mineral Right, all the Holders
thereof must agree to assignment or transfer of the Mineral Right.

                                                      26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                            26.15 Specific Violations and Penalties


In addition to the general Offenses and Penalties described in Part A of this Guiding Template, the common specific violations and penalties that
apply to large scale exploitation licences are (1) conducting exploitation activities in an area for which the operator does not hold a licence, (2) not
meeting the work and expenditure requirements, and (3) failing to secure the site under the licence both during and after the licence has




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  234 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
terminated. It is therefore of critical importance to clearly define in one place obligations for large scale mining licence holders. Typical penalties
include fines, suspension of the mineral right, and seizure `of minerals (that are mined illegally).
26.15. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), while Botswana’s mining law has a
(1) No holder of a mining licence shall engage in wasteful mining or                 general “Offenses and Penalties? section applicable to all mineral rights holders,
treatment practices or conduct his operations otherwise than in accordance           the law specifically prohibits wasteful mining or treatment practices on the part
with good mining practice.                                                           of the mineral rights holder. It is of value to place this specific obligation apart
                                                                                     from the general offense section due to the larger impact (and larger range of
(2) If the [Regulating Authority] considers that the holder of a mining licence      mining activities) that typically take place uniquely under mining licences.
is in breach of subsection (1), he may notify him accordingly and require him
to show cause why he should not discontinue such breach.

(3) If, within the time specified in any notice issued under subsection (2), the
holder of a mining licence fails to discontinue the breach or to satisfy the
[Regulating Authority] that he is not in breach, the [Regulating Authority]
may direct the holder to discontinue the breach and the holder shall comply
with such direction.

26.15. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from the Republic of Congo’s mining law (2005). This law includes a
(1) In addition to the cases referred to in Article [_] (concerning the              general chapter on offenses and penalties, but also contains a chapter that lays
withdrawal of an operating licence due to the development work for the               out specific types of licence holder violations that can lead to revocation of
mining site not commencing within twelve months from the date the licence is         mining rights. This provision addresses holders of research permits as well as
allocated), any mining title holder, after notice has been given, may lose:          large scale exploitation licence holders, and applies equally to those who have
                                                                                     mining rights under a valid lease agreement.
(a) their title, in one of the following cases:
 (i) failure to pay the mining fees due to the State and to the local authorities,
according to the tax regime which is in force;
 (ii) any cession, assignment or subleasing which does not comply with the
rules established in the present [Code][Act][Law];
 (iii) any serious breach of the regulations of the central mining department
as regards law and order, health and safety, or in the event that the measures




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                      235 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
imposed in application of Article [_] (on holders whose applications for
mining titles will be refused for a period of five years due to the fact that they
were sentenced to a period of imprisonment or they failed to fulfil their
rehabilitation obligations) are not complied with;

(b) their operating license, due to:
 (i) the fact that, for an extended time, operations have not been undertaken
or have been undertaken to an insufficient degree, which is clearly contrary
to the potential for the deposit or the interests of consumers, and not justified
by the state of the market;
 (ii) operations have been carried out under conditions which seriously
compromise the economic value, conservation and subsequent use of the
deposits;
 (iii) failure to comply with the terms laid down in Article [_] (on the
obligation to apply methods which have been confirmed as the most suitable,
enabling optimal output) and failure to fulfil the commitments referred to in
Article [_] (on the content of the Agreement signed between the Holder and
the State) and Article [_] (on the commitments of the recipient under the
Agreement) of the present [Law][Act][Code].

                                                        26. Large Scale Exploitation Licensing
                                                   26.16 Closure (plan, certificate etc.) and Reclamation


 Mine closure and site reclamation or rehabilitation may be a distinct phase of a large scale exploitation project at the end of commercial
production of a copper or gold mine, for example, or it may be an ongoing process in the case of exploitation of minerals sands, phosphates and
other minerals that are mined progressively across a horizontal plane, with site fill and rehabilitation being performed on the previously mined area
as each new area is mined. In either case, site closure and rehabilitation is considered an essential phase or component of the exploitation project
for which the licence holder is required to plan and make financial arrangements.
Site rehabilitation plans are generally required as part of the environmental and social impact study and mitigation planning process under modern




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    236 | P a g e
                                             AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                            PART B-3: Large Scale Exploitation
mining laws or the related environmental laws, which also generally require the licence holder to establish a security in the form of a bond, bank
guarantee, insurance policy or funded escrow account to provide adequate funding for the completion of site closure and rehabilitation at the
conclusion of production activity. The surety must be available to the Government to pay for site restoration in the event that the licence holder
fails to meet its obligations. These obligations are covered as part of the environmental topics in Part D of the Guiding Template.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                 237 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                               PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                            27. Small Scale Licencing
Artisanal mining (AM) and small scale mining (SSM) are terms used to define the sub-sectors of the mining industry in Africa within which
individuals, groups, cooperatives and local or small regional/international companies other than state-owned enterprises operate, using methods that
are labour intensive rather than capital and technology intensive. The mining activities of these subsectors generally focus on precious metals and
gemstones, semi-precious gemstones, decorative stones and rock collections, and industrial or quarrying minerals but can also include metallic
minerals such as cobalt, coltan, tungsten. They supply, among other markets, the national jewellery, craft and construction industries. The definitions
of artisanal mining and small scale mining in African mining laws vary widely, as do the practices associated with both such sub-sectors. Indeed,
some mining laws distinguish among “artisanal? mining, “mechanized artisanal mining? (e.g., Mali 2012), “lightly mechanized mining? (e.g.
Cameroon, 2014 Regulation) or “semi-industrial mining? (Côte d’Ivoire 2014) and “small scale? mining (e.g., Ghana, 2006).

Whether and how much to distinguish among different gradations of artisanal and small scale mining (ASM) depends on the types of activity taking
place in a given jurisdiction, the degree of homogeneity or differentiation among the policy objectives with respect to the different types of activity,
and an assessment of the need for differentiation in treatment of them in order to achieve the policy objectives. It is recommended that in all cases, the
title of a licence or authorization be clearly associated with well-defined and readily recognizable activities. Where a mining law addresses one or
multiple types of ASM, the type of activity and the related licence or authorizations should be defined clearly and used consistently throughout the law
to avoid confusion.

This Section addresses the elements of a legal regime for small scale mining, while Section 28 addresses the elements of a legal regime for artisanal
mining. In this Section, SSM is defined as mineral exploitation that has the following characteristics:
       (a) it takes place at a fixed site,
       (b) partially mechanized processes are utilized for the extraction - with or without processing - of minerals and the production and marketing
            of mineral products,
       (c) the deposit that is the subject of SSM is not suitable for large scale exploitation, and
       (d) either -
                (i)      the production volumes do not exceed a specified maximum amount, or
                (ii)     the investment in the SSM project does not exceed a specified maximum amount.

The general policy objective for SSM is usually to provide preferential access into the sector to nationals and to support the development of local
mining entrepreneurs by facilitating national investment in reasonably capitalized domestic ventures that have the capacity to grow.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    238 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                              27. Small Scale Licencing
                                                                    27.1 Eligibility
When a mining law addresses small-scale mining, it usually identifies who may or may not engage in the activity. Eligibility in this case may
sometimes simply be limited to the eligibility to engage in the activity rather than the specific eligibility to apply for a license. For example, some laws
explicitly bar certain large companies from engaging in small scale activities, restrict eligibility to resident country nationals, or restrict eligibility to
cooperatives.

The section should indicate whether the licence to engage in SSM is reserved for nationals or allows for joint ventures with foreign entities. In some
instances, a law may allow full ownership of SSM ventures by foreign entities. This may be in circumstances where there is an absence of local
capacity to engage at that level. In such circumstances, allowing foreign entities to engage in SSM can result in knowledge, skills and technology
transfer, provided that conditions are applied to encourage such transfer.

When non-nationals are eligible, it is important to outline in what capacity they are permitted to apply for the license. It is also important to indicate if
there are special permissions for nationals from neighbouring countries with which there are reciprocal arrangements, for example for members of
economic communities or customs unions. Other general limitations include whether individuals are eligible for SSM licenses and, if so, the age of
majority for that purpose; and what entities and/or individuals are excluded from eligibility due to the pendency of bankruptcy and/or liquidation
proceedings or criminal charges against them, a prior licence revocation, a prior conviction for fraud, or status as a member of the mining
administration or the government, for example.

Under some mining laws, only the holder of a valid exploration licence covering the area applied for is eligible for a small-scale mining licence for
that area. Under others, holding a valid exploration licence for the area is not required for eligibility to obtain the SSM license. Consideration should
be given to whether or not to make this distinction. Given the requirement to provide a detailed work plan or feasibility study and some form of
environmental assessment and site rehabilitation plan with an application for a SSM licence under most mining laws, applicants may find it necessary
to obtain an exploration licence for the area in order to reserve it while preparing the required assessment and plans. Alternatively, if the SSM licence
is for exploration (“prospecting?) and exploitation, the mining law may provide that such assessment and plans can be prepare d during the exploration
phase once the SSM licence has been issued, but will be required to be submitted and accepted in order to obtain permission to commence exploitation
operations under the SSM license.

27.1. Example 1:                                                            Annotation




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        239 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision addresses only SSM
(1) Any person who wishes to carry out small-scale mining operations shall    licenses. Eligibility for such licenses is limited to entities. Under Sierra Leone’s
apply for a small-scale mining licence.                                       mining law, SSM licenses cannot be issued to individuals.

(2) A small-scale mining licence shall be granted to–                         To be eligible, an entity must be either a company that is incorporated or registered in
                                                                              Sierra Leone or a co-operative society that is registered in Sierra Leone. In both
(a) a body corporate that is incorporated or registered in [Country] and      cases, the entity must be owned 25% by nationals. Thus, foreign participation in SSM
having a minimum of twenty-five percent of its shares held by citizens of     is permitted, provided that the foreign participants act through a company or co-
[Country]; or                                                                 operative society that is at least 25% owned by citizens of Sierra Leone and registered
                                                                              there.
(b) a co-operative society registered in [Country] having a minimum of
twenty-five percent of its member being citizens of [Country].                An entity is not required to be the holder of an exploration licence for the area applied
                                                                              for, but it may be such a holder. It probably will be one, in order to preserve the
(3) All such co-operatives and bodies corporate shall register with the       availability of the area while preparing the necessary work plan, environmental
Director and shall provide such documentation as the [Regulating              permitting requirements and other preparatory work.
Authority] may require.
                                                                              The eligible entities must register with the Regulating Authority and provide
                                                                              documentation as required by the Regulating Authority.

27.1. Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2007), this provision describes the persons who
(1) A mining right or non-mining right shall not be granted to any person     are ineligible to hold mining rights in general and SSM licenses in particular. By
except in accordance with the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].            eliminating from consideration the persons stated to be ineligible, the provision
                                                                              results in the following persons being the only ones eligible to receive a SSM
(2) A mining right or non-mining right shall not be granted to or held by —   licenses: individual citizens of Zambia or Zambian citizen-owned companies,
                                                                              provided that they are not rendered ineligible by the other terms of the provision that
(a) an individual who—                                                        apply to all individuals, whether or not they are Zambian citizens, and to all
 (i) is under the age of eighteen years;                                      companies, whether or not they are citizen-owned. Foreigners, foreign-owned
 (ii) is or becomes an undercharged bankrupt, having been adjudged or         companies and even joint ventures involving foreigners are therefore excluded from
otherwise declared bankrupt under any written law, or enters into any         SSM under Zambia’s mining law.
agreement or scheme of composition with creditors, or takes advantage of
any legal process for the relief of bankrupt or insolvent debtors; or         Zambia’s mining law also provides for a small scale gemstone license, for which the
 (iii) has been convicted, within the previous ten years, of an offence       applicant licence must meet the same nationality requirements as apply in the case of
involving fraud or dishonesty, or of any offence under this                   the SSM license.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               240 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
[Act][Code][Law] or any other law within or outside [Country], and been
sentenced therefor to imprisonment without the option of a fine or to a fine
exceeding fifty thousand [penalty units]; or

(b) a company—
 (i) which is in liquidation, other than liquidation which forms part of a
scheme for the reconstruction of the company or for its amalgamation with
another company;
 (ii) unless the company is incorporated under [the Companies Act].
 (iii) which has not established an office in [Country]; or
 (iv) which has among its directors or shareholders any person who would
be disqualified under sub-paragraphs (ii) or (iii) of paragraph (a).

(3) A prospecting permit, small-scale mining licence, small-scale gemstone
licence and an artisan's mining right shall not be granted to a person who is
not a citizen of [Country] or a company which is not a citizen-owned
company.

(4) A mining right for industrial minerals shall only be granted to a citizen
of [the country] and a citizen-owned company.

(5) Any document or transaction purporting to grant a mining right to any
person not entitled to hold the right shall be void and of no effect.

(6) For the purposes of this [Act][Code][Law], "citizen of [Country]" means

(a) in relation to an individual, an individual who is a citizen of [Country];
and

(b) in relation to a partnership, a partnership which is composed exclusively
of persons who are citizens of [Country].


                                                              27. Small Scale Licencing
                                                       27.2 Requirements for Licence Applications



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                   241 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

Unlike the requirements for other licenses, the requirements for a licence Application for small scale mining activities are typically fewer. Some laws
may have no requirements beyond those related to eligibility, leaving the definition of the application requirements to the implementing regulations.
Where there are specific requirements in the law, these may include specifications on the form of the application, required supporting documents, and
the need to meet certain criteria before the issuing authority will grant mining rights. Best practice encourages that the application include a survey
map showing the coordinates indicating the area covered by the application, which may be a polygon with a minimum and maximum number of sides
prescribed or a cadastre unit as set out in the mining law.

Requirements may also specify: (1) Where the application will be lodged; (2) what evidence of technical capacity and financial capacity should be
provided and (3) evidence of the consent of the rightful owner occupier of land to potentially use the land for mining purposes may be required at the
time of lodging the application. The application will need to indicate if the applicant holds other mineral licenses in the country.


Exploration may be required to have been conducted under an exploration licence covering the area that is the subject of a SSM application. Where
such a process is followed then the application may need to be accompanied by a mining work program, an environmental impact assessment and
environment management plan and the prescribed environmental financial guarantees.

27.2. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision addresses small -scale
“Primary mining licence? means a licence for small scale mining operations,       mining activities under the mining licence referred to as the primary mining
whose capital investment is less than US$100,000 or its equivalent in [national   license, which is for mining projects involving an investment of less than
currency];                                                                        $100,000. Investment beyond that limit means the operation exceeds the SSM
                                                                                  scale; and the law requires that it be subject to a mining license, the next category
Article [_]                                                                       in terms of scale (for investments of $100,000 to $ 100,000,000).
(1) Any person not disqualified under section 8 (listing categories of persons
who are ineligible for mining licenses), may apply to the [local Regulating       Given the modest investment involved, the Tanzanian mining law defers to the
authority] for the grant of a primary mining licence.                             regulations the specification of the application contents. Significantly, it requires
                                                                                  the payment of an application fee set by regulation, to defray processing costs and
(2) Every such application shall-                                                 dissuade frivolous applications.

(a) be in the prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fee; and          The application requirements specified in the law are limited to the following:
(b) describe the area not exceeding the maximum area prescribed by regulation         (1) The applicant. He/she/it must not -




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               242 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
over which the licence is sought.                                                                     be a disqualified person (under the eligibility provisions);
                                                                                                      be, or have been, in default that has not been rectified under any
(3) A primary mining licence shall confer on the holder the right to prospect for                      mineral right; and
and mine minerals as provided for in this Division of this Part.                         (2)   The application. It must:
Article [_]
                                                                                                    be in the form prescribed by regulation, and
(1) The [local Regulating authority] of the respective [Zone]                                       be accompanied by the fee prescribed by regulation;
shall grant an application for a primary mining licence which has                        (3)   The area (for which the licence is sought). It must –
been properly made under section 54 (on the persons eligible to file and the                        Be described in the application;
contents of the application) unless-                                                                Not exceed the applicable size limitation set in the regulations;
(a) the applicant is or was in default in respect of any other mineral right and                    Not be subject to another mineral right; and
    has failed to rectify such default;                                                             Not be set aside or reserved by the Minister (a) as a source of
                                                                                                       building materials for infrastructure projects, or (b) for
(b) the area for which application has been made or part of it covers or                               allocation among primary licence holders in accordance with the
     includes an area which is:                                                                        regulations, or (c) for tender.
 (i) subject to another mineral right or an area which the [Regulating
Authority] has approved in writing as a source of building materials for the
construction of tunnels, roads, dams, aerodromes and similar public
works of an engineering nature;
 (ii) an area designated by the [Regulating Authority] under section 16 as an
area reserved for prospecting and mining operations by persons holding
primary mining licence s, to be allocated in accordance with a scheme of
allocation provided for by the regulations;
 (iii) an area designated by the [Regulating Authority] as an area in respect of
which applications for the grant of a mineral right have been, or will be, invited
by tender.

27.2. Example 2:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this single article and the related
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, a person wishing to conduct small        schedule succinctly describe the application requirements for a “minerals permit?
scale mining operations may apply for a minerals permit to conduct such              to conduct small scale mining operations. The application form is well adapted to
operations for any mineral other than diamonds over an area not exceeding 0.5        the policy objective of facilitating access to small scale mining for national
km2 per permit.                                                                      entrepreneurs, provided that they present a serious work program including




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  243 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                                   environmental protections and that they obtain the consent of the owners of the
(2) A person wishing to obtain a minerals permit shall apply to the                land or any existing mineral licence holders in the area applied for.
[Regulating Authority] by completing [Form xxx of the First Schedule], which
requires:                                                                          This provision requires identification of the applicant company as well as the
                                                                                   persons behind the company in order that the Regulating authority can determine
a) Identification of the applicant and its                                         whether the applicant is eligible.
     partners/directors/members/shareholders,
b) Description of the area applied for (including a map and coordinates),          It requires a map and coordinates of the area applied for in order that the
c) Particulars of the minerals for which the permit is sought,                     Regulating authority can determine whether the area is available for such a
d) The period for which the permit is sought, and                                  mineral permit or whether an existing mineral licence holder’s consent is required.
e) The proposed programs of work, including –
 (i) Details of the mineral deposit,                                               It requires particulars of the minerals sought in order that the Regulating authority
 (ii) estimated date by which applicant intends to work for profit,                can determine that the law authorizes the grant of a mineral permit for such
 (iii) estimated capacity of production and scale of operations,                   minerals. (For example, a mineral permit may not be issued for diamonds.)
 (iv) nature of product,
 (v) envisaged marketing arrangements for sale of mineral product(s),              It requires a comprehensive work program rather than a costly feasibility study,
 (vi) Brief environmental impact assessment study and                              and a “brief? environmental impact assessment study together with a “brief?
 (vii) Brief environmental reclamation program.                                    environmental reclamation program rather than a full-blown EIS and rehabilitation
                                                                                   plan.    These are simplified versions of the more strenuous application
(3) An application for a minerals permit relating to —                             requirements for a large scale exploitation license.

(a) any area in respect of which consent is required under any written law         The Botswana application requirements demonstrate a sensitivity to the rights of
shall be accompanied by evidence that such consent has been obtained;              landowners or tribal land boards and existing mineral licence holders in the area
                                                                                   applied for by requiring their written consent to be provided with the application,
(b) land of which the applicant is not the owner shall be accompanied by           except – in the case of the existing mineral right holders – if they will not be
evidence that the consent of the owner, or, in the case of tribal territory, the   prejudiced by the issue of a minerals permit, which determination is made by the
consent of the appropriate land board, has been obtained; or                       Regulating Authority. Written consent is similarly required from the relevant
                                                                                   authority if the area applied for is subject to such a requirement under any written
(c) a prospecting area, retention area or mining area or part thereof shall be     law.
accompanied by evidence that the consent of the holder of the prospecting
licence, retention licence or mining licence has been given, unless such
holder will not be prejudiced by the issue of a minerals permit.


                                                                     27. Small Scale Licencing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                244 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                          27.3. Licence Refusal Appeal Process
In detailing the licence refusal appeals process, a mining law may include: Why a licence may be refused and the due process to be followed by the
regulator. The reasons for refusal may also include non-eligibility and/or failure to meet the “requirements of the application.? The process of refusal
must indicate the format in which refusal will be communicated, the days that are allowed to lapse before the communication is made, informing the
applicant of their right to appeal the application refusal. The refusal process may also address what process the applicant can follow to appeal the
refusal. Consideration should be given to provision of an expedited administrative appeal of any refusal to grant a small scale exploitation license, as a
prerequisite to a subsequent judicial appeal if the administrative appeal is unsuccessful. In countries that have a Minerals Commission, Advisory
Board or Minerals Consultative Body (the latter including representatives of Government, industry, civil society and mining communities, for
example), it could be effective and efficient for appeals of refusals to grant small scale mining licence applications to be made to an adjudicative arm
of such Commission, Board or Body, and for the decision of that institution on appeal to be binding except in very limited circumstances: e.g.,
misconduct, corruption or conflict of interest on the part of the adjudicatory panel, or a decision exceeding its review powers (i.e., similar to the typical
grounds for vacating an arbitration award).

27.3. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from the DRC’s mining law (2002), these provisions explicitly provide for a
The granting of or refusal to grant an Operating Licence for Small-Scale             judicial appeal of the decision to refuse a SSM permit, through a series of cross
Mining shall be governed by the provisions of Articles [_] of the present            references.
[Code][Act][Law] (on the granting of and justification for refusing to grant an
Operating Licence).                                                                  The first article provides that the issuance or refusal of a SSM permit is subject to
                                                                                     the same articles 72 and 73 that apply to large scale mining permits. Article 72
Article [_]                                                                          establishes that the refusal to issue the permit gives rise to the appeals provided for
Reasons are to be given in writing for the refusal of an operating license and       in Articles 317 to 320 of the mining law. Article 73 limits the grounds on which
gives the right to appeal as provided for in the provisions of Articles [_] of the   the permit may be refused by the Regulating Authority.
present [Code][Act][Law] (on arbitration appeal).
                                                                                     Article 317 provides that arbitration is available for the resolution of disputes as to
Article [_]                                                                          the interpretation or implementation of any provisions of the mining law, but that
(1) An Operating Licence may be refused only if:                                     this is subject to the provisions on administrative and judicial appeals.

(a) the feasibility study has been rejected;                                         Article 313 is the general provision on such appeals. It provides that appeals of any
(b) the applicant lacks sufficient financial ability;                                administrative act by the administrative authorities in implementing the mining law
(c) the EIA has been rejected in a final decision, in accordance with the below      are governed by the general law on judicial authority; and it goes on to specify the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    245 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
provisions.                                                                           applicable articles of the relevant law.

(2) A feasibility study may only be rejected for the following reasons:               Thus, the DRC mining law both specifies the grounds on which an application for a
                                                                                      SSM permit may be denied and explicitly provides a right of appeal of the denial
(a) it does not comply with the directive from [the Regulatory Authority]             under the general statutes on judicial procedure, rather than leaving it up to the
specifying its content in accordance with generally recognised international          applicant, its counsel and the courts to determine whether an appeal is available and
practices;                                                                            on what terms. This is, however, a rare provision among African mining laws.
(b) the study contains an obvious error;                                              Most African mining laws do not specifically provide for an appeal of the refusal to
(c) it does not comply with the EIA.                                                  grant a SSM permit. In those cases, whether and where an appeal would lie must
                                                                                      be determined under the applicable general administrative procedures act.
(3) Proof of the applicant's financial capacity may only be rejected for one of
the following reasons:

(a) the financing plan does not comply with the feasibility study;
(b) there is clearly insufficient proof of the likely availability of the financing
which is to be obtained from the sources identified by the applicant.

(4) Proof of financial capacity may not be rejected if, in the case of external
funding, the applicant has produced proof from the financial sources which
were identified, demonstrating the feasibility of the financing within the
parameters considered by the applicant, and, in the case of internal financing,
the financial statements of the person or company certified by a Chartered
Accountant or a Public Accountant recognised by the courts, demonstrating
their self-financing capacity.

Article [_]
Subject to the provisions relating to appeals to a higher administrative
authority and appeal proceedings, penalties and punishments provided for by
the present [Code][Act][Law], disputes which may result from the
interpretation or application of the provisions of the present
[Code][Act][Law], may be settled through arbitration as provided for in
Articles [_] of the present [Code][Act][Law] (on the terms for arbitration).

Article [_]
Subject to the provisions of Article [_] (on the registration of a mining right




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   246 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
through legal channels) and Article [_] (on matters which concern appeal
proceedings) of the present [Code][Act][Law], an appeal against
administrative acts decreed by administrative authorities in application of, or
in violation of, the provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law], or those of the
Mining Regulations shall be governed by the common law, in particular by the
provisions of Articles [_] of the [Code of Judicial Organisation and
Jurisdiction] and by [the law relating to procedure before the Supreme Court
of Justice], as amended and supplemented to date.

27.3. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this article provides a right to a
(1) Subject to previous articles, the [Regulating Authority] shall grant or        judicial appeal of the refusal to grant a SSM licence similar to that provided by the
refuse to grant a small-scale mining licence.                                      articles of the DRC mining law set forth in Example 1, but in more succinct terms.
                                                                                   The Sierra Leone article does not limit the grounds for refusal of the SSM licence
(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall cause the applicant for a small-scale         as the DRC provisions do; but it offers the possibility that the Regulating Authority
mining licence to be notified in writing of his decision on the application, and   will inform the applicant of deficiencies in its application and provide an
if the application is refused, the [Regulating Authority] shall give reasons for   opportunity for the applicant to correct them.
such refusal.

(3) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the [Regulating Authority] to grant
that person a small-scale mining licence may appeal to the Court, whose
decision shall be final.

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not refuse to grant a small-scale mining
licence on any ground referred to in subsection (3) unless he has-

(a) given to the applicant, notice of his intention not to grant the small-scale
mining licence giving full particulars of the ground for refusal; or

(b) specified in the notice a date before which the applicant may make
appropriate proposals to remove the ground for refusal, and the applicant has
not, after that date made any such proposals.
                                                                 27. Small Scale Licensing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                247 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                           27.4. Area
Provisions discussing the area of small scale licensing should provide for spatial limits that respond to: what mineral is being exploited; the location,
concentration and continuity of the deposit, as defined by exploration work carried out; the relation to other licence categories; and whether or not
contiguous licence areas are permitted. The shape of the area should conform to the standard shape requirements of the mining cadastre, which may be
a polygon with a minimum and maximum number and length of sides prescribed or one composed of uniform cadastral units, as set out in the law.
This section may also provide for the creation of special designated areas set aside for SSM operations in which the issuance of other mining rights
will not be permitted.

Since small scale mining is generally defined by limits as to the minerals that can be exploited and the amount of investment or production involved,
SSM licence areas are generally restricted to a size significantly smaller than areas for large scale exploitation. Due to these limitations, SSM is not
suitable for the exploitation of widely disseminated mineralization requiring removal of very large tonnage of overburden and extensive processing of
relatively low grade ore deposits. SSM is suited to the exploitation of relatively high grade deposits that are too small for large scale exploitation and
that can be effectively mined out within a short term of a few years. On the other hand, if the targeted minerals are phosphates, salt, sand or gravel
located near the surface in a dense concentration extending over a large area that can be mined effectively by a small scale mining operation, a larger
licence area may be justified. Hence, it is desirable for the mining law to contain enough flexibility to accommodate these various scenarios.

27.4. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision limits the size of a SSM
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, a person wishing to conduct small   licence (“minerals permit?) area to half of a square kilometre (i.e., 50 hectares.) It
scale mining operations may apply for a minerals permit to conduct such         does not permit any exceptions, but it also does not limit the number of SSM
operations for any mineral other than diamonds over an area not exceeding       licenses that can be held by a single holder.
0.5 km2 per permit.
                                                                                The provision also requires the permit holder to demarcate the SSM permit area
(2) The holder of a minerals permit shall, within three months of the issue     within three (3) months of the issuance of the permit “in such manner as may be
thereof, demarcate the area covered by such permit in such manner as may be     prescribed?.
prescribed.
                                                                                The general article on REGULATIONS clarifies that the rules on the shape of areas
Article [_]                                                                     and how their boundaries are to be demarcated are to be established by the
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may make regulations for the better carrying     Regulating Authority.
into effect of this [Act][Code][Law] and, in particular and without prejudice
to the generality of the foregoing, regulations may provide for the following




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              248 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
matters or purposes—

(a) prescribing anything which in terms of this [Act][Code][Law] is to or may
be prescribed;
(b) for making of returns of minerals won and for the valuation of such
minerals, and the sampling, weighing and testing of any mineral;
(c) the shape of the areas over which mineral concessions may be granted;
(d) the manner in which areas and boundaries shall be marked, beaconed and
surveyed;
(e) the gathering of fuel wood and the cutting and use of timber for the
purposes of carrying on prospecting and mining operations;
(f) the returns to be rendered and the nature of the accounts, books and plans
to be kept by the holders of mineral concessions;
(g) the fees to be paid in respect of any matter or thing done under this
[Act][Code][Law]; and
(h) the protection of the environment.

27.4. Example 2:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), these provisions:
(1) No small-scale mining licence shall be granted to an applicant in an area
designated under section 30 for artisanal mining operations.                             1) prohibit the grant of a SSM licence in an area that has been reserved for
                                                                                            AM;
(2) No person other than the holder of an exploration licence shall be granted           2) establish that only the holder of the exploration licence can obtain a SSM
a small-scale mining licence in respect of land which constitutes the                       licence for any part of the area covered by the exploration license;
exploration licence area or part of the exploration area .                               3) authorize the Regulating Authority to designate certain areas as reserved
                                                                                            for the licensing of SSM operations;
(3) Where the [Regulating Authority] considers that it is in the public interest         4) permit a SSM licence area of up to 100 hectares (but not less than one
to encourage exploration and mining of minerals in any area by methods not                  hectare);
involving substantial expenditure or the use of specialised technology, [it] may         5) require the marking of the boundaries of the SSM licence area by an
by notice in [the Gazette], declare that area for licensing of artisanal or small-          authorized officer; and
scale mining operations and Part [_] and Part [_] shall apply.                           6) delegate the power to set by regulations the rules on the shape and size of
                                                                                            licence areas.
(4) A notice by the [Regulating Authority] under subsection (1) may prescribe
that particular minerals or all minerals in the declared area are subject to the     These terms with respect to SSM licence areas are similar to, but somewhat more




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                249 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
notice.                                                                          comprehensive than, those in Botswana’s mining law. Ironically, Sierra Leone’s
                                                                                 provisions allow for a licence area that is twice as large as that permitted under
 (5) The [Regulating Authority] may, by notice in [the Gazette] vary or revoke   Botswana’s mining law, despite Sierra Leone’s territory being only about one
any notice published under subsection (2).                                       eighth the size of Botswana.

(6) A small-scale mining licence area shall not be less than one hectare and     The Sierra Leone mining law does not specify a limit on the number of SSM
not more than one hundred hectares.                                              licenses that a single person is permitted to hold – similar to Botswana’s mining
                                                                                 law.
(7) Every small-scale mining area shall be demarcated by an authorised
officer in such manner as may be prescribed or as the authorised officer may,
in the circumstances consider appropriate.

(8) The [Regulating Authority] may make regulations for the conservation and
development of mines and minerals and for the purpose of giving effect to the
provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].

(9) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1) regulations may
provide for or with respect to-

(a) prescribing anything which in terms of this [Act][Code][Law] is to or may
be prescribed;

(b) the manner in which applications under this [Act][Code][Law] shall be
made, form of documents required and information to be supplied by
applicants;

(c) the shape and size of blocks and areas over which mineral rights may be
granted;

(d) the mining cadastre; ...etc.

                                                           27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                 27.5. Specific Obligations of a Licence Holder




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                            250 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
As a general matter, the obligations of holders of small scale mining licence s are the same as those of the holders of large scale exploitation licences,
except that certain environmental, social, labour and reporting obligations are often lighter for SSM licence holders for the reason that their operations
are smaller in size and therefore in impact, the term of their licenses is shorter than the term of large scale exploitation licenses, and their projects
involve a much smaller investment. SSM licence holders may also benefit from lower royalty rates and more favourable tax treatment in countries that
have policies of promoting local mining entrepreneurship.

The obligations of SSM licence holders may include the responsibility or duty to undertake certain actions, or restrictions from undertaking certain
actions or causing certain effects. The provisions setting forth such obligations may occur in articles specific to the license, in general provisions that
apply to all licenses, and sometimes in other miscellaneous parts of a mining law. Some of the provisions may cross reference other laws such as Land
and Environment for purposes of harmonizing multiple uses of the surface and subsurface of land, and meeting national commitments on climate
control, for example, among other issues that are multi-sectoral in nature. In any event, all of the provisions or references to provisions on the
obligations of SSM licence holders should be grouped in a single chapter of the mining law, for clarity and avoidance of misinterpretation. The
provisions on obligations may include:
        - management of the impact on the environment, and site rehabilitation,
        - provision of a surety to guarantee environmental compliance,
        - health, safety and security practices,
        - employment conditions,
        - social obligations including local hiring, training and promotion; local procurement; and contribution to sustainable local development;
        - requirement to follow prescribed land access procedures, which may include the consent and compensation of rightful owners or lawful
        occupiers of land for disturbance of their rights,
        - observing the rights of other land users and mining right holders, as well as prohibitions or restrictions on mining operations within a certain
        distance of roads, power lines, railways, buildings, cemeteries and parks or nature reserves,
        - human rights issues including prohibitions on child labour,
        - compliance with regulations on certification of origin of minerals sold,
        - reporting requirements as to production, shipments, sales, payments to the Government. etc.,
        - payment of annual fees per surface area held under the license, and
        - payment of royalties and applicable taxes.


Whereas the provisions on obligations of the holder of a small-scale mining exploitation licence may include fewer reporting requirements than those
that apply to other types of licenses, such provisions will often forbid or limit the use of explosives or heavy machinery as a condition of remaining
within the definition of a small scale mining operation.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     251 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

27.5. Example 1:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_]                                                                              Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision includes the
The holder of a small-scale mining licence shall–                                        following key obligations:
                                                                                                 - carrying out exploration and mining in a reasonable within the
(a)within the limits of its competence and resources, carry on in good faith, in the             required competence.
licensed area, exploration or mining operations;                                                 - furnishing the required information to the Director of Mines
                                                                                                 - carrying directives promptly to ensure safe and good practices
(b)furnish the [Regulating Authority] with such information relating to its                      - Appoint manager to supervise operations
exploration or mining operations as the Director may reasonably require or as may                - notifying appropriate local authorities when beginning or ceasing
be prescribed;                                                                                   operations
                                                                                                 - keeping accurate records and submitting required reports
(c)carry out promptly any directives relating to its exploration or mining                       - selling minerals in prescribed manner
operations which may be given to the holder by the [Regulating Authority] for the                - complying with community development agreements
purposes of ensuring safety or good mining practices;                                            - carrying out required rehabilitation and reclamation of land

(d) if not personally supervising the exploration or mining operations under the         In addition, a SSM licence holder should also have a scheme in place for
licence, employ a Mines Manager for the purpose of supervising its exploration or        employing and training local people.
mining operations provided that all such Mines Managers must be approved by the
Director and shall carry with them such means of identification as the [Regulating
Authority] may direct;

(e) before beginning or ceasing any exploration or mining operations notify the
appropriate local government authority or local authority and an authorised
officer, of the intention to begin or cease exploration or mining, as the case may be;

(f) substantially comply with any community development agreement required
under this [Act][Code][Law];

(g) sell the minerals obtained in the mining area as prescribed;

(h) carry out rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out areas;

(i) keep accurate records of winnings from the mining area and such records shall




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              252 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
be produced for inspection on demand by the [Regulating Authority] or a duly
authorised officer; and

(j) submit all reports as prescribed.

27.5. Example 2:                                                                        Annotation

Article [_]. Registration of small scale licensees                                      Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this provision includes many of the
(1) A person engaged in or wishing to undertake a type of small scale mining            obligations in the previous example, but goes further to address compensation
operation shall register with the [cadastral registry] of the designated area where     for the use of land, the use of explosives and the process for adding additional
the person operates or intends to operate                                               minerals to the license.

(2) A person shall not be granted a licence under article [_] unless the person is
registered under this article.

Article [_]. Operations of small scale miners
A person licensed under section [_] shall observe good mining practices, health
and safety rules and pay due regard to the protection of the environment during
mining operations

Article [_]. Compensation for use of land
Where a licence is granted in a designated area to a person other than the owner of
the land, the licensee shall pay compensation for the use of the land and destruction
of crops to the owner of the land that the [Regulating Authority] in consultation
with the [relevant government agencies] with responsibility for valuation of public
lands may prescribe

Article [_]. Use of explosives

A small-scale miner shall not without the written permission of the [Regulating
Authority] use explosives in the area of operation.

Article [_]. Amendment of mineral at right to add other minerals
(1) Where in the course of exercising a mineral right under this [Act][Code][Law],
the holder discovers an indication of a mineral not included in the mineral right,




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                253 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
the holder shall within thirty days of the discovery, notify the [Regulating
Authority] in writing of the discovery

(2) The notification given under subsection (1) shall

(a) contain particulars of the discovery, and

(b) the site and circumstances of the discovery.

(3) The holder of the mineral right may in the prescribed form, apply for the
mineral right to be amended to

(a) include an additional mineral, or

(b) exclude a mineral.

(4) Subject to this [Act][Code][Law] and unless the land which is the subject of the
mineral right, is subject to another mineral right in respect of the mineral applied
for under subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall amend the mineral right
on the terms and conditions that may be prescribed.

(5) A mineral right shall not be granted for another mineral over the same area of
land subject to an existing mineral right unless the holder of the existing right is
notified and given the first option of applying for the right.

(6) A notification given under subsection (5) shall contain

(a) particulars of the mineral applied for and

(b) the area applied for.

Article [_]. Obligations of holders of mineral rights

(1) The holder of a mineral right shall at all times appoint a manager with the
requisite qualification and experience to be in charge of that holder’s mineral
operations.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                         254 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(2) The holder of a mineral right shall notify the [Regulating Authority] in writing
of the appointment of a manager and on each change of the manager.

Section [_]. Records of and reports by mineral right holders

(1) A holder of a mineral right shall maintain, at an address in [country] notified to
the [Regulating Authority] for the purposes of this section, the documents and
records that may be prescribed and shall permit an authorized officer of the
[Regulating Authority] at a reasonable time to inspect the documents and records
and take copies of them.

(2) A holder of a mineral right shall furnish the [Regulating Authority] and other
persons prescribed, with such reports on the mineral operations of and geological
information attained by or on behalf of the holder.


                                                                  27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                               27.6. Rights of a Licence Holder
Provisions that address what possession of a small scale licence allows the licence holder to do or what the licence holder may be entitled to are
collectively treated as rights. Similar to obligations, the rights of a licence holder are usually addressed in articles specific to the licence in question,
and occasionally in general provisions applying to all licenses. These rights are generally subject to conditions specified in the mining law and
regulations or other laws and regulations, and may include:
         - the exclusive right to extract the specified minerals in the area applied for,
         - the right to obtain an extension of the licence to cover additional mineral substances subsequently discovered in commercial quantities within
         the licence area,
         - the right to access and occupy the land in the licence area for mining (if ownership of the land or consent of the landowner or lawful
         occupier/user was required as an element of the licence application, or alternatively the right to obtain such access in accordance with
         procedures for negotiation/mediation/arbitration and compensation of such owners/occupiers/users specified in the mining law),
         - the right to erect structures and a base camp necessary for the exploitation of the resource in the licensed area,
         - the right to process the extracted mineral substances in order to produce marketable mineral products,
         - the right to use other natural resources such as water and timber,
         - the right to use industrial or quarrying minerals located within the licence area as building materials for necessary facilities at the site or as




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       255 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
        inputs for processing of the targeted minerals,
        - the right to use or sell the mineral products derived from operations under the SSM license, and
        - the right to grant security interests in the license, to sublease operations under the license, and to transfer the licence to another eligible
        holder.

As noted in subsection 27.1 above, a mining law may confer the right to explore for and exploit mineral substances in the licensed area. This may
cover initial exploration to discover a deposit, in which case authorization to proceed to the exploitation phase will normally require submission and
acceptance of findings, a work plan or feasibility study, an environmental impact assessment and mitigation/rehabilitation plan and other elements.
Alternatively, the exploration rights granted may be limited to continuing exploration at the site of exploitation in order to determine and evaluate the
extent of continuation of the identified deposit within the licence area.

As a general matter, the rights of a SSM licence holder within the licensed area are similar to those of a large-scale exploitation licence holder within
its licence area, except that the SSM licence holder’s right may be limited to a certain maximum amount of production or investment. In order to
exceed that limit, the SSM licence holder must convert the SSM licence to the type of exploitation licence under which the projected higher level of
production or investment is authorized.

27.6. Example 1:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                            Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), the first section in the example
(1) A small scale mining licence to mine minerals granted under this section shall     provides for exclusive rights to carry on both exploration (called prospecting in
confer on the holder the exclusive right, subject to this [Act][Code][Law] and the     Tanzania’s mining law) and exploitation of minerals within the licensed area.
Regulations including the Regulations applicable to safety and the protection of the   The right is not limited to specific minerals. The exploration right is for initial
                                                                                       exploration to identify and evaluate a deposit. The Tanzanian mining law does
environment, to carry on exploration and mining operations in the mining area,
                                                                                       not require any prior exploration work to have been carried out under an
and for that purpose the holder, his servants and agents (being persons not
                                                                                       exploration license as a precondition for the grant of a small scale mining
disqualified under subsection (x) of section [_] from holding a small scale mining     licence (called a “primary mining licence? in Tanzania’s mining law). By
licence (which is reserved for citizens of [Country], partnerships of [Country         contrast, prior work to define the grade and extent of a mineral deposit under
citizens] and [Country citizen]-owned companies) ) may, in particular-                 an exploration license is required in order to meet the application requirements
                                                                                       for an industrial mining license or a large scale exploitation licence under the
(a) enter on the mining area and take all reasonable measures on or under the
                                                                                       Tanzanian mining law. Thus, Tanzania’s mining law makes it relatively easy
surface for the purpose of mining operations;                                          for an applicant (which must be a Tanzanian national or a wholly Tanzanian
(b) erect the necessary equipment, plant and buildings for the purpose of mining,      partnership or Tanzanian-owned company) to obtain a small scale mining
                                                                                       license.
transporting, dressing or treating the minerals recovered by him in the course of




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  256 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
mining operations;
                                                                                        Essentially, Tanzania’s mining law removes barriers to entry into small scale
(c) subject to payment of royalties in accordance with this [Act][Code][Law] and        mining for Tanzanian nationals and Tanzanian-owned companies; and it relies
the regulations dispose of any mineral recovered;                                       on regulating their activity by application of the Regulations under the mining
                                                                                        law, rather than requiring them to submit studies, plans and work programs in
(d) stack or dump any mineral or waste product in compliance with the applicable        order to obtain the small scale mining licence.
regulations;
                                                                                        Thus, in subsection (1) of the first section, all rights under the small scale
(e) carry on prospecting operations in the mining area.
                                                                                        mining licence are subject to the Regulations under the mining law, with
                                                                                        special mention of the Regulations on safety and protection of the
Article [_]
                                                                                        environment. Compliance with the regulations under the mining law is
(1) The holder of one or more primary mining
                                                                                        reiterated as a condition of two of the enumerated rights granted by the SSM
licences may-
                                                                                        licence: (c) the right to dispose of minerals recovered, and (d) the right to stack
                                                                                        or dump any mineral or waste product. By contrast, holders of large scale
(a) at any time before the licences expire;
                                                                                        exploitation licences are also required to comply with their environmental
(b) if the holder has tendered the prescribed fee, is not in default and has provided
                                                                                        management plans as a condition of the right to stack or dump minerals and
particulars which would be required in an application for a mining licence under
                                                                                        waste products. No environmental management plan is required of SSM
article [_], apply to the [Regulating Authority] to convert the SSM licence or
                                                                                        licence holders.
licences to a mining licence.
                                                                                        Under the second article in the example, the holder of the SSM licence also has
(2) An application made in accordance with subsection (1) shall be granted by the
                                                                                        the right to apply for the conversion of the SSM licence into a mining licence
[Regulating Authority] and the mining licence shall be issued within the period of
                                                                                        for industrial exploitation. This enables the SSM licence holder to graduate to
thirty days from the date of receipt of the application.
                                                                                        a licence for exploitation based on a higher maximum amount of investment, if
                                                                                        the target deposit warrants a greater investment and the licence holder is
(3) When granting the licence under this section the remaining period of the former
                                                                                        capable of mobilizing the necessary capital.
licence s shall not be taken into account.

27.6. Example 2:                                                                        Annotation

Article [_]                                                                             Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (2005), this example specifies the rights
(1) A "PRE" licence is a prospecting and small-scale mining licence, and, within        of an SSM licence holder in a single article. The SSM licence in Madagascar
the area under the licence and for the period during which the licence is valid, it     is called the Exploration and Exploitation Permit (“PRE?). Similar to the SSM
confers on the holder an exclusive right to carry out prospecting work and mine the     licence in Tanzania, the PRE under Madagascar’s law grants an exclusive right
material or materials for which the licence was issued, in accordance with the          to conduct prospecting, exploration and exploitation of minerals within the
commitments in the Plan annexed to the application, a template of which shall be        licence area. This contrasts with the general exploration licence and
                                                                                        exploitation licence, which are separate licences for the distinct exploration




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   257 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
set out in the implementing decree for the present [Code][Act][Law].                 and exploitation phases of mineral development, respectively.

(2) However, before prospecting and operating work may commence, the                 The rights conferred by the PRE licence under Madagascar’s mining law
commitments in the environmental commitment plan, which is to be submitted to the    include the rights to construct necessary infrastructure and to utilize wood and
department in charge of the mining environment for the [Regulatory Authority],       water resources found within the licence area. These rights are subject to (a)
must be approved by the relevant authorities in accordance with the regulations      obtaining the consent of the landowner, if there is one, and (b) compliance
relating to environmental protection.                                                with applicable laws and regulations.

(3) Nevertheless, an environmental impact assessment, the terms for which shall be   All of the rights under the PRE license in this example are subject to several
specified in the regulations, may be required in the event that there are numerous   conditions that do not apply in the previous example. They are as follows:
applications for "PRE" licences in one area.
                                                                                     1) The rights are granted with respect to specific minerals.
(4) Subject to prior consent from the landowner, should the need arise, the right    2) The rights granted under the PRE in this example are subject to the
conferred by an "PRE" licence includes the right to build the necessary                 commitments made in the plan attached to the licence holder’s application.
infrastructure and to use the wood and water located in the area in accordance       3) The commencement of exploration and exploitation activities under the
with the laws and regulations in force.                                                 PRE licence in the example is subject to obtaining the approval by the
                                                                                        competent environmental regulatory authority of an environmental
(5) Should a small-scale operator cease to use only artisanal techniques when           commitment plan that must be submitted to the sectoral environmental
carrying out prospecting and mining work, this shall result in them being required      regulatory service.
to apply to have their "PRE" licence converted to a standard licence.                4) An Environmental Impact Study may be required in the event of
                                                                                        concentration of PRE licences in a particular area.
                                                                                     5) If the PRE licence holder utilizes techniques that are not within the
                                                                                        definition of “artisanal techniques?, he must request the transformation of
                                                                                        his PRE licence into a standard licence.

                                                                                     In conclusion, this example provides for a more carefully circumscribed set of
                                                                                     SSM rights in general, and in particular with respect to protection of the
                                                                                     environment. This more cautious approach to SSM may be more appropriate
                                                                                     in jurisdictions where nature and wildlife conservation and related tourism are
                                                                                     important concerns.


                                                                27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                                 27.7. Term of License



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                             258 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                               PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

The term of the licence is the period of time during which it is valid. The mining law or regulation should establish the length of time or the maximum
length of time for which a licence is granted. The licence itself should specify the start date and the end date of its period of validity (subject to
possible early termination).

The mining law may specify the exact term of a SSM licence or it may specify the maximum term of a SSM licence and authorize the Regulating
Authority to set the term of each SSM licence individually within that limit, based on the technical information about the deposit and the technical
exploitation plan submitted by the applicant.

The terms of SSM licenses are generally much shorter than the terms of large scale exploitation licenses because by definition SSM is limited to the
exploitation of small scale deposits involving limited amounts of investment and/or production. Some mining laws that provide for SSM licenses also
contemplate a process for a SSM licence to be transformed into an industrial mining licence with a longer term if justified by the nature of the deposit
and the technical operations during the course of operations under the SSM license.
There is considerable variety in the terms of SSM licenses under mining laws. They may be for a term as short as three years, with unlimited
renewals, or for as long as ten years with no renewals.

Factors to be considered in setting the term of SSM licenses include:
    whether the SSM licence covers the exploration and exploitation phases or only the exploitation phase (if the former, a longer term is probably
       justified);
    whether the SSM licence is preceded by work of the applicant under an exploration licence (in which case, a shorter term may be appropriate);
    whether to set a fixed term or a maximum term length and allow the Regulating Authority to set the exact term of the licence subject to that
       maximum (depending on the enforcement capability of the Regulating Authority to terminate SSM licenses under which work has been
       abandoned);
    whether to set the term length in the law or in the regulations (security of title in the law versus flexibility to adjust to subsector conditions by
       regulation);
    the extent of the information about the deposit and the work program required to be submitted with an application for the SSM licence (more
       information available would suggest greater confidence in a relatively short term); and
    the definition of SSM in the mining law and the ability to transform the SSM licence into an industrial mining licence with a longer term.

27.7. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision sets a maximum




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    259 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), a minerals permit shall be            term length of five years, but authorizes the Regulating Authority to set a
valid for such period, not exceeding five years, as the [Regulating Authority] may     shorter term for a particular license. The provision also allows for unlimited
determine and may, on application made to the [Regulating Authority], be renewed       renewals, each similarly limited to no more than (but possibly less than) five
for further periods not exceeding five years at a time.                                years.

(2) Without prejudice to Article [_] (on the Regulating Authority’s power to           Under Botswana’s mining law, it is not necessary to obtain an exploration
suspend or cancel a mineral concession), the [Regulating Authority] may terminate      (prospecting) licence as a prerequisite to obtaining a SSM license; however,
a minerals permit issued to exploit industrial minerals if he is satisfied that the    Botswana’s mining law does require the submission of substantial information
holder thereof has ceased to be a citizen of Botswana or has entered into an           regarding the deposit, the planned work program, and environmental
arrangement with a person who is not a citizen of Botswana, as defined in Article      protection measures with the application for the SSM license. Therefore, the
[_], which arrangement has the effect of transferring to that person any interest in   holder of a SSM licence is expected to commence operations promptly
such permit.                                                                           following the grant of the license.

                                                                                       It is furthermore to be expected that most SSM operations may last no more
                                                                                       than five years, because the definition of SSM is as follows:

                                                                                                "small scale mining" means the intentional winning of minerals other
                                                                                                than diamonds in operations involving the mining and processing of
                                                                                                less than 50 000 tonnes of raw ore per annum and in which the overall
                                                                                                investment in fixed assets does not exceed P1 million [about USD
                                                                                                93,000 on July 18, 2016].

                                                                                       On the other hand, the term of a SSM licence in Botswana is subject to
                                                                                       unlimited renewals, as long as the operation does not exceed the definition of
                                                                                       SSM, the holder is in compliance with its licence obligations, and a complete
                                                                                       renewal application is timely filed.

                                                                                       Overall, this is a balanced approach that seeks to set an appropriate term length
                                                                                       for the type of operation involved, in light of the pre-licence preparatory work
                                                                                       required. It provides flexibility while guarding against the risk of SSM licence
                                                                                       areas being tied up for periods that exceed the time of their productivity.

27.7. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_] Duration of small-scale mining licence                                     Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), these provisions provide flexibility




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                260 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
A small-scale mining licence shall be granted for a period not exceeding ten years.   to the Regulating Authority to set the term of each individual SSM license, up
                                                                                      to a maximum of ten years. The provisions are similar to Botswana’s in
Article [_] Duration of small-scale gemstone mining licence                           providing Regulating flexibility, but with a longer maximum term.
A small-scale gemstone licence shall be granted for a period not exceeding ten
years.                                                                                Unlike Botswana’s mining law, Zambia requires that a SSM licence applicant
                                                                                      be the holder of a SSM exploration licence (prospecting permit). However,
                                                                                      that is not required as a prerequisite for a small-scale gemstone license.

                                                                                      Whereas SSM is defined in Botswana’s mining law by reference to limits on
                                                                                      annual production and total investment, there are no such limits on small scale
                                                                                      mining in Zambia. Rather, the key distinctions in Zambia are that (a) SSM
                                                                                      licenses are reserved exclusively for Zambian citizens and Zambian citizen-
                                                                                      owned companies, and (b) a SSM licence is for a smaller area and a shorter
                                                                                      term than a large scale exploitation license. The potentially longer SSM
                                                                                      licence term provides greater security of title to a Zambian mining
                                                                                      entrepreneur who may invest substantially more than the holder of a SSM
                                                                                      licence in Botswana.

                                                                                      In light of the potentially longer term of the SSM licence under Zambia’s
                                                                                      mining law, it includes a provision that authorizes the Regulating Authority to
                                                                                      cancel the licence if production for three years or more is less than 50% of the
                                                                                      estimated recovery rate for the mine.


                                                                 27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                                 27.8. Renewal of License
Renewal of licence provisions provide for the minimum and maximum duration of the licence renewal period and the number of renewals permitted.
The limitations should be guided by consideration that there will be different sizes and types of mineral deposits available, and the capacity to exploit
it in the time allowed.

Conditions are set under which renewal will be permitted and granted; and these may include:
        - Having met all the requirements of the licence during the preceding term such as fees, management of the environment, health, safety and




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              261 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
         mine development;
         - Submission of an updated environmental impact assessment and mitigation and rehabilitation plan;
         - Submission of an updated work program, if necessary;
         - There being enough resource to be exploited in the renewal period.
Renewal provisions typically require that an application for renewal be filed at least three months or more before the expiration of the initial term of
the licence (or the prior term, where multiple renewals are allowed), so that the decision on renewal can be issued before the licence expires. The best
renewal provisions provide for automatic extension of the licence until the decision on renewal is issued. Consideration should be given to even
earlier deadlines for the filing of renewal applications, so that the licence holder has sufficient time to close operations, remove equipment, perform
necessary site rehabilitation and vacate the site before the expiration of the licence if the renewal is denied.

27.8. Example 1:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_]                                                                              Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision enables the
Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), a minerals permit shall be valid for such   Regulating Authority to grant multiple renewals of a SSM licence for renewal
period, not exceeding five years, as the [Regulating Authority] may determine and        terms of up to five years. This provides flexibility in light of the fairly short
may, on application made to the [Regulating Authority], be renewed for further           term (5 years) of the SSM license. However, in light of the definition of SSM
periods not exceeding five years at a time.                                              in Botswana’s mining law, which includes limits on annual production and
                                                                                         investment, it seems unlikely that a SSM licence holder will be able to obtain
(2) An application for renewal of the minerals permit shall be submitted no later        multiple renewals while retaining SSM status.
than such period of time prior to the expiration date of the minerals permit as the
[Regulating Authority] shall establish by regulation.                                    Nevertheless, the potential availability of unlimited renewals enables very
                                                                                         small scale subsistence miners to maintain their rights for as long as they can
(3) The application for renewal shall provide the information and accompanying           continue to profitably produce marketable mineral products from their licensed
documents required by Form [_] of the First Schedule, , which requires:                  areas while remaining within the definition of SSM. This reflects, in part, a
                                                                                         poverty reduction strategy.
a) Identification of the applicant and its                                               The renewal application is the same as the initial licence application, thus
   partners/directors/members/shareholders,                                              assuring that a renewal is justified by the nature of the deposit and the planned
b) Description of the area applied for (including a map and coordinates),                work program, and adjusting the related environmental protection measures
c) Particulars of the minerals for which the permit is sought,                           accordingly.
d) The period for which the permit is sought, and
e) The proposed programs of work, including –                                            The deadline for submitting a renewal application, if any, is set in the
   (i)       Details of the mineral deposit,                                             regulations. Unfortunately, the mining law does not contain a provision that
   (ii)      estimated date by which applicant intends to work for profit,               automatically extends the validity of the SSM licence until the final
   (iii)     estimated capacity of production and scale of operations,                   administrative decision on a renewal application is issued.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  262 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
    (iv)     nature of product,
    (v)      envisaged marketing arrangements for sale of mineral product(s),
    (vi)     Brief environmental impact assessment study and
    (vii)    Brief environmental reclamation program.

27.8. Example 2:                                                                          Annotation

Article [_]. Renewal of small-scale mining licence                                        Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), these provisions provide for a single
(1) A holder of a small-scale mining licence may apply to the [Regulating                 renewal of a SSM or small-scale gemstone mining licence for a renewal term
Authority] at least sixty days before the expiry of the small- scale mining licence,      of up to ten years. As in the preceding example, the Regulating Authority is
for the renewal of the licence in the prescribed manner and form upon payment of          given the discretion to set the renewal term shorter than the maximum period
the prescribed fee.                                                                       established in the law. However, under Zambia’s mining law only a single
                                                                                          renewal is contemplated, rather than multiple renewals. As in the preceding
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall, where an application     example, the renewal term is the same as the initial term of the license, but the
for the renewal of a small-scale mining licence complies with the requirements of         term under Zambia’s law is twice as long as the term in Botswana.
this [Act][Code][Law], renew the small-scale mining licence for a period not
exceeding ten years, on such terms and conditions as the [Regulating Authority]           The longer initial and renewal terms for both SSM and small scale gemstone
may determine.                                                                            mining (SSGM) reflect the Zambian policy orientation of creating special
                                                                                          subsectors for SSM and SSGM reserved for Zambian citizens, in order to
(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall reject an application for the renewal of a           promote local mining entrepreneurship. (SSM and SSGM are not defined by
small-scale mining licence where-                                                         production or investment limitations under Zambia’s mining law.)

(a) the development of the mining area has not proceeded with reasonable                  In contrast to Botswana’s law, the Zambian mining law limits the groun ds on
diligence;                                                                                which the Regulating Authority can reject a renewal application, and further
                                                                                          requires the Regulating Authority to provide the licence holder with notice and
(b) minerals in the workable quantities do not remain to be produced;                     an opportunity to remedy three of the four potential grounds for non-renewal.
                                                                                          This provides some security of tenure to small scale miners. There is,
(c) the programme of the intended mining operations will not ensure the proper            however, a significant gap in this protection by omitting a requirement of
conservation and use in the national interest of the mineral resources of the mining      notice and opportunity to remedy a “breach of any condition of the licence or
area; or                                                                                  any provision of? the mining law. Nonrenewal for a temporary breach of a
                                                                                          minor condition under the act, with no opportunity to cure the breach, is a
(d) the applicant is in breach of any condition of the licence or any provision of this   potentially harsh penalty. SSM licence holders in Zambia are vulnerable to
[Act][Code][Law].                                                                         nonrenewal on such grounds because the Regulating Authority has the
                                                                                          discretion to deny renewal on any such breach.
(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not reject an application on any ground




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   263 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
referred to in—                                                                           Zambia maintains parallel licensing regimes for SSM and small-scale
                                                                                          gemstone mining. The former requires the applicant for a SSM licence to
(a) paragraph (a) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has given the      possess an exploration licence (prospecting permit) for the area as a
applicant the details of the default and the applicant has failed to remedy the           prerequisite to obtaining a SSM license. That is not required for a small-scale
default within three months of the notification;                                          gemstone mining license. Small scale gemstone mining is often characterized
                                                                                          by “rushes? of small scale miners to sites where someone else has made an
(b) paragraph (b) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has given the      initial discovery, so the lack of a prospecting permit requirement matches that
applicant reasonable opportunity to make written representations thereon to the           reality with the objective of formalizing small scale gemstone mining activity
[Regulating Authority] or (c) paragraph (c) of subsection (3), unless the                 as much as possible.
[Regulating Authority] has notified the applicant and the applicant has failed to
propose amendments to the operations within three months of the notification.             The provisions of Zambia’s mining law on the term and renewals of SSM
                                                                                          licenses and small scale gemstone licenses are identical, however. In both
(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on the renewal of a small-scale mining              cases the Regulating Authority is directed to attach the approved work
licence, attach to the licence the approved program of mining operations to be            program to the renewed license, such that it becomes a condition of the license.
carried out in the period of renewal.

Article [_]. Renewal of small-scale gemstone licence
(1) A holder of a small-scale gemstone licence may apply to the [Regulating
Authority] at least sixty days before the expiry of the licence, for the renewal of the
licence in the prescribed manner and form upon payment of the prescribed fee.

(2) Subject to subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall, where an application
for the renewal of a small-scale gemstone licence complies with the requirements of
this [Act][Code][Law], renew the small-scale gemstone licence for a period not
exceeding ten years, on such terms and conditions as the [Regulating Authority]
may determine.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall reject an application for renewal of a small-
scale gemstone licence where—

(a) the development of the mining area has not proceeded with reasonable
diligence;

(b) minerals in workable quantities do not remain to be produced;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  264 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(c) the programme of the intended mining operations will not ensure the proper
conservation and use in the national interest of the mineral resources of the mining
area; or

(d) the applicant is in breach of any condition of the licence or any provision of this
[Act][Code][Law].

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not reject an application on any ground
referred to in—

a) paragraph (a) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has given the
applicant the details of the default and the applicant has failed to remedy the
default within three months of the notification;

(b) paragraph (b) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has given the
applicant reasonable opportunity to make written representations thereon to the
[Regulating Authority] or

(c) paragraph (c) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has notified
the applicant and the applicant has failed to propose amendments to the operations
within three months of the notification.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on the renewal of a small-scale gemstone
licence, attach to the licence the program of mining operations to be carried out in
the period of renewal.


                                                                  27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                                 27.9. Suspension of License
This section provides for when a licence may be suspended and the conditions under which the suspension may be lifted. Suspension remedies may be
triggered when the conditions under which the licence was issued have changed or are no longer being observed. This may include such circumstances
as revelation of fraudulently acquired license ownership as required by the eligibility provisions, failure to rectify operational contraventions of
provisions in the law such as false record keeping, use of child labour, breach of health and safety or environmental obligations.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                               265 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

The conditions and procedure under which suspension may be lifted should be specified. The procedure to appeal the suspension should also be
provided for.

27.9. Example 1:                                                                      Annotation

Article [_]                                                                           Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), these provisions on suspension
(1) The [Regulating Authority], or any person authorised by the [Regulating           are extensive. They contemplate both:
Authority], may, in writing, order reconnaissance, exploration or mining
operations to be temporarily suspended on an emergency basis, regardless of                   Temporary suspensions pending the remediation of dangerous or
whether such operations are authorized by a mineral right, until such                          potentially harmful conditions or compliance failures; and
arrangements are made that are in [Regulating Authority]’s opinion necessary to               Suspensions during notice of violations which, if not remedied during
prevent danger to life, property or the environment or to comply with this                     the suspension period, will culminate in the cancellation of the
[Act][Code][Law].                                                                              license.

(2) The [Regulating Authority] may cancel or vary the terms of any temporary          The provisions include both general provisions applicable to multiple types of
suspension order.                                                                     mineral rights and specific provisions applicable to SSM licenses.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall have the power to confirm a temporary            Temporary suspensions are issued when necessary to prevent danger to life,
suspension order made by the [Regulating Authority] and may not delegate this         property or the environment, or to comply with the mining law. Such
power.                                                                                suspensions lapse after 21 days unless confirmed by the authority supervising
                                                                                      the Regulating Authority.
(4) A temporary suspension order shall lapse after twenty-one days of its issuance,
unless it is confirmed, in writing, by the [Regulating Authority].                    Suspensions that may lead to cancellation are pronounced by the Regulating
                                                                                      Authority for the various reasons specified. Prior to pronouncing the
Article [_]                                                                           suspension, the Regulating Authority must give notice of the grounds for the
(1) The [Regulating Authority] after consultation with the [Advisory Board] may       suspension to the licence holder and afford the holder the possibility to correct
suspend or cancel a mineral right if the holder-                                      the situation within 30 days. If the grounds for suspension are either (i) gross
                                                                                      violation of health and safety requirements or causing environmental harm, (ii)
(a) fails to make any of the payments required by or under this [Act][Code][Law]      child labour, or (iii) ineligibility of the licence holder, and in each case if the
on the date due;                                                                      violation is not cured within the thirty-day notice period, then the Regulating
                                                                                      Authority may either suspend or cancel the mineral right. In the case of other
(b) fails to meet any prescribed minimum annual programme of work or work             violations that are not remedied, the authority may suspend the license.
expenditure requirement;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 266 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                                         The specific provisions that apply to SSM authorize an authorized officer to
(c) grossly violates health and safety regulations or causes environmental harm;         order the suspension of SSM operations after giving notice to the licence
                                                                                         holder if the officer perceives “such mining operation to be so dangerous or
(d) employs or makes use of child labourers;                                             defective as in his opinion to be likely to cause bodily injury to any person?
                                                                                         and immediate suspension is necessary.           This provision contemplates
(e) fails to submit reports required by this [Act][Code][Law];                           significant hand-on policing of the mining SSM subsector in light of the high
                                                                                         risk of dangerous operations. The provision includes an appeal process for the
(f) contravenes any of the provisions of this [Act][Code][law] or the conditions of      licence holder, subject to ceasing operations pending the appeal.
the mineral right or the provisions of any other enactment relating to mines and
minerals;                                                                                An additional general provision authorizes suspension or cancellation of a
                                                                                         SSM licence if the Regulating Authority determines that the licence holder’s
(g) dies and his heir or successor in title is not qualified under this                  required Environmental Management Program is not succeeding. Yet another
[Act][Code][Law] to hold the mineral right, unless an application is received from       general provisions establishes that a SSM licence can be suspended or
the heir or successor within ninety days of the death to transfer the right to a third   cancelled for violation of the prohibition on child labour or failure to comply
party who is so qualified and accepts all duties under the right;                        with requirements to train and employ local labour.

(h) becomes an un-discharged bankrupt or becomes of unsound mind;                        In sum, this is a good example of the use of temporary suspension to require
                                                                                         remedy of dangerous conditions and also the use of suspension with notice and
(i) makes any statement to the [Regulating Authority] in connection with his             an opportunity to cure violations as an intermediate sanction prior to
mineral right which he knows or ought to have known to be false;                         cancellation of a SSM license, the latter being only the last resort when a cause
                                                                                         of suspension has not been remedied.
(j) fails to substantially comply with the terms of a community development
agreement when required by this [Act][Code][Law] to do so;

(k) for any reason becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under article [_]
(on restrictions on grants of mineral rights).

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall, before suspending or cancelling any mineral
right give notice to the holder in such a manner as shall be prescribed and shall, in
such a notice require the holder to remedy in not less than thirty calendar days any
breach of the conditions of the mineral right.

(3) If the holder of a mineral right fails to remedy any failure or contravention
specified in paragraphs (c), (d) and (k) of subsection (1), the [Regulating
Authority] may, by notice to the holder thereof, suspend or cancel the mineral right




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  267 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
forthwith.

(4) On cancellation of a mineral right under this section the rights of the holder
shall cease but without prejudice to any liabilities or obligation incurred in relation
thereto prior to the date of cancellation.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall not later than seven calendar days after
cancellation of a mineral right under this section, cause the cancellation to be
recorded in the mining cadastre.

Article [_]
(1) Where an authorised officer considers any mining operation under a small-
scale mining licence or anything, matter or practice in or connected with any such
mining operation to be so dangerous or defective as in his opinion to be likely to
cause bodily injury to any person, he may give notice in writing of it to the holder
of the licence.

(2) A notice issued pursuant to subsection (1) may require the danger or defect to
be remedied or removed, either immediately or within such time as may be
specified, and if the authorised officer considers it necessary, order the mining
operations to be suspended until the danger is removed or the defect remedied to
his satisfaction.

(3) The holder of a licence to whom notice has been given under subsection (1),
shall comply with the notice.

(4) If the holder of a licence intends to object to any requirement or order given by
the authorised officer, he shall forthwith cease the mining operations or that part of
the operations affected by the notice and appeal to the [Regulating Authority]
against the order.

(5) On an appeal made to the [Regulating Authority] pursuant to subsection (4),
the [Regulating Authority] shall inquire into the matter and his decision thereon
shall be final.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                         268 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
Article [_]
(1) Any mining licence -holder who is required to prepare an environmental
management programme shall in each calendar year after the first year in which
commercial production first occurs submit in triplicate to the [Regulating
Authority] an “Environmental Management Programme Report? covering each of
the items listed in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of article [_] indicating their
current status.

(2) An Environmental Management Programme Report shall be sufficiently
detailed so that the [Regulating Authority] can determine whether the
environmental management programme is succeeding, and if the [Regulating
Authority] determines that the plan is not succeeding, the [Regulating Authority]
may suspend the licence until such time as measures are taken to insure its success.

Article [_]
(1) A holder of a mineral right shall not employ or in any way use child labour.

(2) A holder of a small-scale mining licence or large-scale mining licence shall
carry out a scheme of training and employment of local employees in each phase
and level of operations taking into account the requirements of safety and the need
to maintain acceptable standards of efficiency in the conduct of the operations.

(3) The training programme shall provide appropriate instruction and training to
ensure the advancement of [Country citizen] employees in the skilled technical,
supervisory, administrative and managerial categories.

(3) Failure by a holder of a mineral right to comply with the provisions of
subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall be regarded as a material breach and if such person
is the holder of a small-scale mining licence or large-scale mining licence, the
licence may be suspended or cancelled.

27.9. Example 2:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_]                                                                              Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), these provisions apply suspension
(1) Subject to this section, the [Regulating Authority] shall cancel a mining right or   only as an intermediate penalty that is subject to prior notice to the licence




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                269 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
non-mining right where the holder of the mining right or non- mining right—              holder and an opportunity to cure the deficiency or violation within sixty days.
                                                                                         The law authorizes suspension of mineral licenses by the Regulating
(a) contravenes a condition of the mining right or non-mining right;                     Authority, but only within strict limitations.

(b) fails to comply with any requirement of this [Act][Code][Law] relating to the        The Zambian provisions require prior consultation with the Mining Advisory
mining right or non-mining right;                                                        Board before the Regulating Authority or the Regulating Authority orders a
                                                                                         suspension, and further requires the authority to furnish its reasons in writing
(c) fails to comply with a direction lawfully given under this [Act][Code][law];         to the Advisory Board if the authority decides, after consultation with the
                                                                                         Board, to act contrary to the Board’s recommendation. Moreover, the
(d) fails to comply with a condition on which any certificate of abandonment is          Zambian mining law provides for a right of appeal of a licence holder
issued or on which any exemption or consent is given under this                          aggrieved by an order of suspension. The holder can take an administrative
[Act][Code][Law];                                                                        appeal of a decision by the Regulating Authority to the Regulating Authority
                                                                                         and, if not satisfied, can take a judicial appeal of the decision of the latter to the
(e) is convicted on account of safety, health or environmental matters;                  High Court.

(f) in the case of a large-scale mining licence or large-scale gemstone licence, the     These provisions appear to be carefully designed with a view to protecting the
holder has failed to carry on mining operations in accordance with the proposed          holders of mineral rights against arbitrary and discretionary decisions of the
plan of mining operations and the gross proceeds of sale of minerals from an area        Regulating Authority.
subject to such licence in each of any three successive years is less than half of the
deemed turnover application to that licence in each of those years; and;                 All of the provisions on suspension of mineral rights in the Zambian mining
                                                                                         law are GENERAL PROVISIONS that apply to all mineral rights. There are
(g) is convicted on giving of false information on recovery of ores and mineral          none that are specific to SSM.
products, production costs or sales.

(2) The [Regulating Authority] may, before cancelling a mining right or non-
mining right, suspend the mining right or non-mining right on such terms and
conditions as the [Regulating Authority] may determine.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall not suspend or cancel a mining right or non-
mining right on grounds referred to in any of paragraphs (a) to (c) of subsection
(1) unless—

(a) the [Regulating Authority], as the case may be; has first served on the holder a
default notice specifying the grounds on which the mining right or non-mining right
may be suspended or cancelled; and




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                      270 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

(b) the holder has failed within a period of sixty days from the date on which the
default notice was served, or such longer period as the [Regulating Authority] may
allow, to remedy the default specified, or where such default is not capable of being
remedied, has failed to pay such compensation therefor as the [Regulating
Authority] may determine.

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not suspend or cancel a mining right or non-
mining right on the ground referred to in paragraph (d) of subsection (1) if, within
a period of sixty days from the date on which the default upon which the default
notice was served, or such longer period as the [Regulating Authority] may allow
the holder, in addition to paying the amount overdue, pays interest on that amount
at the prescribed rate.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] may, by notice in writing to a holder of a mining
right or non-mining right, cancel the mining right or non-mining right on the
occurrence of an event which, as provided by section seven renders the holder
ineligible to hold a mining right or non-mining right.

(6) On the cancellation of a mining right or non-mining right under this section, the
rights of the holder thereunder cease, but the cancellation does not affect any
liability incurred before cancellation, and any legal proceedings that might have
been commenced or continued against the holder may be commenced or continued
against that holder.

Article [_]

(1) The [Regulating Authority and Regulating Authority] shall, prior to exercising
any power conferred upon them under this [Act][Code][Law] —

(a) to terminate, suspend or cancel a licence or permit;
(b) refer the matter to the Mining Advisory Committee for its advice.

(2) The Mining Advisory Committee, shall in considering a matter submitted to it
under subsection (3), consult any person, party or other stakeholder in the area to




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                       271 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
which the mining right or non-mining right relates who may be affected by the
grant, termination, suspension, cancellation or renewal of the mining or non-
mining right.

(3) Where the Mining Advisory Committee advises the [Regulating Authority]
pursuant to subsection (3) and the [Regulating Authority] proposes to dispose of
that matter other than in accordance with the advice of the Committee, [Regulating
Authority] shall before disposing of the application, furnish the Committee with a
statement in writing of the [Regulating Authority’s] reasons for doing so.

Article [_]
(1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the [Regulating Authority] —

(a) to cancel or suspend any licence or permit held by the person;
(b) may appeal to the [Regulating Authority], who shall determine the appeal,
consistent with the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] and the circumstances of
the case.

(2) A determination of the [Regulating Authority] under this section may include
such directions to the [Regulating Authority] as the [Regulating Authority]
considers appropriate for the disposal of the matter, and the [Regulating Authority]
shall give effect to the directions.

Article [_]
(1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the [Regulating Authority] may appeal
to [Judicial Reviewer], which shall determine the appeal, having regard to the
provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] and the circumstances of the case.

(2) A determination of [Judicial Reviewer] under this section may include such
directions to the [Regulating Authority] as the Court considers appropriate for the
disposal of the matter, and the [Regulating Authority] shall give effect to the
directions.

                                                                 27. Small Scale Licencing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                            272 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                             27.10. Termination of License
The validity of a small scale mining licence typically terminates in the same way that a large scale exploitation terminates, i.e. in one of the following
ways:
             Upon its expiration date, unless and to the extent it is renewed or automatically extended by law; or
             Upon nullification (e.g., if issued to an ineligible holder, or for mineral substances for which such licenses are not authorized, or over
                 an area that is not available for a SSM licence under the law, or if obtained by fraud); or
             Upon revocation due to abandonment or breach of conditions that constitute grounds for revocation of the license; or
             Upon relinquishment or surrender of the licence by the holder prior to its expiration date.

In addition, the mining law may provide that a SSM licence must be transformed into an industrial or large scale exploitation licence if the mining
operations exceed the parameters of SSM as defined in the law; and the law may authorize the Regulating Authority to monitor the SSM activity and
terminate non-performing licenses in order to avoid excessive areas being tied up by non-productive SSM licence holders.

It is important for termination provisions to specify the obligations of the licence holder in connection with termination of the license. In addition,
many mining laws provide the Government with a right to either acquire equipment and installations at the mine site upon termination or require their
removal by the licence holder. The holder’s environmental rehabilitation obligation should apply regardless of the type of t ermination. It is best
practice to require the licence holder to provide a bank guarantee and/or environmental escrow account to which the Government has access in order to
pay for necessary environmental restoration if the licence holder abandons the mine without performing the necessary clean-up in the case of
termination by revocation.

27.10. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                           Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), these provisions include a
 “Termination? means the lapse of a mineral right by expiry of time, surrender or     definition of “termination? of a mineral right as including its expiration,
cancellation; and where the surrender or cancellation is in respect of part only of   cancelation or surrender, which may be total or partial.
the area covered by the mineral right, then the mineral right shall be deemed to
have been surrendered or cancelled in respect of that surrendered or cancelled        Under Sierra Leone’s mining law, SSM licenses are subject to general
area;                                                                                 provisions that apply to termination of all mineral rights and specific
                                                                                      provisions that apply to termination of SSM licenses.
Article [_] For All Mineral Rights
(1) Where the holder of a mineral right intends to cease operations either during     There are two general provisions on termination. The first governs (a) the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                           273 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
the period of or on termination of his mineral right, he shall, not less than ninety    required reporting and disposition of assets at the mining site, the reporting of
calendar days or such other period as the [Regulating Authority] may allow before       site conditions, and the Regulating Authority’s prerogatives in response to
such cessation or termination, furnish to the [Regulating Authority], a full register   such reports; (b) the restoration of the rights of the property owner to the land,
of assets showing those assets which he intends to remove and those which he            subject to the Government’s option to retain the land upon the payment of
intends to leave in the area covered by the mineral right, and shall further notify     compensation to the landowner; and (c) the maintenance intact of any fresh
the [Regulating Authority] of any potentially hazardous substances, erections or        water dam on the site.
excavations in that area.
                                                                                        The second general provision requires the submission to the Regulating
(2) On receipt of a notice in terms of subsection (1), the [Regulating Authority]       Authority of all records, data, plans and maps required to be maintained under
may, if he deems it necessary-                                                          the mining law and a final report summarizing all findings and work carried
                                                                                        out under the mineral license.
(a) certify that specified items of fixed machinery are necessary for the care and
maintenance of the area covered by the mineral right and such items and                 The specific provisions require the SSM licence holder to notify “the
machinery shall not be removed;                                                         appropriate local government authority or local authority and an authorised
                                                                                        officer? in advance of any planned cessation of exploration or mining
(b) require that specified buildings and other items of fixed machinery shall be        operations under the license. They also require the licence holder to carry out
removed;                                                                                rehabilitation and reclamation of the mined out areas.

(c) require that potentially hazardous substances, erections and excavations be         These provisions apply in the case of any type of termination.
removed or made safe in such manner as he may direct.

(3) If removal of specified assets which the holder has indicated that he wishes to
remove is prohibited under paragraph (a) of subsection (2), the [Regulating
Authority] shall pay reasonable compensation to the holder for such assets and any
person who acquires a mineral right over the area concerned shall reimburse the
sum equal to the compensation so paid.

(4) Upon cessation of operations by the holder of a mineral right, the area covered
by the mineral right shall revert to the owner thereof provided that if the
[Regulating Authority] determines that the area should be retained, it shall be so
retained by the [Regulating Authority] subject to payment of fair compensation to
the owner for such retention.

(5) Any fresh water dam and the waters impounded thereby shall be left intact on
cessation of operations or termination of a mineral right.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  274 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

Article [_]
(1) Upon termination of any mineral right, the holder thereof shall deliver to the
[Regulating Authority]-

(a) all records which the holder is obliged under this [Act][Code][Law]to maintain
including full and detailed reports as prescribed containing all information, results,
interpretation, data and other related information pertaining to the exploration and
mining of minerals under the mineral right;

(b) all plans or maps of the area subject to the mineral right prepared by the holder
or at his instructions; and

(c) except for the holder of an artisanal mining licence, a final report which shall
be a summary of previous annual reports plus a detailed report on containing all
information, results, interpretation and data relating to all activities carried out in
the final period of the licence since the previous annual report.

(2) Where the former holder of a mineral right fails to deliver any document
required to be delivered under subsection (1), the [Regulating Authority] shall call
upon such former holder to comply with subsection (1).

Article [_] For SSM licenses

The holder of a small-scale mining licence shall–

(a) before beginning or ceasing any exploration or mining operations notify the
appropriate local government authority or local authority and an authorised
officer, of the intention to begin or cease exploration or mining, as the case may be;

(b) carry out rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out areas.

27.10. Example 2:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_]. Termination of Mining Rights                                                 Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), these provisions, like those in the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                275 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
1) Mining rights shall terminate if:                                                       preceding example, specify what constitutes termination of a mining right,
                                                                                           including a SSM license, and include both general provisions of all mineral
a) a licensee relinquishes the whole area or surrenders the licence;                       right holders and specific provisions of holders of SSM licenses.
b) a licence is revoked by the Licensing Authority pursuant to the provisions of this
Proclamation, regulations and directives;                                                  Similar to Sierra Leone’s mining law, the Ethiopian mining law includes
c) a licence expires without being renewed; or                                             relinquishment, revocation and expiration without renewal as events of
d) without prejudice to the rights of heirs, a licensee dies, or where the licensee is a   termination. It also provides for termination in the event of the death of the
juridical person, it is liquidated or declared bankrupt.                                   individual licence holder or bankruptcy or liquidation of an entity licence
                                                                                           holder.
2) Upon termination of mining rights of the holder of a small scale or large scale
mining license, the government may, unless an agreement specifies otherwise,               The general provisions on expiration of all mineral licenses establish the
acquire all of the immovable and movable property used in the mining operations            Government’s right to acquire the movable and immovable property used in
at a price equal to the then unamortized value of such assets, as shown in the             the mining operations, at its book value, or alternatively to decline to do so and
financial book of accounts of the licensee. If the government does not exercise such       instead require the licence holder to remove them. The provisions also require
right, the licensee shall be free to dispose such assets to another person in              all licence holders to fence and safeguard any open pits or other works in the
accordance with the applicable laws, or otherwise he shall be obliged to remove            licence area in order to protect the safety of other persons.
them as required by his environmental obligations.
                                                                                           The specific provisions on expiration of SSM licenses require the holder to
3) The licensee shall be required on termination of a small scale or large scale           apply for a mine closure certificate within 180 days from a licence revocation,
mining license, to fence and safeguard to the satisfaction of the [Regulating              termination of mining operations, total or partial relinquishment, or
Authority], any pits and such other works in the licence or lease area so that the         abandonment of the mine. (Greater clarity is needed as to how this would
health, life and property of persons may not be endangered.                                apply in a case of revocation.) In order for the certificate to be issued, the
                                                                                           provisions pertaining to health, safety and the environment must have been
Article [_]. General Obligations of Licensees                                              addressed.
In addition to the obligations under other relevant provisions of this Proclamation,
a licensee shall have the obligations to remove constructions in the licence area
and lease area upon termination of the licence or relinquishment of the licence
area.

Article [_]. Mine Closure
1) The holder of a small scale or large scale mining licence shall apply to the
Licensing Authority for a mine closure certificate upon:

a) revocation of the license;
b) termination of the mining operations;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     276 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
c) relinquishment of the whole or any portion of the licence area; or
d) abandonment of the mine.

2) The application shall be made within 180 days from the occurrence of any of the
events specified under sub-section (1) of this Article.

3) No closure certificate shall be issued until the provisions pertaining to health,
safety and the environment have been addressed.


                                                                 27. Small Scale Licencing
                                                               27.11. Revocation of License
This section provides for when a licence may be revoked (or cancelled or withdrawn). This may happen if the conditions under which the licence was
issued have changed (for example, the licence holding entity is no longer wholly owned by nationals, as required) or are no longer being observed (for
example, limits on investment or production have been exceeded). This may include failure to rectify noncompliance with provisions in the law such
as record keeping requirements, a prohibition against using child labour, and mandatory health, safety and environmental management obligations.

Because licence revocation is the ultimate civil penalty for noncompliance with conditions or obligations of the SSM licence, the implementation of
that sanction should be subject to due process protections. These should include:

    1) Notice in writing to the licence holder stating the grounds for a proposed revocation;
    2) A reasonable opportunity for the licence holder to present arguments and evidence of compliance or of a force majeure event that temporarily
       excused noncompliance; and
    3) A reasonable opportunity to rectify a correctable violation of a condition or failure to meet an obligation and a decision as whether the cause
       for revocation has been rectified, as a condition prior to revocation.

These protections should essentially mirror those that apply in the case of revocations of large scale exploitation licences.

27.11. Example 1:                                                                      Annotation

Article [_]                                                                            Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example provides only two
A SSM licence may be revoked by the [Regulating Authority] if the mining activities    grounds for revocation that are specific to a SSM licence: failure to commence




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              277 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                        PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
have not commenced within 180 calendar days from the date of issuance or                  activities under the licence in a timely fashion and failure to comply with the
renewal of the licence or if the share ownership of [Country citizens] in the             minimum national ownership requirement.
licensed entity is less than 25%.
                                                                                          Although these are the only two grounds for revocation of the SSM licence,
                                                                                          holders are also subject to the general provisions on licence cancellation that
                                                                                          apply to all mineral rights under Sierra Leone’s mining law. Thus, this
                                                                                          example adds specific grounds for revocation of the SSM licence to the
                                                                                          generally applicable grounds for revocation/cancellation of all types of mineral
                                                                                          licences. This specific provision is necessary in order to enforce the national
                                                                                          ownership condition for the SSM licence and to prevent holders from using
                                                                                          licences to block others from accessing certain sites rather than performing
                                                                                          work on the site themselves.

27.11. Example 2:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_]. Revocation of licence                                                        Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this example provides three
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may revoke a SSM licence granted under the terms           alternative grounds for the revocation of a SSM license. These grounds are
of this [Act][Code][Law] where,                                                           broader than the grounds in the preceding example because they constitute all
                                                                                          of the grounds for revocation or cancellation of a SSM licence under Ghana’s
(a) the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the licensee has contravened or          mining law. The SSM licence is not within the definition of the term “mineral
failed to comply with a term or condition of the licence or a requirement applicable      right? under Ghana’s mining law and is therefore not s ubject to the general
to the licensee,                                                                          provisions on cancellation of mineral rights. Thus, this is an example of an
                                                                                          inclusive revocation provision for SSM licences.
(b) the licensee is convicted of any offence relating to the smuggling or illegal sale
or dealing in minerals, or

(c) the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so.


                                                                     27. Small Scale Licencing
                                                                    27.12. Surrender of License
This section provides for when a licence holder gives up the mining right voluntarily before the duration of the licence has run out. Surrender can be
by way of partial or whole relinquishment. Certain conditions would need to be satisfied for this to be permitted, and include environmental




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  278 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
requirements being met.

Not all mining laws provide for surrender of SSM licences. Under mining laws in which the maximum surface area of a SSM licence is very limited
and the term of the licence is rather short, such provisions may obviate the need for a surrender provision. Surrender provisions are important
primarily for exploration licences under which the licensed area is very large and the goal of the licensee is to gradually narrow and focus the
exploration effort, by process of elimination, and for exploration or exploitation licences that have terms longer than that which is necessary for the
completion of the exploration or mining operations. In mining laws that provide for partial or total surrender of licence areas under a SSM licence, the
applicable provisions are those that apply to surrender of area under any type of mineral right.

27.12. Example 1:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_]                                                                               Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision applies to SSM
1) Subject to this [Act][Code][Law] and any condition of his mineral right, the           licences because they are “mineral rights? under the mining law. There is no
holder of a mineral right may surrender the area covered by his mineral right or          specific surrender provision for SSM licences.
part of it by-
                                                                                          The surrender section in this example includes provisions that cover the
(a)giving the [Regulating Authority], not less than ninety calendar days’ notice of       following principles:
his intention to surrender the whole or part of the area concerned; and
                                                                                              1) Surrender is not automatic and self-executing. It requires the issuance
(b) complying with such conditions as may be prescribed or stated in the mineral                 of a certificate of approval by the Regulating Authority, which in turn
right.                                                                                           requires advance notice.
                                                                                              2) Surrender cannot be used as a way to avoid compliance with any
(2) Upon compliance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of subsection (1), the [Regulating               conditions of the mineral right. Neither does it enable the licence
Authority] shall issue a certificate of surrender to the holder.                                 holder to avoid any liability or obligations incurred prior to the date
                                                                                                 when the surrender becomes effective due to the issuance of the
(3) If the application for a certificate of surrender is in respect of part only of the          certificate by the Regulating Entity.
area covered by the mineral right, the holder shall-                                          3) In the case of partial surrender, the license holder must submit an
                                                                                                 acceptable map of the area to be surrendered, together with technical
(a)in his application-                                                                           reports of the work performed on that area, and mark off the
 (i) provide a reliable plan in a form and substance acceptable to the [Regulating               remaining area retained, once the surrender has been approved.
Authority], of the area to be relinquished; and
 (ii) submit detailed technical reports as prescribed containing all information,
results, interpretation and data relating to the surrendered area from the
commencement of the mineral right;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 279 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

(b) if the application is approved, demarcate the remaining area in the prescribed
manner.

(4) No surrender of any area covered by a mineral right shall be effective until the
[Regulating Authority] has issued a certificate of surrender in respect of that area
upon payment of the prescribed fee by the holder.

(5) A surrender of an area covered by a mineral right shall be without prejudice to
any liabilities or obligations incurred by the holder in relation to the area
surrendered prior to the date of surrender.

(6) On the issue of a certificate of surrender the [Regulating Authority] shall-

(a)if the surrender is in relation to the whole area covered by a mineral right,
cancel such right; or

(b) if the surrender is in relation to part only of the area covered by a mineral
right, amend the mineral right accordingly.

If the surrender was partial, then the remaining mineral right will be amended to
reflect the change.

27.12. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                             Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this example refers specifically to
                                                                                        the surrender of areas under SSM licences, although the provision applies
(1) The holder of a small-scale or large-scale mining license or a lease may,           equally to large scale exploitation licences. This example differs from the
without prejudice to the rights of persons claiming under the license, surrender any    preceding example in the following ways:
such license or lease by giving to the [Regulating Authority], unless otherwise
agreed, at least 12 months advance written notice.                                          1) It appears to be automatic and self-executing, when the required
                                                                                               advance notice is given to the Regulating Authority.
(2) Any person who surrenders his license or lease right, pursuant to sub-article (1)       2) The required advance of 12 months is much longer than the 90 days’
of this Article, shall not be released from the liability of performing the duties             notice required in the preceding example.
imposed upon him and due to be performed during the term of the license or lease.           3) It only provides for surrender of the licence. The provision does not




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              280 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                 PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                                             contemplate a partial surrender of area under the licence.

                                                                                    Like the preceding example, the provision in this example does not permit the
                                                                                    licence holder to use surrender to avoid liability for performing any obligations
                                                                                    due to be performed during the term of the licence.


                                                            27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                      27.13. Transfer/Assignment of Rights
This section should provide for whether a SSM licence holder may hand over, sell, rent (either part or the whole) or in any way encumber/place a lien
on the licence for the benefit of another person or entity as well as under what conditions this transfer may take place. The transfer should be aligned
with the eligibility provisions. Transfer/assignment may be partial or whole.

27.13. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]. Mineral rights transferable                                            Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010) - from which inapplicable
(1) The holder of a SSM licence, or where the holder is more than one person,       subsections have been deleted – this liberal provision authorizes transfers of
every person who constitutes the holder of that SSM licence, shall be entitled to   SSM licences in whole or in part, provided that the transferee is eligible to
assign the mineral right or, as the case may be, an undivided proportionate part    hold a SSM licence (i.e., a Tanzanian citizen, a partnership of Tanzanian
thereof to another person.                                                          citizens or a company wholly owned and controlled by Tanzanians).

(2) A SSM licence may not be assigned to a person to whom that SSM licence could    Although the Section in the example provides that an application for the
not have been granted under this [Act][Code][Law].                                  transfer must be filed, the consent of the Regulating Authority to the transfer of
                                                                                    an SSM licence is not required under the Tanzanian mining law. All that is
(3) Application for assignment or transfer of SSM licences shall be made in a       required is that the transfer be made to one or more eligible Tanzanian persons
prescribed form and accompanied by a prescribed fee.                                or entities, and that an application for the transfer (in the form prescribed in the
                                                                                    regulations) be filed, accompanied by the prescribed fee.

27.13. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this example differs from the
(1) No SSM licence or any interest therein shall be transferred, assigned,          preceding example in the following ways:
encumbered or dealt with in any other way without the approval of the [Regulating       1) The approval of the Regulating Authority is required for any transfer




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               281 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
Authority].                                                                                   of a SSM licence.
                                                                                           2) The holder must submit the same information as to the transferee as
(2) In any application to the [Regulating Authority] for approval under subsection            would be required for an initial grant of the licence.
(1), the applicant shall give such particulars concerning the proposed transferee,         3) The Regulating Entity must satisfy itself as to the same matters that
assignee, or other party concerned as would be required in an application for a               would be required for the initial grant of the licence.
SSM licence.
                                                                                       Thus the provision in this example is a more cautious approach to transfers,
(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall grant its approval to the transfer, assignment,   requiring more oversight than the preceding example.
encumbrance or other dealing with any SSM licence or interest therein provided
the transferee is not disqualified under any provision of this [Act][Code][Law]
from holding a SSM licence and the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied in
accordance with article [_] (regarding the work program and required consent
conditions for the grant of a SSM licence).

(4) For the purposes of this section, “interest? in a SSM licence shall mean in the
case of a holder who is a private company, a controlling interest in such holder.

                                                             27. Small Scale Licensing
                                                      27.14. Specific Violations and Penalties
This section provides for what are considered violations that are specific to small scale mining activities, and which will result in penalties in the form
of fines and/or imprisonment. Small scale mining is subject to the general provisions of the mining law on violations and penalties, as well. These
specific violations should relate to the unique features of small scale mining, for example: (a) it is limited as to investment, or degree of mechanization,
or production volume, and (b) it is reserved exclusively for nationals and national-owned entities.

27.14. Example 1:                                                                      Annotation

Article [_]. Unlawful possession of precious minerals.                                 Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision makes it an
(1) Any person who is in possession of any precious mineral and who fails to prove     offence for any employee of a small scale mining licence holder to be in
that he is in lawful possession of such mineral commits an offence.                    possession of precious minerals except at the work site within the licence area.
                                                                                       It also makes it an offence for the SSM licence holder to be in possession of
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1)-                                                 precious minerals unless the holder is at the above-mentioned work site, at the
                                                                                       holder’s registered place of business, or at any other place “used to exercise the




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 282 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(a) a labourer or tributer employed by the holder of a small-scale mining licence       rights vested in it in respect of such minerals by virtue of the licence?.
shall not be deemed to be in lawful possession of a precious mineral unless such
mineral is in his possession within the actual workings in the mineral right area;

(b) the holder of a small-scale licence or its duly authorized agent as the case may
be, shall not be deemed to be in lawful possession of the precious mineral unless
such mineral is in its possession-
 (i) within the actual workings of its mineral right area;
 (ii) within its registered place of business; or
 (iii) any other place used to exercise the rights vested in it in respect of such
minerals by virtue of the licence.

(3) Subject to article [_] and this article, no other person shall be deemed to be in
lawful possession of a precious mineral unless such mineral is in his possession
under and in accordance with the terms of a valid mineral right or minerals licence
issued under this [Act][Code][Law].

(4) Any person who commits an offence under this section shall be liable on
conviction to imprisonment for a term not less than [_] years.

(5) In addition to the penalty imposed in subsection (4) for an offence committed
under this section, any precious minerals in connection with which the offence was
committed shall be forfeited to the State.

27.14. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                             This example makes it a criminal offence for the holder of a SSM licence to
(1) Any holder of a small scale mining licence who knowingly engages in mining          knowingly engage in activity that exceeds the limits of scale, mechanization,
operations within the licensed area that exceed the limits of scale, mechanization,     investment or production that apply to the SSM licence for more than a very
investment or production applicable to the holder’s licence for more than two days      short period of time without either obtaining the consent of the Regulating
without having first obtained the approval of the [Regulating Authority] or the         Authority or transforming the SSM license into a standard exploitation licence.
transformation of the SSM license into a standard exploitation licence shall be
guilty of an offence and shall be liable upon conviction for the payment of a fine of   The example also makes it a criminal offence to front for non-nationals in
not less than [_] [national currency] and not more than [_][national currency] or       obtaining or acting under a SSM licence.
to imprisonment for not less than [_] days nor more than [_] year(s), or to both




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   283 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
such penalties.                                                                       These provisions are designed to punish what is essentially fraudulent
                                                                                      behaviour in obtaining or acting under a SSM licence.
(2) Any person or group of persons who knowingly obtain or act under a SSM
licence on behalf of one or more persons or entities who are not eligible to hold a
SSM licence under the terms of this [Act][Code][Law], shall be guilty of an offence
and shall be liable upon conviction for the payment of a fine of not less than [_]
[national currency] and not more than [_] [national currency] or to imprisonment
for not less than [_] days nor more than [_] year(s), or to both such penalties.

                                                                   28. Artisanal Mining


Considerations that can help to determine whether an activity is Small Scale Mining (SSM) or Artisanal Mining (AM) include: types of deposits, depth
of excavation, use of explosives, use of chemicals, participants, number of employees, level of investment. In some countries, AM is consolidated with
SSM and generally referred to as Artisanal and Small Scale Mining (ASM) within the mining law. In other countries, such activities and the respective
related licences or authorizations are treated separately. Yet in others, the mining law addresses one and not the other while in still others, a set of
activities can be solely titled small scale mining and nevertheless include artisanal activities.
In this Section, AM is treated as an activity distinct from SSM; with AM defined as mineral extraction and rudimentary processing that is:
        (a)   continuous or seasonal,
        (b)   carried out by individuals or groups of individuals,
        (c)   conducted using primarily or exclusively manual labour and manual tools,
        (d)   carried out at a single site or multiple sites, and
        (e)   focused on producing mineral products that are primarily delivered or sold to
                  (i)      traders in those mineral products,
                  (ii)     local artists and craftsmen, or
                  (iii)    builders acting within the national economy.

The primary rationale for regulating AM is to formalize the sector. AM activities are usually already in existence and there is interest in ensuring that
these activities are carried out according to state and national policies addressing poverty alleviation. Other goals in regulating AM include: to curb
abuses such as forced labour, child labour, and vices related to gender discrimination; to eliminate or diminish unsafe or unhealthy practices by




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       284 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
artisanal miners; to ameliorate AM practices with respect to safety, security and environmental protection and social relations with local communities;
to eliminate or minimize clandestine trade in a nation’s non-renewable mineral resources; and to improve the collection of tax revenue from the
subsector.
There are multiple considerations that determine the choices that states make in the naming of the licence or authorization to be issued for artisanal
mining. In most cases, it is not considered to be a mineral right; and it therefore does not have the same rights or obligations as the licenses that are
mineral rights. It is recommended that in all cases, the title of the licence or authorization be consistent with the activities that it authorizes.
Legal engagement in AM can be based on:

    1) authorizations (restricted to nationals) which allow the automatic right to conduct the activity, subject to complying with obligations for the
       proper conduct of the activity (e.g., Madagascar (2005) – gold digging authorization; DRC (2002) – artisanal miner card), OR
    2) use of a permit system which allows for identification without an onerous licence application process before the conduct of AM activities
       (e.g., Zambia (2005) – artisan’s mining right), OR
    3) applications for licenses, which requires steps that are more extensive than the acquisition of an identifying permit, also before engaging in the
       AM activity (e.g., Burkina Faso (2015), Côte d’Ivoire (2014) – artisanal exploitation authorization; Sierra Leone (2009) – artisanal mining
       licence).

                                                                      28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                          28.1 Eligibility


In most laws where AM is provided for separately from SSM, depending on whether the law provides for an authorization system, a permit system or a
licence system (as described in the Introduction section above), the eligibility for engaging in the activity is restricted to either:
    1) nationals (i.e., individuals who are citizens of the host country),
    2) nationals and cooperatives of nationals, or
    3) nationals, cooperatives composed of nationals and companies wholly owned by nationals.
The rationale behind this restriction is to support local livelihood and traditional mining activities, particularly in countries where there is a culture of




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       285 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
 mining. It may also be seen as a lenient point of entry into the mining sector to allow the development of local mining entrepreneurs.
 In laws where SSM and AM are addressed in a consolidated manner as ASM, a clear legal regime would isolate the issue of eligibility and indicate
 whether foreign nationals are eligible or not for AM authorization. In this regard, it is important to indicate if there is special permission for nationals
 from neighbouring countries with which there are reciprocal arrangements. Other general limitations include age of majority, exclusion due to
 bankruptcy or criminal charges etc.
28.1. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]. Eligibility for artisanal mining licences.                            Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision – which involves an
                                                                                   application process for an artisanal mining licence - permits only citizens of Sierra
(1) Any person who wishes to carry out artisanal mining operations shall apply for Leone or registered cooperatives, partnerships joint ventures and corporates that are
an artisanal mining licence                                                        wholly owned and controlled by citizens of Sierra Leone to be eligible for a license.
(2) An artisanal licence shall be granted to-                                    Individuals who are legally insolvent are ineligible, as are individuals who are under-
(a) an individual person who is a citizen of [Country];                          age or have been convicted of fraud or dishonesty. Similarly, corporate entities that
                                                                                 are legally insolvent or who have among their managers or directors an ineligible
(b) a co-operative society registered in [Country]comprising citizens of individual are similarly ineligible.
[Country]exclusively;
                                                                                 The restriction of eligibility for artisanal mining rights to national citizens or entities
(c) a joint-venture or partnership registered in [Country]comprising citizens of wholly owned and controlled by such citizens is typical among mining laws. The
[Country]exclusively; or                                                         reason for this is that artisanal mining is generally a poverty-driven phenomenon
                                                                                 among segments of the local population; and the goal of the law is to formalize it.
(d) a body corporate that is incorporated or registered in [Country] having one
                                                                                 Artisanal mining by definition is labour intensive and not capital intensive. No
hundred percent of its shares held by citizens of [Country].
                                                                                 foreign investment is necessary or desirable in AM. If AM were open to foreign
(3) All such co-operatives and partnerships shall register with the [Regulating individuals and entities, that could encourage migration to AM sites that would likely
Authority] and shall provide such documentation as the [Regulating Authority] create social problems. On the other hand, existing informal AM activity,
may require.                                                                     particularly in border areas, often involves a mixture of nationals and visitors from
                                                                                 the neighbouring country. In those areas, it may be difficult to impossible to
                                                                                 formalize the activity without including those foreign participants.
Article [_]. Persons ineligible for artisanal mining rights

(1) No artisanal mining right shall be granted to an individual who:




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  286 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

(a) is under the age of 18 years;



(b) is not a citizen of [Country] or has not been ordinarily resident in [Country]
for a period of ten years immediately preceding the application for a mineral
right;



(c) is an un-discharged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise declared
bankrupt under any written law, or enters into any arrangement or scheme of
composition with creditors; or



(d) has been convicted of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty;



(2) No artisanal mining right shall be granted to a co-operative society which is
not registered in accordance with the laws of [Country].



(3) No artisanal mining right shall be granted to a body corporate:



(a) which is not registered or incorporated under [the Companies Act]; or



(b) which is in liquidation other than a liquidation which forms part of a scheme
for the reconstruction or amalgamation of such body corporate;




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     287 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing

(c) in respect of which an order has been made by a court of competent
jurisdiction for its winding up or dissolution;



(d) which has made a composition or arrangement with its creditors;



(e) which has among its shareholders any shareholder who holds at least a ten
percent share of the company or a director, who would be disqualified in terms of
subparagraphs (a) or (d) of paragraph (1).


28.1 Example 2:                                                                      Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Mali’s mining law (2012), this example refers to two types of artisanal
(1) The artisanal exploitation authorization is granted to:                          mining authorization that exist under the law: the standard AM authorization and the
(a) individuals of [Country] nationality;                                            mechanized AM authorization. The eligibility requirements for the mechanized AM
                                                                                     authorization are more restrictive than those for the standard AM authorization.
(b) corporate entities organized under [Country]law; and
                                                                                      Individuals are eligible for both types of authorization if they are citizens of Mali.
(c) nationals of countries that extend reciprocity to [Country citizens].
                                                                                      Individual citizens of other countries that extend reciprocity to Malians are also
(2) The mechanized artisanal exploitation authorization is granted to:                eligible for the standard AM authorization, but not for the mechanized AM
                                                                                      authorization. Corporate entities organized under Malian law are eligible to receive
(a) individuals of [Country] nationality; and                                         standard AM authorizations without regard to the nationality of the shareholders.
                                                                                      For mechanized AM authorizations, only corporate entities (wherever organized)
(b) corporate entities whose share capital is held exclusively by [Country citizens].
                                                                                      whose share capital is entirely owned by Malians are eligible.

                                                                                     Thus, this example leaves the door open to some foreign participation in AM that is
                                                                                     not mechanized, but reserves mechanized AM exclusively for Malians and
                                                                                     companies wholly owned by Malians. The reason for the distinction is probably the
                                                                                     historic participation of nationals of neighbouring countries in artisanal mining in




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  288 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                               PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                            Mali and the reciprocal participation of Malians in artisanal mining in the
                                                                            neighbouring countries. On the other hand, mechanized AM has been recognized as
                                                                            a new category of AM activity and therefore is being reserved for Malians in the
                                                                            interest of promoting local investment and entrepreneurship in the subsector.

                                                               28. Artisanal Mining
                                               28.2. Requirements for Licence Applications


As a general matter, it must be kept in mind that AM is fundamentally a poverty alleviation activity engaged in largely by individuals in rural areas
who are poor and illiterate. They often lack the capacity to read instructions and to complete applications in writing; and they often live and work in
areas far from urban centres where offices of the Regulating Authority are located, without the means to travel to those offices.
The requirements for AM licence applications depend on which type of regime applies to AM under a country’s mining law, and whether AM is
authorized in and restricted to designated zones or is authorized in a site specific to each permit or licence.
If the mining law establishes a simple authorization system that allows the artisanal miner to work in a designated artisanal mining zone, very little
may be required beyond proof of identity, nationality and address; agreement to abide by certain rules as to security, health, safety and environmental
protection and rehabilitation; and payment of a fee. Often the responsibility to grant the AM authorizations under this simplified approach is delegated
to the local authorities in the communities where AM zones are established.
If the mining law establishes a simple permit system that allocates specific individual sites to each permit holder, it is also necessary to require the
submission of a map or the cadastral coordinates of the area for which the permit is requested. This requires more sophistication on the part of the
applicant, and verification by the cadastral authority as to whether the requested site is available. The permit issuing function may be delegated by the
mining law to the heads of the provincial/state/zonal offices of the Regulating Authority because of their relative proximity to the sites of AM activity.
If the mining law provides for an AM licensing regime, then the application requirements are likely to closely resemble those for a SSM licence, the
difference between the AM and SSM licences being essentially the lower limit on investment and/or production applicable to the AM licence and the
ability to utilize mechanized exploitation techniques under the SSM license.
As a general matter, prior exploration to identify and evaluate a mineral deposit under an exploration licence is not required in connection with an




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     289 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
 application for an AM licence (whether it be an authorization, a permit or a licence).
 Where the applicants are cooperatives, partnerships and companies, these must register with the Regulating Authority and present certified copies of
 their organizational documents, as well as evidence that they are wholly owned by nationals if that is a requirement.
 If an AM permit or licence on a specific site is requested, it may be required to show evidence of consultation with the traditional authorities under
 whose jurisdiction the area that is subject of the application falls and that permission to access the land for the purpose of AM has been granted.
 Fees are typically payable either with the AM application or as a condition for the grant of the AM authorization/permit/license.

28.2. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example describes the
(1) An application for the grant of an artisanal mining licence shall be made to the comprehensive application requirements for an AM licence that are similar to the
[Regulating Authority] in such form as may be prescribed.                            requirements for a SSM licence. The level of sophistication required to comply with
                                                                                     this licence application requirement is way beyond the capability of the typical AM
(2) An application for the grant of an artisanal mining licence shall –              practitioner working at the mine site. This application requirement is suitable for a
                                                                                     situation in which sophisticated entrepreneurs obtain AM licences to specific sites
(a) be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of the capital and experience
                                                                                     and hire as employees the workers who will conduct the operations at the AM site.
available to the applicant to conduct exploration and mining operations of the
                                                                                     This is evidently a response to the reality that AM in Sierra Leone is focused largely
mineral efficiently and effectively;
                                                                                     on diamonds, as to which the imposition of a certain order and control is deemed
(b) be accompanied by a plan of the area over which the licence is sought drawn necessary. This approach represents the most rigorous end of the spectrum of
in such manner as the [Regulating Authority] may require;                            application requirements for AM licences. It would not work as a method of
                                                                                     formalizing seasonal itinerant miners seeking to supplement their meagre incomes by
(c) be accompanied by documentary evidence that consent to use the land for finding and selling precious stones and/or metals.
mining purposes has been given to the applicant by the [applicable traditional
authority] or rightful occupiers or owners of the land for mining purposes;

(d) shall state the period applied for;

(e) give or be accompanied by a statement giving particulars of the programme of
proposed mining operations, including a statement of-

(i) the likely effects of the proposed mining operations on the environment and on




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 290 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
the local population and proposals for mitigation and compensation measures;

(ii) any particular risks (whether to health or otherwise) involved in mining the
minerals, particularly radioactive minerals, and proposals for their control or
elimination;

(iii) the proposed marketing arrangements for the sale of the mineral production;
and

(f) set out any other matter which the applicant wishes the Director to consider.

28.2. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this article is an example of a provision from
(1) In areas for artisanal mining, only those who hold currently valid artisanal the other end of the spectrum, in comparison to the preceding example. DRC uses a
miner's cards for the area concerned shall be authorised to mine gold, diamonds, simple authorization regime that enables access to designated AM zones. The
or any other mineral substance which may be mined using artisanal methods.       authority to issue the artisanal miner cards is delegated to the Chief of the Provincial
                                                                                   Division of Mines (the decentralized office of the Regulating Authority).
(2) Artisanal miner's cards shall be issued, by the Head of the Provincial Mining
Division with jurisdiction, to those who are eligible, who apply for them, and who The only requirements for obtaining an AM card are as follows:
undertake to comply with the regulations relating to environmental protection and
health and safety, in artisanal mining areas, in accordance with the rules laid         1) Make a request for the card to the Chief of the Provincial Division of
down in the Mining Regulations, after they have examined said regulations.                   Mines;
                                                                                        2) Commit to respect the regulations with respect to protection of the
(3) When each card is issued, a set fee shall be collected, the total amount of              environment, hygiene and security in the AM zones, in accordance with the
which shall be determined in the regulations.                                                measures set in the mining regulation after having learned them; and
                                                                                        3) Payment of a fixed fee.
(4) The Mining Regulations shall lay down the terms for obtaining an artisanal
miner's card.                                                                      This simple system is designed to facilitate formalization by often illiterate artisanal
                                                                                   miners who will be authorized to working in designated zones. It assumes that
                                                                                   officials of the Regulating Authority will explain the regulatory requirement
                                                                                   concerning environmental protection, hygiene and security in the AM zones to
                                                                                   applicants.




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 291 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                    28. Artisanal Mining
                                                        28.3. Licence Refusal Appeal Process


 Provisions outlining the licence refusal appeal process should address:
         - Why a licence may be refused and the due process to be followed by the regulator. The reasons for refusal may include non-eligibility or a
         failure to meet a specific “requirements of the application?. The process of refusal must indicate the format in w hich refusal will be
         communicated, the dates that days that are allowed to lapse before the communication is made, informing the applicant of his right to appeal
         the application refusal, and
         - The process that the applicant can follow to appeal the refusal.
 These provisions are often deferred to the regulations in light of the fact that the process of granting authorizations/permits for artisanal mining is often
 decentralized to a local level which may be subject to changes in organization of administration. In countries where artisanal mining is a major
 activity, the principles of the licence refusal appeal process might best be set out in the mining law. They are part of or cross referenced with the
 section that sets out the process of disposition of the application. Where a formal application is required, that includes where the application will be
 lodged, how it will be processed, the duration of the processing period, how the applicant will be informed of the regulator’ s decision on the
 application, the option for which are: a) refusal, b) acceptance or c) requesting provision of additional information. In cases of authorization to work in
 designated artisanal mining zones, where no formal application is required, the processing is greatly simplified and the appeal process should also be
 simplified and avoid the necessity of formal writing.

28.3. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]. Disposition of applications for artisanal mining licences           Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision provides for the
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may grant or refuse to grant an artisanal mining licence to be obtained at the level of the Regulating Authority, whilst the appeal is
licence                                                                          handled at the Ministerial level, both of which are within the same administrative
                                                                                 structure.
(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall issue its decision on an application for an
artisanal mining licence within [] days of the filing of an application that is This detailed appeal provision is designed for the more formal artisanal mining
                                                                                 licence application procedure that is administered by the Regulating Authority, as




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                            292 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
complete.                                                                           opposed to a less formal authorization/permitting regime administered at the local
                                                                                    level. Thus, decisions and appeals in writing are required, and strict timeframes for
(3) If an application that has been submitted is lacking in any essential the processing of the application, the issuance and delivery of decisions and the
information, the [Regulating Authority] shall, within [_] days of the submission of lodging of appeals must be observed.
the application request the applicant to provide the missing information. The
applicant must provide the requested additional information within [_] days of The procedure assumes that the application requirements are such that additional
receipt of the request, failing which the application will be deemed withdrawn. information may be required before the Regulating Authority considers the
The process will be repeated if necessary until the application is complete.        application to be complete; so provision is made for that contingency.

(4) A decision refusing to grant the artisanal mining licence shall be issued in The example also assumes that a general provision elsewhere in the mining law
writing stating the reasons for the refusal in accordance with the terms of this specifies the means by which decisions are to be delivered to the applicant for a
[Act][Code][Law]. The decision will be delivered to the applicant by the means licence which could be either by regular mail, by electronic mail, by posting in a
stated in this [Act][Code][Law] within [_] days of the issuance of the decision and public information room, or by some other means that is appropriate to the context.
will inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal the decision, the authority to
which any appeal is to be made, and the timeframe within which the appeal must In this example, the possibility but not the necessity of a hearing on appeal is
be filed.                                                                              provided for. It is assumed that most appeals can be disposed of based on the written
                                                                                       submission alone; but a hearing could be necessity if clarification is needed or if
Article [_]. Appeals of a refusal to grant artisanal mining licence                    necessary to establish the identity and nationality of the applicant.
(1) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the [Regulating Authority] to grant that
person an artisanal mining licence may appeal to [the Reviewing Authority].            The decision of the Reviewing Authority on appeal is final in this example because it
                                                                                       is unlikely that the applicant has the means to challenge the decision in court, and the
(2) Any appeal under subsection (1) shall be in writing stating the reasons why the applicant has not lost any investment due to the decision. If the refusal and denial on
decision refusing the artisanal mining licence should be overturned, and shall be appeal are the result of corruption or misconduct on the part of the Regulating
lodged with the [Reviewing Authority] within [_] days of the delivery of the Authority and/or the Administrative Reviewer, those grounds for a judicial challenge
decision of refusal to the applicant.                                                  should be available under another statute or under a general appeal provision in the
                                                                                       mining law.
(3) The Reviewing Authority may decide the appeal on the basis of the written
submission or may, within [_] days of the submission of the appeal, convoke a
hearing on the appeal which shall take place within [_] days of delivery of notice
to the applicant by the means stated in this [Act][Code][Law].

(4) The decision of the [Reviewing Authority] shall be issued in writing within [_]
days of the date when the appeal was lodged or the date of the conclusion of the
hearing, whichever is later, stating the reasons for the decision to uphold, overturn




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     293 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
or modify the decision of refusal to grant the artisanal mining licence. The
decision of the Reviewing Authority shall be final and not subject to further
appeal.

28.3. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          The above example provides for appeals of decisions of the Regulating Authority
(1) Any decision by [the local permitting authority] refusing to grant an artisanal responsible for mines. This example provides for decentralisation of the appeal
mining authorization/permit shall be issued in writing stating the reasons for the process, i.e. a local authority that reviews decisions of the local permitting authority.
refusal in accordance with the terms of this [Act][Code][Law]. The decision will The reviewing authority should be independent of the permitting authority. In this
be delivered to the applicant by the means required for the delivery of case, the existence of a Regional Mining Commission composed of representatives
administrative acts by such [local permitting authority] as stated in the applicable of Government, industry, local communities and civil society is assumed, and that
law and regulations. Such delivery shall be made within [_] days of the issuance
                                                                                     said commission has an appeal board. This provides artisanal miners with the
of the decision and will inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal the
                                                                                     assurance that they can appeal to an entity that is representative of various
decision, the authority to which any appeal is to be made, and the timeframe
within which the appeal must be filed                                                stakeholders concerned with mining and that is independent of the local permitting
                                                                                     authority. It also provides a check on the power of the local permitting entity.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the [local permitting authority] to grant The example provides timeframes for decisions and actions; and it requires decisions
that person an artisanal mining authorization/permit may appeal to [the appeal of the local permitting authority and the appeal board to be in writing. It does not
board of the Regional Mining Commission, a consultative body composed of assume, however, that any application in writing was required for the artisanal
representatives of Government, the mining industry, local communities and civil mining authorization or permit; nor does the filing of a written appeal. This
society].                                                                            approach is designed for the case of simplified authorization or permitting of
(3) A request for appeal under this Section shall be made to the appeal board of artisanal miners to work in designated artisanal mining zones.
the Regional Mining Commission] within [_] days of the delivery of the decision of
refusal to the applicant. The request need not be in writing.

(3) The appeal board of the Regional Mining Commission shall, within [_] days of
the request for appeal, convoke a hearing on the appeal which shall take place
within [_] days of delivery of notice to the applicant by the means required for the
delivery of acts of the local permitting authority.

(4) The decision of the appeal board of the Regional Mining Commission shall be
issued in writing within [_] days of the date of the conclusion of the hearing,
stating the reasons for the decision to uphold, overturn or modify the decision of




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  294 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
refusal to grant the artisanal mining authorization/permit. The decision of the
appeal board shall be final and not subject to further appeal. It shall be
implemented by [the local permitting authority] within [_] days.

                                                                     28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                            28.4. Area


 The section on area should provide for the spatial limits within which the artisanal mining is authorized. If a specific site is designated for the AM
 licence, the mining law should establish the minimum and maximum size (which may vary depending on the mineral to be exploited), the shape and
 orientation of the area, whether or not contiguous license areas are permitted, and whether under certain conditions overlapping licence areas with
 other types of mineral licenses are permitted. The area should be a polygon with a minimum and maximum number of sides prescribed by the general
 rules for mineral licence areas or composed of cadastral units as set out in the mining law.
 Alternatively, the mining law may provide for the creation of special designated areas set aside for artisanal mining operations in which the issuance of
 other mining rights will not be permitted.

28.4. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                            Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this is an example of a provision for
(1) Subject to this section, the [Regulating Authority] shall, within [thirty] days of individual AM licence areas.
receipt of an application under article [_], and on the recommendation of the
Mining Cadastre Office, grant an artisan's mining right to the applicant, to It provides for a review of the area for which the AM licence is to be issued by the
explore and mine the deposit referred to in the application.                           Mining Cadastre Office in order to verify that the licence area is not within an
                                                                                       existing licence area of any other mining right (i.e., no overlaps whatsoever are
(2) An artisan's mining right shall—                                                   permitted).

(a) identify the minerals in respect of which it is granted; and                By making the grant of the AM licence subject to the recommendation of the Mining
                                                                                Cadastre Office, the example assures that the shape, orientation and size of the
(b) be granted over an area not exceeding two cadastre units, not being an area licence area conform to the applicable cadastre rules for all licence areas.
that is already subject to a mining right, which shall be delineated on a plan
                                                                                The spatial limit of two cadastre units for the licence area translates to an average of




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              295 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
attached to the right.                                                             2 x 3.34 hectares = 6.68 ha per licence. The mining law does not limit the number of
                                                                                   AM licences that a person may hold; nor does it prohibit the grant of licences over
                                                                                   contiguous areas to the same person. Therefore, a person could potentially secure
                                                                                   access to a larger area by obtaining more than one AM licence. However, the AM
                                                                                   licence is intended to authorize exploitation of a deposit that can be efficiently
                                                                                   exploited within a short time frame (1-3 years) using artisanal (i.e., non-mechanized)
                                                                                   methods. If a person has identified a deposit larger than what can be exploited
                                                                                   within 6 2/3 has mechanized exploitation will probably be appropriate and the person
                                                                                   should apply for a SSM licence rather than an AM licence.

28.4. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]. Establishing an area for artisanal mining                             Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this is an example of the establishment of an
(1) When, due to the features of certain deposits of gold, diamonds or any other   artisanal mining zone in which all mining will be reserved for holders of AM
mineral substance, technical and economic factors do not allow for industrial or   authorizations to work in the area. This approach limits AM to certain designated
semi-industrial operations, but do allow for artisanal operations, such deposits   zones instead of assigning specific areas to AM licence holders.
shall be established as an artisanal mining area, within the limits of a set
geographic area.                                                                     In order for an area to be designated as an AM zone, it must contain deposits of
                                                                                     minerals that are suitable for AM but not for industrial exploitation. Advice of the
(2) The establishment of an artisanal exploitation zone shall be carried out by [the geological service and the provincial governor is required to be considered by the
decision of the Regulatory Authority] after consultation with [the Mines Regulating Authority before it takes a decision to establish an AM zone.
Directorate] and [the Governor of the Province] concerned.                           Furthermore, an AM zone may not be created over an area where a mineral licence
                                                                                     already exists.
(3) A mining perimeter with a valid mining title cannot be converted into an
artisanal mining area. Such a perimeter is expressly excluded from artisanal zones The Mining Cadastre records the newly established AM zone on its cadastre maps,
established in accordance with the provisions of this [chapter].                     thereby assuring that the area is available and that the shape, orientation and
                                                                                     alignment of the zone corresponds to the cadastre rules on licence areas. No new
(4) The establishment of an artisanal mining area is addressed to the Mining mineral licence is allowed to be granted within the AM zone, with the exception of
Cadastre, which deals with mining rights maps. As long as an artisanal mining an exploration licence that may only be granted to a grouping of the AM
area exists, no mining title can be granted, except for a research permit requested authorization holders operating in the zone. However, the geological service is
by a group of artisanal miners working in the zone.                                  authorized to conduct exploration activities in the zone.
(5) However, [the Geology Department] may at any time carry out prospecting
and research in artisanal areas.




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               296 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                   PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(6) The Mining Regulations set the conditions for the exceptional granting of the
Research Permit to the grouping of artisanal miners.

                                                                    28. Artisanal Mining
                                                  28.5. Specific Obligations of a Licence Holder


 The nature and extent of the obligations of AM license holders vary considerably, depending on a country’s type of AM licensi ng. In countries that
 authorize or permit AM only in designated zones under a locally administered permitting regime, the obligations of the holders of AM authorizations
 or permits tend to be quite limited to observance of rules regarding protection of the environment including site rehabilitation, security, health and
 safety. They may be required to contribute to a common fund to be used for site rehabilitation. Alternatively, a portion of the royalties paid in respect
 of the minerals that they extract and sell may be allocated for that purpose. In this context, the AM authorization holders are generally poor and
 illiterate individuals working in remote areas.
 In some cases, holders of AM authorizations in a region may operate within the licence area of the holder of a large scale exploitation licence who
 consents to that. In such case the LSE licence holder is responsible to the State for the environmental consequences of the allowed AM activity and the
 obligations of the holders of the AM authorizations vis à vis the LSE licence holder are the subject of an agreement negotiated between the parties.
 In countries that grant AM licences over specific licence areas under a more sophisticated application procedure administered by the Regulating Entity,
 the obligations of AM licence holders tend to more closely resemble those of SSM licence holders. In such cases, specific obligations of a licence
 holder often cross reference other laws such as Land and Environment, and may include:
         - management of the environmental impacts and site rehabilitation,
         - health and safety practices,
         - employment conditions,
         - social obligations,
         - prescribed land access procedures which may include compensation of rightful owners or occupiers of land for disturbance of their rights,




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                   297 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
          - traceability of origin of the minerals,
          - observing the rights of other land users and mining right holders, and
          - human rights issues including prohibitions on child labour, forced labour, gender discrimination and money laundering.
 In addition, the mineral production of artisanal miners is subject to an obligation to pay royalties and may be subject to an obligation to make local
 tribute payments. That payment obligation may be an obligation of the AM licensee or of the trader who purchases the AM production for resale. AM
 licensees are generally subject to other tax obligations as well. This section deals only with non-fiscal obligations, however.

28.5. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009) this example pertains to an AM
(1) The holder of an artisanal mining licence shall–                                 licensing regime administered by the Regulating Authority, as opposed to an
                                                                                     authorization regime delegated to local authorities. The obligations of AM licence
(a)within the limits of its competence and resources, carry on in good faith, in the holders under this example are rather comprehensive and resemble those of SSM
licensed area, exploration or mining operations;                                     license holders. However, the section is drafted with some sensitivity to the
                                                                                     limitations of even the relatively sophisticated AM license holder to which this
(b)furnish the [Regulating Authority] with such information relating to its
                                                                                     section applies. Operations are to be carried on in good faith within the limits of the
exploration or mining operations as the [Regulating Authority] may reasonably
                                                                                     competence and resources of the licence holder, rather than based on state of the art
require or as may be prescribed;
                                                                                     or best practice standards.
(c)carry out promptly any directives relating to its exploration or mining
                                                                                  The example contemplates that the AM licence holder may not personally supervise
operations which may be given to the holder by the [Regulating Authority] for the
                                                                                  the mining operations. This reflects the phenomenon that AM facilitators tend to be
purposes of ensuring safety or good mining practices;
                                                                                  urban merchants with capital available to hire, equip and pay workers to carry out the
(d)if not personally supervising the exploration or mining operations under the AM work within their licensed area. In such cases, an on-site Mines Manager with
licence, employ a Mines Manager for the purpose of supervising its exploration or appropriate identification is required. A limit of 50 labourers or “tributers? at the
mining operations provided that all such Mines Managers must be approved by mine site is imposed; and the licence holder is required to promptly carry out any
the [Regulating Authority] and shall carry with them such means of identification directives of the Regulating Authority to ensure safety or good mining practices.
as the [Regulating Authority] may direct;
                                                                                    With respect to record-keeping and reporting, the obligations in the example are
(e)employ in the area in respect of which the licence is issued not more than fifty comprehensive but not inflexible:
labourers or tributers per artisanal mining licence;
                                                                                         Licence holders are to furnish “such information relating to its exploration




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  298 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(f)sell the minerals obtained in the artisanal mining licence area as prescribed;             or mining operations as the [Regulating Authority] may reasonably require
                                                                                              or as may be prescribed?.
(g)carry out rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out areas;
                                                                                             They must keep accurate records of their production and making those
(h)keep accurate records of winnings from the artisanal mining licence area and               records available for inspection on demand by an authorized officer.
such records shall be produced for inspection on demand by the [Regulating                   And they must furnish such reports as are prescribed.
Authority] or a duly authorized officer; and
                                                                                     These obligations may be reasonable and necessary from AM licence holders who
(i) submit such reports are may be prescribed.                                       are sophisticated business people; but they far exceed the capability of the often
                                                                                     illiterate workers who work as itinerant artisanal miners to alleviate their poverty.

28.5. Example 2:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (2005) this example is geared toward a
The Decentralised Territorial Administrative Division which issues artisanal decentralized system of AM regulation where local authorities grant AM
miner's permits shall ensure that the artisanal miners concerned abide by the authorizations and the AM authorization holders work in designated zones.
measures for health, safety and environmental protection which shall be defined in
the regulations.                                                                   In this context, the local territorial administration that delivers the AM authorizations
                                                                                   is responsible for ensuring that the miners to whom it has granted authorizations
Article [_]                                                                        respect the rules on security, hygiene and environmental protection that are set for
An Extension Office shall be responsible for providing technical assistance and them in regulations.
training to artisanal miners and Decentralised Territorial Administrative
Divisions, as regards artisanal mining and prospecting for precious and semi- The national Extension Agency is given the responsibility for providing technical
precious materials, health and safety measures for mines, environmental assistance and training to artisanal miners and local authorities with respect to
protection, as well as on procedures to be followed in order to obtain artisanal exploration and exploitation of precious and semi-precious substances; mine security
mining permits.                                                                    and hygiene; protection of the environment; and the procedures for the issuance of
                                                                                   AM authorizations. The Extension Agency is also authorized to collect whatever
Article [_]                                                                        information is necessary to increase understanding of artisanal mining.
The Extension Office shall be authorised to carry out any operation which is for
the purpose of collecting the required information to control artisanal mining The holders of AM authorizations have the explicit obligation to conduct their
activities.                                                                        activities in accordance with specific environmental protection measures set for them
                                                                                   in regulations. The fee that they must pay in order to obtain their AM authorization
Article [_]                                                                        includes a contribution to an environmental clean-up fund; and they must agree to
Holders of artisanal mining permits are to carry out their work in compliance with
                                                                                   take prevention measures against environmental damage and carry out site
the specific environmental obligations specified in the regulations.
                                                                                   rehabilitation in accordance with programs established by the local territorial




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  299 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                  PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
Article [_]                                                                   administration.
All artisanal mining permit holders shall pay the Decentralised Territorial
Administrative Division which issued the permit an environmental contribution These provisions offer an example of a pragmatic approach to improving the
which shall be included in the granting fee, and shall undertake to carry out practices of widespread and sometimes chaotic AM activity in an environment of
environmental rehabilitation and prevention work at the gold panning sites in extreme poverty and isolation.
accordance with the programmes established by the Decentralised Territorial
Administrative Division.


                                                                  28. Artisanal Mining
                                                           28.6. Rights of a Licence Holder


 As is the case with respect to their obligations, the rights of AM licensees depend on the type of authorization/permit/licensing regime that applies to
 them.
 If the “licence? is a simple authorization to engage in AM in a designated AM zone, granted by A local authority, the rights of the AM authorization
 holder tend to be limited to a non-exclusive right to work in that zone and to sell the authorized mineral products extracted. Because the AM zone has
 been pre-established by the mining administration, the licensee is assured of access to the site without the need to obtain other consents.
 If the licence is granted as to a specific licence area, the rights granted are likely to be exclusive and also include the rights to erect necessary structures
 on the land, subject to the consent of the landowner or lawful users, if any, as well as the right to utilize water and timber resources within the licence
 area. Because the licence area is selected by the licence applicant and is not pre-established, access to the site by the licensee may be subject to
 obtaining the consent of any landowners or lawful users.
  The right to sell the mineral output of the licensee’s labours is inherent in all types of AM authorization/permit/licence al though this is sometimes not
 made explicit. As a matter of best practice, the right should be specified. Some mining laws regulate the buyers to whom the AM licensees can sell
 their mineral products.
 Other issues that are treated variably by mining laws are: (a) whether the licensee has the right to process the minerals extracted pursuant to the AM
 license, and (b) whether the license holder has the right or a priority to obtain the transformation of the AM licence into a SSM licence or a standard




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                         300 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
 exploitation licence.

28.6. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Burkina Faso’s mining law (2015), the articles in the example provide
An artisanal mining permit relating to mining materials confers on the recipient the following details as to the rights conferred by the AM licence (called “artisanal
an exclusive right to carry out artisanal mining and to dispose of the specified mining authorization? in the Mining Code of Burkina Faso), which is not a mining
mineral substances they find there on the open market and for own account, within title under that law:
the area determined in the permit, under the conditions defined therein, and to a
depth which is compatible with workers' safety as established in the regulations.       1) The right to exploit specified minerals within the specified licence area is
                                                                                             exclusive.
Article [_]                                                                             2) The AM right is spatially limited not only by the borders of the licence area,
(1) The recipient of an artisanal mining permit relating to mining materials is to           but also as to depth. The limit on the depth of an artisanal mine is set in the
mine mineral substances in a rational manner, complying with the standards for               regulations, based on what is considered compatible with the security of the
public health and safety for work, environmental preservation and the marketing              mineworkers.
of mined products in accordance with the regulations in force.                          3) The AM right is subject to conditions specified in the licence.
                                                                                        4) The AM right is also subject to regulations as to rational exploitation, public
(2) Subject to the provisions of Articles [_] (on the relationship between mining
                                                                                             health, mine safety, environmental protection and marketing of mineral
operators and landowners and other occupants of the land, and relationships
between mining operators) in the present Code, the recipient of an artisanal                 products. The AM licence holder may not conduct operations on
mining permit may not, except with the prior consent of the farmers, engage in               agricultural land without the agreement of the local farmers and may not
work on cultivated land, nor may they obstruct the normal irrigation of land under           interfere with the normal irrigation of crops. The holder is responsible to
cultivation. In the event that damage is caused, the Holder shall be required to             pay for any damages caused to farmers.
compensate the farmers for the loss suffered.                                           5) The AM right is not a mining title and does not include any right or
Article [_]                                                                                  preference to obtain a mining title. Although the AM right is exclusive
(1) An artisanal mining permit relating to mining materials does not confer on the           within the licence area, an exploration licence may be superimposed on the
holder any particular right to obtain a subsequent mining title.                             same area. Furthermore, if an industrial exploitation licence is subsequently
                                                                                             granted to a party other than the AM licence holder, the latter licence will
(2) An artisanal mining permit relating to mining materials supersede prospecting            not be renewed. However, the licence holder will be entitled to
activities on the surface area covered by said permit. In the event that an                  compensation by the new industrial exploitation licence holder.
industrial operating title covering the same surface area is granted the permit         6) The AM licence is not a right that can be pledged. It can however be sublet,
shall not be renewed, but the recipient shall have the right to indemnification from         upon authorization by the Regulating Authority. The AM licence cannot be
the new operator.
                                                                                             transferred, except in the case of death or disability of the licence holder.
Article
(1) An artisanal mining permit relating to mining materials is a right which may This is an example of a comprehensive statement of the rights of AM licence




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  301 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
not be used as security. It may be subleased with authorisation from [the holders. It clarifies the nature of the rights, their spatial limitations, and their scope
Regulatory Authority]                                                                as further defined or limited by regulations and the conditions of the licence. Note
                                                                                     that the AM right under Burkina Faso’s mining law does not refer to exploration,
(2) Artisanal mining permits may not be assigned. They may be transferred in the because the law provides for a separate exploration licence for artisanal miners.
event of the death or personal incapacity of the operator, subject to prior approval Burkina Faso is a jurisdiction with a substantial artisanal gold mining subsector.
from [the Regulatory Authority], and subject to payment of the duties and taxes
provided for in the Tax Code with regard to succession.

28.6. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example provides an exclusive
(1) Subject to the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] or any other law and any right to the holder of an AM licence granted with respect to a specified mineral and a
condition of an artisanal mining licence, the holder of an artisanal licence shall specified licence area. The right includes the right to enter the specified area and to
have the exclusive right to carry on exploration and mining operations in the carry on both exploration and exploitation, and to remove and dispose of the
licensed area                                                                      specified minerals, which encompasses the right to sell the minerals. The right may
                                                                                 be subject to conditions specified in the licence, which may address other issues
(2) The holder of an artisanal mining licence may, in the exercise of the right referenced above.
conferred under subsection (1), enter the licensed area and remove minerals from
the area and dispose of the mineral in respect of which the licence was issued.

                                                                      28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                     28.7. Term of License


 The Term of license the AM licence provisions provide for the minimum and maximum duration of the initial period of validity of the license licence.
 that can be valid for. The time allowed should consider that different the types and sizes of mineral deposit available, and the capacity to exploit it in
 the time allowable. For a variety of reasons, the term of the AM licence tends to be short: one or two years in most cases. By definition, AM licences
 are only granted as to small deposits that are not suitable for industrial exploitation. Also by definition, AM is only conducted using traditional manual
 labour and tools, without mechanization. Since little or no capital investment is required, a substantial term within which to recover capital is not
 necessary. Moreover, AM has generally been an informal or illegal activity, with artisanal miners moving to a new site as recovery of minerals
 diminishes at the old site. In this context, the State has an interest in retaining the ability to closely monitor and restrict artisanal mining at a site in




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                302 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
 order to prevent or limit environmental damage, forced labour, child labour, unhealthy and/or unsafe working conditions, money laundering or other
 illegal, unsafe or unhealthy practices. In short, the deposit should be one that can be effectively exploited without mechanization in a year or two, there
 is no substantial investment that necessitates a longer recovery period, and the State has an interest in closely monitoring the activity and restricting it if
 necessary to prevent abuses.
 On the other hand, artisanal miners have argued that the short term of AM licences, coupled with the possibility of an exploration licence and
 ultimately an exploitation licence being superimposed on their licence area, resulting in the termination or non-renewal of their licences leaves them
 excessively vulnerable and thwarts their aspirations to evolve into SSM operators and eventually form strategic relationships with larger international
 mining companies. This suggests that some flexibility in the terms of AM licenses may be desirable, particularly in the case of licence holders who
 demonstrate or have demonstrated their ability to follow best practices in health, safety and environmental protection.
28.7. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010) this example provides the licensing
An artisanal mining license shall be valid for the period specified in the license; authority with some flexibility to set the initial term of the licence, depending on the
provided however, that such period shall not exceed three years.                    term requested, the conditions of the deposit and the capability of the applicant. The
                                                                                    maximum term allowed is longer than the typical term allowed for AM licences in
                                                                                    Africa. Thus, this example reflects some sensitivity to the desire and need of AM
                                                                                    licensees for a potentially longer period of quiet enjoyment of the right to exploit a
                                                                                    small deposit manually.

28.7. Example 2:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from the mining laws of Liberia (2000), the DRC (2002), Madagascar (2005)
The term of an artisanal mining licence shall be one year.                           and Sierra Leone (2009), this provision is one of the more restrictive limits on the
                                                                                     initial period of validity of an AM licence. Liberia and Sierra Leone grant AM
                                                                                     licences for exclusive licence areas, whereas the DRC and Madagascar license
                                                                                     individuals or groups of individuals to engage in AM within AM zones designated
                                                                                     by the mining administration. These short terms for AM licences reflect a State
                                                                                     concern with oversight of the AM subsector in which a very significant number of
                                                                                     individuals engage in each of those jurisdictions.




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  303 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                     28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                  28.8. Renewal of License


 Renewal of AM licence provisions establish the duration of the licence renewal period, the number of times renewal is permitted and the conditions for
 renewals. As noted in the previous section on Term of Licence, the initial period of validity of an AM licences tends to be short (1-3 years) for a
 variety of reasons. On the other hand, there exist deposits of precious minerals and stones that are suitable for mining by artisanal methods for many
 years. Historically, artisanal mining has been conducted for many years (and even centuries) at certain sites (e.g., silver at Potosi, Bolivia; emeralds in
 Colombia; lapis lazuli in Afghanistan; bronze in Nigeria, etc.). Most African mining laws address the longevity issue by not limiting the number of
 renewals available. However, the renewal periods are kept short like the initial term in the interest of government policing of possible abusive
 practices and environmental damage; but the need for frequent renewals can be burdensome on licence holders and exposes them to uncertainty about
 their ability to continue operating from year to year. A counterargument is that if they are not able to graduate to a SSM license that requires some
 mechanization and greater responsibilities, then the AM licence is not serving the goal of fostering indigenous development of the mining sector and
 therefore is not a practice that should be encouraged on a long-term basis.
 Conditions under which renewal will be granted should be set in the mining law; and these include the following:
          - having met all the requirements of the AM licence such as the payment of fees and royalties, and compliance with regulations on
          environmental, health, safety and mine development practices;
          - there being enough resource to be exploited in the renewal period.

28.8. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example allows up to three
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an artisanal mining licence shall be valid for a renewals for one year each, such that the total duration of the validity of the AM
period of one year and may be renewed for up to three further periods not licence could be as long as four years. Each renewal is subject to the conditions
exceeding one year at a time                                                    specified with respect to continuing recognition of the area and the mineral as being
                                                                                   appropriate for AM, and compliance of the licence holder with his various
(2) An artisanal mining licence shall not be renewed pursuant to subsection (1)–   obligations.




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                            304 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(a)if the artisanal mining licence area has ceased to be an area declared for This is an example of an AM licensing regime based on a policy of not permitting
artisanal mining operations;                                                  AM for long, indeterminate periods and forcing AM practitioners to either graduate
                                                                              to SSM in order to keep a site for a longer term or move to another site.
(b)in respect of any mineral which has ceased to be a mineral prescribed for
artisanal mining operations;

(c)unless the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the applicant has carried on,
in good faith, within the limits of its competence and resources, mining operations
in the artisanal mining licence area and intends to continue doing so;

(d)if the applicant has not carried out effective rehabilitation and reclamation of
the applicant’s mined out areas to the satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority]
and authorities responsible for the protection of the environment or paid the
prescribed fee;

(e)if the applicant has not reported diligently on its mining operations; or

(f) if the applicant is in default and the [Regulating Authority] is not prepared to
waive the default.

28.8. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                             Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this example provides for unlimited
(1) A holder of an artisan's mining right may apply to the [Regulating Authority] renewals of a longer term AM right (i.e., 2 years) than the preceding example. The
at least sixty days before the expiry of the artisan's mining right, for the renewal of longer term of the renewal period corresponds to the longer initial Term of the AM
the artisan's mining right in the prescribed manner and form upon payment of the right under the Zambian mining law and puts less of a burden on the license holder
prescribed fee                                                                          than the annual renewal provision of the preceding example. The lack of a limit on
                                                                                        the number of renewals provides greater flexibility to the Regulating Authority and
(2) Subject to subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall, where an provides potentially greater stability to the licence holder who is able to meet all of
application for the renewal of an artisan's mining right complies with the his obligations.
requirements of this [Act][Code][Law], renew the artisan's mining right for a
period not exceeding two years, on such terms and conditions as the [Regulating This example both provides explicit conditions that the licence holder must meet in
Authority] may determine.                                                               order to be granted a renewal of the licence and also requires that the licence holder
                                                                                        be given notice and an opportunity to correct any deficiencies. It thereby seeks to
(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall reject an application for renewal of an strike a balance between the Regulating Authority surveillance of AM practices and




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                    305 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
artisan's mining right where—                                            enforcement of standards on the one ha nd, and the artisanal miner’s desire for a
                                                                         reasonable amount of stability and security of title, on the other hand. In exchange
(a) the development of the mining area has not proceeded with reasonable for the possibility of unlimited renewals, the licence holder is subject to an approved
diligence;                                                               work programme so as to avoid holders tying up areas without production.
(b) minerals in workable quantities do not remain to be produced;

(c) the programme of the intended mining operations will not ensure the proper
conservation and use in the national interest of the mineral resources of the
mining area; or

(d) the applicant is in breach of any condition of the right or any provision of this
[Act][Code][Law].

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not reject an application on any ground
referred to in—

(a) paragraph (a) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has given
the applicant the details of the default and the applicant has failed to remedy the
default within three months of the notification;

(b) paragraph (b) of subsection (3) unless the [Regulating Authority] has given the
applicant reasonable opportunity to make written representations thereon to the
[Regulating Authority]; or

(c) paragraph (c) of subsection (3) unless the [Regulating Authority] has notified
the applicant and the applicant has failed to propose amendments to the
operations within three months of the notification.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on the renewal of an artisan’s mining right,
attach to the licence the approved program of mining operations to be carried out
in the period of renewal.

                                                                       28. Artisanal Mining




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        306 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                 28.9. Suspension of License


 Suspension provisions enable the Regulating Authority to temporarily halt operations under an AM licence in order to avert or mitigate risks of
 damage to public health, safety or the environment believed to be caused by the AM operations, or in order to avoid further negative consequences
 arising from external events such as conflict, weather events or earthquakes. Suspension is also used as a sanction until an ASM licence holder
 corrects a failure to meet obligations as set out in the mining law and regulations or related laws and regulations. Ideally, the provisions authorizing
 suspension should allow for an appeal in situations not involving an emergency and should specify the conditions under which the suspension may be
 lifted.

28.9. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_] Notice to remedy dangerous or defective mining operations.               Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example provides for suspension
(1) Where an authorised officer considers any mining operation under an artisanal only in the case where continued mining operations pose a probable threat of bodily
mining licence or anything, matter or practice in or connected with any such injury to any person, in the opinion of an authorised officer of the Regulating
mining operation to be so dangerous or defective as in his opinion to be likely to Authority. The example provides for notice to the licence holder and an opportunity
cause bodily injury to any person, he may give notice in writing of it to the holder for him to appeal the suspension order to the Regulating Authority; but the
of the licence                                                                       Regulating Authority’s decision on appeal is not subject to any further review.
(2) A notice issued pursuant to subsection (1) may require the danger or defect to Because the risk of bodily injury to some person is the standard for justifying the
be remedied or removed, either immediately or within such time as may be suspension of mining operations, the licence holder is required to comply with the
specified, and if the authorised officer considers it necessary, order the mining suspension order, even if he is taking an appeal. The suspension will only be lifted
operations to be suspended until the danger is removed or the defect remedied to when the danger is removed or the defect is remedied o the satisfaction of the
his satisfaction.                                                                  authorizing officer.
(3) The holder of an artisanal mining licence to whom notice has been given under The role of suspension in the example is more limited in the AM context than it is in
subsection (1), shall comply with the notice.                                      the context of industrial exploration and exploitation rights because suspension of
                                                                                   AM operations may only be ordered when the authorized officer finds that the
(4) If the holder of an artisanal mining licence intends to object to any
                                                                                   mining operation is so dangerous or defective as to be likely to cause bodily injury to
requirement or order given by the authorised officer, he shall forthwith cease the
                                                                                   some person. In the industrial context, suspension can be applied more broadly as a
mining operations or that part of the operations affected by the notice and appeal
                                                                                   sanction less severe than revocation of the mining title that is applied in order to
to the [Regulating Authority] against the order.
                                                                                   motivate licence holders to correct a variety of failures to comply with regulatory




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                307 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(5) On an appeal made to the [Regulating Authority] pursuant to subsection (4), requirements – particularly in the case of health, safety, environmental protection
the [Regulating Authority] shall inquire into the matter and his decision thereon and reporting.
shall be final.

28.9. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_] Suspension or cancellation of artisans mining right                 Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008) and Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may suspend or cancel an artisan's mining right provision authorizes the Regulating Authority to suspend an AM license for any of
where—                                                                          the three specified reasons.   None of the three reasons refers to an emergency
                                                                                situation as does the preceding example. Therefore, the two examples should be
(a) the holder of the right has been disqualified under article [_];
                                                                                viewed as complementary pieces of a whole, rather than as alternative provisions.
(b) the holder has been convicted of an offence under this [Act][Code][Law]; or They should work together.

(c) the holder contravenes this [Act][Code][Law] or any condition of the right.     The example provides for notice and an opportunity for reconsideration based on
                                                                                    information to be provided by the licensee or lifting of the suspension once the
(3) Before acting under sub-section (1) of this Article, the [Regulating Authority] licensee has corrected the underlying problem that gave rise to the suspension. If the
shall give notice in writing to the Licensee:                                       grounds for the suspension is one of the first two listed in sub-section (1) of the
                                                                                    example, the licensee’s only defence would be to show that the alleged grounds for
a) setting out the grounds for considering the suspension of the license;
                                                                                    the suspension are not in fact true – i.e., that the holder has not been disqualified or
b) directing the licensee to take specified measures to remedy any contravention, has not been convicted of an offence under the mining law. If the third listed ground
breach or failure; and                                                              for suspension applies, the holder has an opportunity to correct the matter and obtain
                                                                                    the lifting of the suspension.
c) specifying a reasonable date of not less than [_] working days, before which the
licensee may, in writing, submit any matter for the [Regulating Authority] to
consider.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] may lift the notice for suspension of a mineral right
where:

a) the licensee complies with the notice contemplated in sub-section 2(b) of this
Article by rectifying, removing, or as appropriate by mitigating the grounds for
suspension, or by preventing the recurrence of such grounds within the time
specified in the notice; or




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  308 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
b) where it accepts the reasons supplied by the licensee in accordance with sub-
section 2(c) of this Article for the lifting of the suspension.

                                                                       28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                28.10. Termination of License


 Termination of Licence provisions state the ways in which the validity of a licence may cease. They should also clarify the consequences of
 termination for (a) the responsibility or liability of the license holder, and (b) the status of the licence area, including any equipment or structures of the
 licence holder situated within the licence area upon termination.

28.10. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Burkina Faso’s mining law (2015), this provision specifies the three
(1) In the event that an artisanal mining permit expires, is surrendered or is ways in which an AM licence can terminate:
revoked, or the recipient forfeits their permit, the area that it covers shall be
released of any right resulting from it, from the day after:                           1) By expiration at the end of its Term;
                                                                                       2) By surrender;
(a) the expiration date, where a permit expires;                                       3) By revocation; or
(b) the date of notification, where a permit is surrendered or revoked, or the         4) Upon the death of the licence holder.
recipient forfeits the permit.
                                                                                  The example further provides that the status of the licence area is that it is free of the
(2) The recipient of an artisanal mining permit shall be released from their rights conferred by the licence as of the expiration date, in the case of expiration, or
responsibilities relating to the rehabilitation of the site only once they have the date of notification in the case of the other three types of termination. It further
fulfilled these responsibilities. The same shall apply for any damage caused by provides that the licence holder is not released from his responsibility for site
their operations under the permit.                                                rehabilitation or his liability for any damages caused by his operations until he has
                                                                                  fulfilled those obligations.

28.10. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this example lists the events of
(1) An artisanal mining license shall terminate if:                                  termination of the artisanal mining license, which are similar to those listed in the




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  309 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                                          preceding example. Here, the case of liquidation or bankruptcy has been added as a
(a) a licensee relinquishes the whole area or surrenders the license;                     cause of termination. The time of the termination has not been specified in the law
                                                                                          in this case. That is left for the regulations.
(b) a license is revoked by the [Regulating Authority] pursuant to the provisions of
this [Act][Code][Law] or the regulations and directives issued under this
[Act][Code][Law];

(c) a license expires without being renewed; or

(d) without prejudice to the rights of heirs, a licensee dies, or where the licensee is
a juridical person, it is liquidated or declared bankrupt.

                                                                         28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                  28.11. Revocation of License


 Provisions on revocation of the Artisanal Mining licence describe the grounds on which the Regulating Authority can cause the early termination of the
 licence, as well as the process that it must follow in doing so. Forced early termination of the licence by the Regulatory Authority is called revocation,
 withdrawal or cancellation, depending on the jurisdiction.

28.11. Example 1:                                                                         Annotation

Article [_] Revocation of artisanal mining licences.                           Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example provides only the
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may revoke an artisanal mining licence if he is following two grounds on which an artisanal mining licence can be revoked by the
satisfied in respect of the licence that–                                      Regulating Authority:

(a)the holder of the licence, including any member of a cooperative or a                      1) The holder does not meet the eligibility requirement of being a citizen of the
partnership or a shareholder of a body corporate, is not a [Country] citizen; or                 host country, or an entity wholly-owned by such citizens; or
                                                                                              2) Mining operations under the licence have not commenced within half a year
(b) no mining operations have commenced within a period of one hundred and                       after the date of registration of the licence or of its renewal.
eighty calendar days from the date of registration or renewal of the licence.
                                                                                          This provision describes the specific grounds for revocation of an AM licence. That
                                                                                          licence is considered to be a mining right under Sierra Leone ’s mining law and, as




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                     310 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
                                                                                    such, is subject to the general provisions on cancellation that apply to all mining
                                                                                    rights.

28.11. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from the DRC’s mining law (2002), this is an example of a provision for the
(1) An artisanal mining permit may be revoked by the [Provincial Head of the revocation of an AM licence granted pursuant to a simple, decentralized license
Regulatory Authority] or by its local representative who issued the permit, after a procedure, authorizing AM work within a designated AM zone rather than within an
formal notice to comply within thirty days did not result in the card holder exclusive licence area.
remedying the situation, for any failure to comply with the obligations provided for
in Article [_] of the present [Code][Act][Law] (on the obligations of the recipient The example contains several notable features. It provides due process safeguards.
of an artisanal mining permit)                                                       In this example, the decentralized authority that issued the AM licence is authorized
                                                                                     to revoke it only after giving 30 days’ notice of a failure to comply with one or more
(2) Where applicable, the person whose Artisanal Mining Permit has been of the obligations of AM licence holders specified in the cross-referenced articles of
revoked, shall not be eligible to obtain a new Artisanal Mining Permit for three the mining law, in the absence of remediation or correction by the licence holder
years, unless they complete a training course in suitable artisanal mining within that time period. Thus, the examples provide for notice and an opportunity to
techniques, organised or approved by the Mining Department.
                                                                                     cure the defective performance and thereby avoid the revocation. Furthermore, the
(3) An artisanal mining permit being revoked gives the right to appeal as provided example provides a right to appeal the decision to revoke the AM licence to a
for in the provisions of Articles [_] and [_] of the present [Code][Act][Law] (on judicial court.
appeal proceedings).                                                               The example provides that the holder of the revoked licence is disqualified from
(4) The Mining Regulations shall lay down detailed terms for the organisation of a
                                                                                   acquiring another AM licence for the next three years – unless he participates in a
training course on artisanal mining techniques.
                                                                                   training session in artisanal mining techniques, to be organized as provided in the
                                                                                   regulations. Thus, the example provides for corrective training to improve AM
                                                                                   practices among licence holders who have failed to comply with their obligations in
                                                                                   regard to health, safety, environmental protection and mine management.

                                                                      28. Artisanal Mining
                                                                 28.12. Surrender of License


 Surrender of licence provisions allow the AM licence holder to give up the licence voluntarily before the expiration of the initial or renewal term of the




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                 311 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
 licence. Surrender can be partial or total relinquishment of the licence area. Provisions should specify any conditions that need to be satisfied for
 surrender to be accepted or permitted, and include relevant environmental regulatory requirements that must be met prior to surrender.

28.12. Example 1:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]. Abandonment of land subject to licence or permit                       Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this general provision on surrender (called
(1) A holder of a licence or permit who wishes to abandon all or any part of the “abandonment of land? under the Zambian mining law) for all licences and permits
land subject to the licence or permit shall apply to the [Regulating Authority], as applies to the AM license because it is a license under that law.
the case may be; not later than ninety days before the date on which the holder
wishes the abandonment to have effect, for a certificate of abandonment             The maximum size of an AM licence under Zambia’s mining law is only about 6 2/3
                                                                                    hectares; and the term is only 2 years, although it is renewable. Given such
(2) Subject to this section, the [Regulating Authority], as the case may be; shall parameters, it is unlikely that the holder of an AM licence in Zambia would need to
issue to the applicant a certificate of abandonment either unconditionally or surrender the licence in whole or in part during the initial or a renewal term. Thus,
subject to such conditions relating to the abandoned land as the [Regulating Zambia’s mining law, like most mining laws, does not contain a section on surrend er
Authority] Survey, as the case may be; may determine.                               of AM licenses in particular. However, this provision is available for the occasional
                                                                                    case of surrender by the holder of an AM licence.
(3) An application under this section—

(a) shall identify the land to be abandoned and, if the application applies to only a
part of the land subject to the licence or permit, shall include a plan clearly
identifying both the part to be abandoned and the part to be retained;

(b) shall state the date on which the applicant wishes the abandonment to take
effect;

(c) shall give particulars of the operations which have been carried on under the
licence or permit on the land to be abandoned; and

(d) shall be supported by such records and reports in relation to those operations
as the Director or the Director of Geological Survey, as the case may be; may
require.

(4) A certificate of abandonment shall take effect on the date on which it is granted
to the applicant, and

(a) where the certificate relates to the whole of the land subject to the holder's




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               312 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                       PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
licence or permit, the licence or permit shall be cancelled with effect from the
same date; and

(b) in any other case, the licence or permit shall be amended to take account of the
abandonment.

(5) The abandonment of any land does not affect any liability incurred before the
date on which the abandonment has effect in respect of the land, and any legal
proceedings that might have been commenced or continued in respect of any
liability against the applicant for the certificate may be commenced or continued
against that applicant.

28.12. Example 2:                                                                      Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Côte d’Ivoire’s mining law (2014), this article facilitates partial or total
(1) The total or partial surrender of an artisanal mining permit shall be authorised surrender of the licence area upon simple notification of the Regulating Authority.
without a penalty or indemnity, subject to [the Regulatory Authority] being
notified.                                                                            Permission of the Regulating Authority is not required for surrender under this
                                                                                       provision. However, site rehabilitation is required.
(2) Surrender of a permit entails the rehabilitation of the operating site.

                                                                         28. Artisanal Mining
                                                            28.13. Transfer/Assignment of Rights


 Transfer or assignment of rights provisions provide for whether a licence holder may hand over, sell, rent (either in part or in whole), encumber or
 place a lien on the licence for the benefit of another person or entity. The transfer should be aligned to the eligibility provisions of artisanal mining
 licenses.
 Most mining laws provide that AM licences are not transferable or assignable in pledge; and they do not constitute real property rights that can be
 mortgaged (e.g., Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, DRC, Madagascar, Sierra Leone, Zambia). Since they are reserved for nationals of the h ost country and
 local companies wholly-owned by nationals, one concern is not to permit such licences to fall into the hands of non-nationals as a result of transfers,




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                  313 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                      PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
 assignments or pledges. Another consideration is to avoid speculation in AM licences for purposes of trading them. Most governments are of the view
 that the limited size of the deposits, the short term and small licence area make AM licences unfit for transfer generally. However, in the context of the
 African Mining Vision objective of strengthening opportunities for national entrepreneurs to graduate from AM to SSM and eventually to medium or
 large scale exploitation, consideration should be given to creating an appropriate legal framework for such evolution, including opportunities to
 transform an AM licence into a SSM licence or to transfer an AM licence to a third party who is capable of transforming the licence and the mine to a
 SSM operation.

28.13. Example 1:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this provision allows transfers of AM
(1) Any license, other than a reconnaissance or retention licenses, may be licences subject to the prior consent of the Regulating Authority. AM licenses can
transferred with the prior consent of the [Regulating Authority]                     only be transferred to individual citizens of the host country, or groups of such
                                                                                     individuals organized as a cooperative.
(2) No license may be transferred to:
                                                                                     This example is unusual. Most mining laws provide that AM licenses are not
(a) Any person who is un-rehabilitated insolvent, or is under a scheme of transferable. AM licenses in Ethiopia are for a relatively long term – up to three
arrangement with creditors;                                                          years, renewable twice for three-year periods – and are not subject to any maximum
(b) a business organization which is in liquidation, other than a liquidation which size of the licence area specified in the law. Since AM licences in Ethiopia may be
forms a part of a scheme for the reconstruction of the business organization or for for larger areas and longer terms than under most mining laws, there may be more
its amalgamation with another business organization;                                 interest in transferability so that an artisanal miner who discovers a deposit larger or
                                                                                     more complex than what can be mined manually can transfer his licence to a SSM
(c) a non-citizen of [Country] or a group of people who are not registered as a miner who can transform the AM licence into a SSM licence and take the project to
cooperative society in accordance with the relevant law where it is for an artisanal the next level.
mining license.

(3) Any transfer of license shall have no effect unless registered by the [Regulating
Authority].

28.13. Example 2:                                                                       Annotation

Article [_]                                                                             Drawn from Burkina Faso’s mining law (2015), this provision states, in typical
(1) Artisanal mining permits may not be assigned.                                       fashion, that an AM licence is not transferrable. However, it goes on to say that the
                                                                                        AM licence may be rented or sublet to a third party upon authorization by the
                                                                                        Regulating Authority. This provides greater flexibility to the licence holder than




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   314 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
(2) They may be subleased with authorisation from [the Regulatory Authority].      what is found in most mining laws that simply do not permit transfers of AM
                                                                                   licences.

                                                                     28. Artisanal Mining
                                                        28.14. Specific Violations and Penalties


 This section focuses on violations that are specific to artisanal mining activities, and which will result in criminal penalties in the form of fines and/or
 imprisonment. This includes the following violations that are considered to present substantial risks in artisanal mining:
 - unlawful possession of precious minerals,
 - use of explosives, cyanide or mercury to isolate precious minerals, and
 - use of child labour.
 Holders of AM licences and their agents, employees and tributers are subject as well to other generally applicable provisions on infractions in the
 mining law.

28.14. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from Burkina Faso’s mining law (2015), this example includes the article on
(1) The use of explosives and hazardous chemical substances, including cyanide prohibitions that are specific to AM and the articles that make violations of those
and mercury, is prohibited in artisanal mining activities.                     prohibitions subject to criminal penalties of fines or imprisonment or both.

(2) Child labour is also prohibited in artisanal mining activities.               The prohibitions apply against:
Article [_]
(1) The following shall be penalised with a fine of between [_] and [_] in             the use of explosives or dangerous chemicals including cyanide and
[national currency] and a prison sentence of between of between [_] and [_]               mercury in AM; and
years, or only one of these two penalties: for anyone who uses explosives or           child labour in AM.
dangerous substances in artisanal mining activities.
                                                                                  Separate articles establish the penalties for violations of each of those prohibitions.
(2) In addition, the products, materials and means used shall be seized and their Under Burkina Faso’s mining law, the possible fines and/or prison sentences for




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                               315 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                    PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
confiscation ordered.                                                              violations of the prohibition against the use of explosives and dangerous chemicals
                                                                                   are at least twice as large as those for violations of the prohibition against child
Article [_]                                                                        labour.
The following shall be penalised with a fine of between [_] and [_] in [national
currency] and a prison sentence of between [_] and [_] years, or only one of these The punishable violation of the prohibition against child labour is expansive. It
two penalties: any recipient of an artisanal mining permit who tolerates or includes the following acts by the holder of an AM licence:
pretends not to be aware of the fact that minor children or schoolchildren are
present on the site, or are working on the site, or any recipient who is aware of       toleration or feigned ignorance of the presence or work of minor children or
this but refrains from alerting the relevant administrative authorities, or from          schoolchildren; or
taking action to put an end to child labour.                                            having knowledge of their presence, refraining from alerting the
                                                                                          administrative authorities or from taking measures to put an end to it.

                                                                                   Thus, passive indifference by the AM licence holder to the existence of child labour
                                                                                   in connection with the work conducted under the licence is a punishable offence. If
                                                                                   an AM licence holder is aware of child labour in connection with his activities, he
                                                                                   must report it to the authorities or put an end to it.

28.14. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2008), this provision on unlawful
(1) Any person who is in possession of any precious mineral and who fails to prove possession of precious minerals applies to workers in AM licence areas and the
that he is in lawful possession of such mineral commits an offence.                holders of AM licences. The workers are in violation of the provision if they have
                                                                                   precious minerals in their possession outside of the mine within the AM licence area.
(2) For the purpose of subsection (1)-                                             The AM licence holders and their agents are in violation if they are in possession of
(a) a labourer or tributer employed by the holder of an artisanal mining licence precious minerals unless they are at the mine within the licence area, or their
shall not be deemed to be in lawful possession of a precious mineral unless such registered place of business, or “any other place used to exercise the rights vested in
mineral is in his possession within the actual workings in the mineral right area; [them] in respect of the minerals by virtue of the licence.? There would appear to be
                                                                                   a need to supplement this exception to allow for transport of precious minerals from
(b) the holder of an artisanal mining licence or its duly authorized agent as the the mine site to the licence holder’s registered place of business, or to his storage
case may be, shall not be deemed to be in lawful possession of the precious facility or sales outlet.
mineral unless such mineral is in its possession-
 (i) within the actual workings of its mineral right area;                         The penalty for violation of the provision against unlawful possession of precious
 (ii) within its registered place of business; or                                  minerals is harsh: imprisonment for not less than three years.
 (iii) any other place used to exercise the rights vested in it in respect of such
                                                                                   In sum, this is an example of a violation specific to widespread AM exploitation of




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                              316 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                     PART B-4: Small Scale Licencing
minerals by virtue of the licence.                                                     precious minerals, which is inherently difficult to police.

(3) Subject to article [_] (on the duties of persons who find precious minerals) and
this section, no other person shall be deemed to be in lawful possession of a
precious mineral unless such mineral is in possession under and in accordance
with the terms of a valid mineral right or minerals licence issued under this
[Act][Code][law].

(4) Any person who commits an offence under this section shall be liable on
conviction to imprisonment for a term not less than three years.

(5) In addition to the penalty imposed in subsection (4) for an offence committed
under this section, any precious minerals in connection with which the offence was
committed shall be forfeited to the State.




 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                                   317 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals


                                                             29. Development Minerals

Although the provisions relating to mineral rights in other parts of the Guiding Template are generally applicable to development minerals, the
provisions in this part have been modified to apply exclusively to development minerals. Fundamentally, these provisions are inspired by efforts
on the continent to promote development of lesser known minerals (so-called lower value minerals) that have comparative value addition potential
to contribute more directly to local or regional development. The Africa Mining Vision (AMV) underscores the importance of such minerals to the
industrialization and economic transformation agenda of the continent through their use in local production of consumer and industrial goods.
Similarly, other continental bodies like the African Minerals Development Centre (AMDC) and the African Union Commission (AUC)
Specialized Technical Committee on Trade, Industry and Minerals (STC-TIM) have highlighted and are working towards realising the local
economic and utilization linkages potential of development minerals. Recognising these efforts and the need for new laws to facilitate this vision,
the Guiding Template proposes draft legislative provisions that seek to ensure maximization of the value of development minerals to the countries
that have them. These include a purposive definition that allows a country to determine which particular minerals within a broad range of minerals
are considered strategic or relevant for local utilization or value addition. Other provisions account for the regional value of development minerals
and provide opportunities for cooperation among countries towards their development and utilization. Lessons learned from regulating higher
value minerals have also informed options for local government or sub-national involvement in licensing of development mineral rights. In a bid
to link laws closely to the policies they are derived from (and especially to ensure that regional or continental policies on development minerals are
duly recognized and implemented immediately) the practice in civil law jurisdictions of referencing policies in legislations is introduced here.
Furthermore, the entire gamut of relevant issues in minerals and mining regulation is modified in this part to account for the nuances associated
with development minerals and to cater to countries that may have only such minerals.

                                                   29.1 Definition of Development Minerals

This section deals with certain minerals categorized as development minerals. Some of these minerals have been treated under quarrying
provisions in the mining laws of most African countries. The minerals consist mainly of non-metallic and non-fuel minerals commonly called
industrial minerals such as salt, potash, mica, limestone, kaolin, bentonite, and barite; building and construction materials such as sand, gravel,
clay, and slate; and semi-precious stones such as tourmaline, aquamarine, tanzanite, garnet, zircon, and opal. The designation of these minerals as
development minerals is consistent with their designation under the Africa Mining Vision (AMV) and by the African Union Commission (AUC)
Specialized Technical Committee on Trade, Industry and Minerals (STC-TIM) which emphasize the utilization of such minerals for the economic


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                   318 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
transformation of African economies. Unlike the provisions on quarrying that mainly provided for the exploitation of development minerals
without holistically addressing their local economic and utilization linkages potential, the following provisions acknowledge the relevance of these
minerals to the development of countries (or even regions or economic clusters) and provide guidelines or possible legislative language to promote
their optimization.
It is recognized that some countries define some minerals as strategic and apply unique rules to them to ensure that they are developed in a manner
that optimizes their value for the country. Similarly, countries may consider some of these development minerals to be strategic minerals and can
use language in this part to facilitate optimization of such minerals.
It is also noted that the AMV recognizes the potential for cross border utilization or joint development of development minerals to maximize
economic and utilization linkages and so countries are encouraged to support such developments in accordance with applicable laws and
procedures for inter-national or regional cooperation.
29.1. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       This example defines the scope of a development mineral and specifically
For the purpose of this [section], “development mineral? refers to a non -        requires that development minerals be mined, beneficiated and used locally.
metallic or non-fuel mineral that may be mined, beneficiated and utilized or
consumed [principally] in [Country] and includes [list particular minerals] or
such other minerals as the [Regulating Authority] may from time to time
declare by notice in the [Gazette] to be a development mineral.

29.1. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       This example is stated in more general terms, allowing the regulating entity to
For the purpose of this section, “development mineral? means a mineral that       determine ‘relevance to national development’ and ‘local economic potential’
is relevant or strategic to the development needs of [Country] due to its local   in relation to the country’s development or needs at any points in time.
economic and utilization linkage potential and includes minerals such as [list
of particular minerals] as the [Regulating Authority] may from time to time to
time declare by notice in the [Gazette] to be a development mineral.

                                                             29. Development Minerals
                                                                29.2 Other Definitions


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            319 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Words requiring definitions that are not defined under the mining law may be specifically defined here. Also, words used in this section that have
a different meaning from similar words used in the mining law may be distinguished.

29.2. Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   The minimum investment threshold is the minimum amount a non-citizen must
“minimum investment threshold? means [US$28 million] [or specify different    invest to be granted a large scale development minerals exploitation licence.
amounts for different minerals];                                              See sections 31.1(d), 31.7 and 31.10. This requirement aims to ensure that non-
“Region? means [ECOWAS] [EAC] [ECCAS] [SADC] or [List specific                citizens do not crowd out citizens in the development minerals sector and that
countries];                                                                   investments by non-citizens are substantial enough to incorporate local value
                                                                              addition or utilization projects. Any region or countries mentioned in the
                                                                              definitions are to be exempted or differentiated from the non-citizen minimum
                                                                              investment threshold requirement. See sections 31(1) and 31(7).

                                                          29. Development Minerals
                                                   29.3 Ownership of Development Minerals

The constitutions of most African countries vest all minerals, including development minerals, in the state or the President on behalf of the
citizens. And the Minister responsible for minerals or other authority designated by the President exercises the right to take various actions in
relation to the minerals such as negotiations, grants, renewals, termination and providing conditions for dealing with minerals in accordance with
applicable laws. However, since most development minerals are most optimally utilized within a limited radius of their production, it is
recommended that regulation of such minerals is devolved to the locality where the minerals are produced. Federal governments may also consider
vesting the ownership of development minerals in states to facilitate their optimization. It is noted that local government administrations may have
little or no capacity to deal with mineral rights issues. But this may be resolved by building local capacity to deal with regulation of the specified
development minerals. Alternatively, the local or district office of the regulating entity or ministry may continue to process mineral right
applications in accordance with applicable laws but the granting authority could be the local government authority (e.g. district administrator)
instead of the Minister or the Commissioner of mines.

29.3. Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  This example vests development minerals in the sub-national authority (e.g.
Notwithstanding section [_] of this [Law][Act][Code] and/or [a law to the    states in a federal system) and empowers the local authority to make decisions


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                        320 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
contrary] the property in [list applicable minerals] shall vest in the [States]   in relation to such minerals.
[Districts] in which such minerals occur and the [Governor] [District
Administrator] may on the recommendation of the [district mining officer]
negotiate, grant, revoke, suspend or administer mineral rights in accordance
with this [Law][Act][Code].

29.3. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       In this example the minerals remain the property of the national government but
Notwithstanding section [_] of this [Law][Act][Code] and/or [a law to the         the sub-national or local authority is authorized to make decisions in relation to
contrary] a [Governor] [District Administrator] of a [State] [District] in        the minerals on behalf of the owner of the minerals.
which (state applicable minerals) occur may on behalf of the [President]
negotiate, grant, revoke, suspend or administer mineral rights in relation to
those minerals subject to the recommendation of the [district mining officer]
in accordance with the mining [Law][Act][Code].

                                                         29. Development Minerals
                                                29.4 Reference to Relevant Policies and Laws

This topic envisages the bringing together in one place (for ease of reference and as a guide to interpretation) all relevant laws that are implied
(expressly or otherwise) by the provisions under this part and the policies that inform the provisions. Reference to such documents in a law may
also provide guidance to officials in the implementation of the law. Including relevant policies in this part ensures that officials are reminded of the
principles to be promoted through the law and the objectives or goals countries seek to achieve through legislation. But only relevant policies
adopted through appropriate procedures should be cited in this part (for instance some countries require policies to be published in the national
Gazette). And the law ought to be duly amended to remove or replace policies that are spent. Whilst this is not a common practice in Common
Law jurisdictions, civil law countries generally incorporate policies in their laws to serve as a guide to implementation of laws. In view of the
significance to African governments of the principles being advocated to ensure optimal utilization of development minerals it would be useful to
refer to relevant policy documents or parts of them in this part. If these policies have not been sufficiently disseminated in the various countries, it
would also be useful to publicize them in this way. If adopted, it is important that the correct versions of the documents referred to be incorporated
in the law and that such documents are made available together with the law.

29.4. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              321 | P a g e
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Article [_]                                                                 This example provides the laws that are relevant to compliance with and
Unless otherwise specified in the applicable provision of this              implementation of these provisions of the law. Examples of such laws include
[Act][Law][Code], this [Part] [Division] shall be read and applied in       relevant local government laws or regulations, tax laws, environmental laws,
conjunction with the following laws:                                        etc. Note that this may also include regional decisions or “legislation? made by
[__________]                                                                regional bodies to which countries belong. For instance, ECOWAS decisions
[__________]                                                                adopted and published by a country in its national Gazette are a secondary
[__________]                                                                source of law.

29.4. Example 2:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 This language refers to the relevant policy documents to the extent that they
The following national policies and international protocols/agreements      facilitate understanding or interpretation of the statutory provisions. Where a
adopted or executed by [Country] embody the strategies for achievement of   country wishes to incorporate a policy document into its laws so that its
the objectives under these policies. The provisions of this Part shall be   provisions are enforceable this would have to be expressly provided in the law.
implemented in a manner that ensures that the objectives they espouse are
achieved:
[__________]
[__________]
[__________]

Unless otherwise specifically provided in this [Law][Act][Code] the
documents referred to in this provision shall only serve as a guide to
interpretation of the provisions of this Part.

                                                        29. Development Minerals
                                                       29.5 Types of Rights Granted

This provision seeks to highlight all the development mineral rights and related rights that may be granted under the law. This can be done in
different ways. A complete list in one provision of the mineral rights granted under the law clearly shows the mineral rights obtainable under the
law. The mineral rights may also be listed according to categories determined in the law, i.e. exploration rights, exploitation rights, and processing
rights, and trading rights.
29.5. Example 1:                                                            Annotation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                       322 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Article [_]                                                         This example simply lists all the various rights granted under this part. It must
The following mineral rights may be granted under this Part:        be clarified (because it is important that development minerals are utilized
(a) Development Minerals Exploration Licence                        locally) that export licences here are limited to licences for exporting minerals
(b) Artisanal Development Minerals Exploitation Licence             to other countries within a region or for exporting value added products or
(c) Small Scale Development Minerals Exploitation Licence           where approved limited quantities of unprocessed development minerals.
(d) Large Scale Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
(e) Development Minerals Processing Licence
(f) Development Minerals Trader/Dealer Licence
(g) Development Minerals Transport Licence
(h) Development Minerals (Export) Licence
(i) [Others Applicable Licences]

29.5. Example 2:                                                    Annotation

The following mineral rights may be granted under this Part:        This example draws on Tanzania’s mining act (2010), where the various
                                                                    licences granted under the act are categorized according to the type of rights
(a) Under [sub-part A]:                                             granted, e.g. exploration, exploitation, and value addition or other incidental
 (i) Development Minerals Exploration Licence                       rights.

(b) Under [sub-part B]:
 (i) Artisanal Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
 (ii) Small Scale Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
 (iii) Large Scale Development Minerals Exploitation Licence

(c) Under [sub-part C]:
  (i) Development Minerals Processing Licence
  (ii) Development Minerals Trader/Dealer Licence
  (iii) Development Minerals Transport Licence
  (iv) Development Minerals (Export) Licence
 (v) [Others Applicable Licences]


                                              30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                               323 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
Exploration – also called “prospecting? in many Anglophone African jurisdictions (e.g., Botswana, Ghana, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania,
Zambia, Zimbabwe) and “recherche? in Francophone jurisdictions - is the systematic investigation of the surface and subsurface of the Earth in a
designated area using geological, geophysical and geochemical methods for the purpose of determining the presence of economic deposits of
mineral substances and establishing their nature, chemical composition, shape, grade and estimated quantity within degrees of certainty according
to industry norms, as well as the most effective, efficient and appropriate means of extracting, processing and marketing the mineral products
derived from the deposits under forecasted conditions of price and cost (including fiscal terms).

Exploration activity proceeds in stages. The results of each stage are evaluated by the explorer and a determination is made to either proceed to
the next stage, sell the exploration rights where possible, or abandon the project and relinquish the rights. The first stage of exploration in a
geographical area that has not been the subject of extensive prior exploration or mining activity typically commences with wide scale, superficial
investigation using primarily geological and geophysical methods. This is the least costly stage of exploration activity.

If the results of that activity are sufficiently promising and the explorer is willing and able, then the second stage of exploration work will typically
involve progressively more narrowly targeted investigation of the type, quality, extent and quantity of concentrated mineralization in a specific
area by means of drilling and the analysis of core samples taken at various depths from selected points on a grid laid over the targeted surface area,
and the completion of at least a preliminary reserve study to quantify the volume of mineralization identified or projected based on the drilling and
analysis in accordance with industry norms as to degree of certainty. The second stage of activity may be the first stage of exploration activity in
an area that has previously been extensively explored or mined and for which substantial data is available for analysis.

If the results of the drill core analysis and preliminary reserve study are determined to justify a significant investment in evaluating the commercial
feasibility of exploiting the identified deposit, the third and most expensive stage of exploration activity will involve conducting the final mineral
reserve studies (if one has not already been completed), prefeasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessments and final feasibility
studies with the goal of establishing the economic justification for developing the identified deposits.

In some jurisdictions, an exploration licence may be, or must be, preceded by a prospecting/reconnaissance licence as described in the previous
part of this Guiding Template (Part B-1). In those jurisdictions, the main difference between prospecting/reconnaissance activity and exploration
(or “prospecting?) activity is that the former is limited to the types of activity common to the first stage of “greenfield? exploration, whereas the
latter includes drilling, analysis of drill core samples of ore and the conduct of in-depth studies to determine the presence of a commercial deposit
of valuable mineral substances.

In other jurisdictions, the activity described under prospecting/reconnaissance licences in Part B-1 of this Guiding Template is considered part of


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                     324 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
exploration and there is no separate licensing of prospecting/reconnaissance activity.
Thus, depending on the jurisdiction, an exploration licence may be the right or title that authorizes (a) initial activity to locate and evaluate
concentrations of valuable minerals in nature, and/or (b) the second stage of exploration activity following the completion of an initial stage of
such activity pursuant to a prospecting/reconnaissance licence. Overall, it is essential for “exploration? (or “prospecting? or “recherche?) to be
defined or described in the “definitions? and “types of mineral rights? sections of a mining law to avoid confusion.

                                              30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                                     30.1 Eligibility


A mining law should define what individuals or legal entities can receive a permit or authorization to conduct exploration activities, either by
defining who may or may not apply for the right, or by defining prior conditions that must be met before such an entity can be considered eligible
to apply.
Issues to be considered include:
?   Whether individuals and legal entities are eligible for exploration rights?
?   Whether foreign individuals or entities are eligible, whether there is preference for local entities, and under what conditions? (When
    distinguishing between foreign and national entities, mining legislation should define what is meant by a foreign entity.)
?   Whether and what financial and/or technical capacity is required?
?   Which individuals and entities are not eligible for exploration rights?


The eligibility requirements will determine not only who may obtain an exploration licence directly, but also whether and to whom such licence
may be transferred in the future.
30.1. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_] General rules for exploration licences in development minerals.     Inspired by Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009) and partially by DRC’s mining
(1) As a general principle, all development mineral projects shall be granted   law (2002), these provisions modify the general provision on eligibility for
a licence and shall have an exploration phase, following the rules of this      mineral licences. In this example, the possibility of granting mineral licences for
[Law][Act][Code].                                                               development minerals to individuals is eliminated.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                             325 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(2) In any case can a development mineral project proceed without licence      This approach has several advantages: control will be easier, it stimulates
Only by exception, the exploration phase may be waived, following the rules    individuals for association, higher environmental standards might be demanded
of this [Law][Act][Code].                                                      and tax collection would be simpler.

Article [_] Eligibility for exploration licence for development minerals in    However, it is highly likely than government will have to work on helping
large scale operations.                                                        people to associate and organize entities to be able to get development minerals
(1) Only companies duly incorporated or legally incorporated cooperatives of   licences.
artisanal or small scale miners may apply for the grant of an exploration
licence for development minerals in large scale operations under this
[Law][Act][Code].

(a) A foreign company can apply for an exploration licence without being
incorporated in [Country]. However, if the foreign company is awarded with
a licence, it shall incorporate a branch in [Country] before starting
operations in the field. This requisite shall be verified by the [Regulating
Authority] before the start of the exploration activities.

Article [_] Eligibility for exploration licence for development minerals in
artisanal and small scale mining operations.
Only legally incorporated national cooperatives of artisanal or small scale
miners may apply for the grant of an exploration licence in artisanal and
small scale mining operations under this [Law][Act][Code].

Article [_] Restrictions on grant of mineral rights
(2) No mineral right shall be granted to-

(a) individuals

(b) corporations or cooperatives -
  (i)which is not legally registered or incorporated under the applicable
legislation, except for foreign entities, following Article [_] (1) (a);
  (ii)which is in liquidation other than a liquidation which forms part of a
scheme for the reconstruction or merger of such body corporate;
  (iii)in respect of which an order has been made by a court of competent
entity for its winding up or dissolution;
  (iv) which has among its shareholders any shareholder, directly or


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                          326 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
indirectly, or a director, that is a government officer, including Police and
Army, or a relative following anti- bribery or anticorruption laws.

30.1. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] Eligibility for exploration licence for development minerals in        In this example, individuals can be licence holders. The advantages and
large scale operations.                                                            disadvantages expresses in the previous annotation should be considering when
(1) Only companies duly incorporated or legally incorporated cooperatives of       implementing this provision.
artisanal or small scale miners may apply for the grant of an exploration
licence for development minerals in large scale operations under this
[Law][Act][Code].

(a) A foreign company can apply for an exploration licence without being
incorporated in [Country]. However, if the foreign company is awarded with
a licence, it shall incorporate a branch in [Country] before starting
operations in the field. This requisite shall be verified by the [Regulating
Authority] before the start of the exploration activities.

Article [_] Eligibility for exploration licence for development minerals in
artisanal and small scale mining operations
Individuals and legally incorporated national cooperatives of artisanal or
small scale miners may apply for the grant of an exploration licence in
artisanal and small scale mining operations under this [Law][Act][Code].

Article [_] Restrictions on grant of mineral rights
(1) No mineral right shall be granted to-

(a) individuals –
  (i) is under the age of 18 years;
  (ii) is not a citizen of [Country] or being a citizen, has not been ordinarily
resident in [Country] for a period of three years immediately preceding his
application for a mineral right;
  (iii)is an un-discharged bankrupt, having been adjudged or otherwise
declared bankrupt under any written law, or enters into any arrangement or
scheme of composition with his creditors; or
  (iv) has been convicted of an offence involving fraud
.
(b) corporations or cooperatives –

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            327 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
  (i)which is not legally registered or incorporated under the applicable
legislation, except for foreign entities, following Article [_] (1) (a);
  (ii)which is in liquidation other than a liquidation which forms part of a
scheme for the reconstruction or merger of such body corporate;
  (iii)in respect of which an order has been made by a court of competent
entity for its winding up or dissolution;
 (iv)which has among its shareholders any shareholder, directly or indirectly,
or a director, that is a government officer, including Police and Army, or a
relative in the levels mandated in anticorruption, anti-bribery and
transparency norms.


                                              30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                 30.2 Requirements for Licence Applications

Regulatory authorities generally require that eligible entities seeking authorization to conduct exploration activities submit particular documents
and show proof of certain criteria as part of the authorization application process. Unlike other licences, the requirements for a licence Application
for small scale activities are typically fewer. Some laws may have no requirements beyond those related to eligibility, leaving the definition of the
application requirements to the implementing regulations.

Several countries have adopted a two-tier approach to the procedure for issuing exploration licences: that is, (1) an application procedure with
defined criteria for areas in which significant deposits have not yet been identified (i.e., “greenfields? projects), and (2) a tender procedure for
areas containing known deposits that have been explored or worked previously. For those areas put up for bid, the requirements are set out in the
bidding terms and specifications, and the tender is conducted in accordance with established rules for transparency and objectivity. A third
possibility is to grant exploration rights to known stratoform deposits by an auction procedure (i.e., by offering them to the highest bidder during a
specified auction period, without the other more extensive requirements of a tender procedure).

In addition to identification and eligibility of the applicant, the requirements for the grant of an exploration licence will or may contain some or all
of the following:
      The availability of the area requested;
      Proof of eligibility and domicile, for the individual applicant and/or the firm seeking authorization;
      The specification of the minerals to be targeted by the exploration project;
      A proposed work program for all or part of the licence term;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                     328 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
        Proof of technical and financial capability to carry out the proposed work program;
        Compliance with limitations on the number of permits or the aggregate area that a person or entity and its affiliates may hold under
         licence;
        Completion and submission of specified official forms;
        Payment of processing fees upon application; and
        Payment of any fees required as a condition for the issuance of the licence.

A fundamental issue in designing the requirements is whether to (a) restrict access to mineral exploration licences by imposing technical and
financial standards as conditions for the grant of rights, or (b) facilitate access to such licences and eliminate non-performing Licensees
subsequently based on their failure to meet performance standards under their licences.

In some jurisdictions where the right to a mining licence is attached to the exploration licence, subject to the fulfilment of defined conditions, the
signature of a contract between the State and the Licensee may be required at the time of issuance of the exploration licence. The contract sets
forth the rights and obligations of the licensee during the term of the exploration licence and the conditions under which a mining licence will be
issued. In light of increasing global commitments related to Climate Change and Land Use, it would be prudent for the State to require in such
cases the conduct of an initial social, environmental and overall sustainable development assessment of the project at an early stage of contract
implementation prior to the completion of the exploration phase and the authorization of mine development. The applicant’s c ommitment to and
proposed plans for the funding and conduct of such a study in collaboration with the national and local environmental authorities and their
contractors, as well as local communities, could constitute an essential component of the application.


30.2. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Section [_]: Tender for exploration licences                                       In this case, there is a tender procedure for all licences of development minerals.

Article [_]: General rules for tenders                                             Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), inspired by Botswana’s mining law
(1) All licences for exploration of development minerals shall be granted by       (1999) and Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision sets forth the
tender. The application for such exploration licence shall-                        requirements for the grant of an exploration licence (called a prospecting licence
                                                                                   in the law).The example here provides a tender process for all kinds of
(a) be in the prescribed tender form and accompanied by the prescribed             licences. It sets out the requirements for the licence in the article describing the
tender fee; and                                                                    required application contents and then refers back to them in the article on the
                                                                                   conditions for the grant of the licence.
(b) subject to the terms and conditions of the invitation to tender, include the
matters required to be included in applications by this [Law][Act][Code].



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                329 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(2) Applications made under subsection (1) and complying the terms and
conditions of the invitation shall be submitted to the [Licensing Authority] for
the decision.

(3) The [Licensing Authority] shall consider the competing bids and shall
select the bid which is most likely to promote the expeditious and beneficial
development of the mineral resources of the area having regard to

(a) the program of exploration operations which the applicant proposes to
carry out and the commitments as regards expenditure which the applicant is
prepared to make;

(b) the financial and technical resources of the applicant;

(c) the investment commitment for the program of exploration; and

(d) the previous experience of the applicant in the conduct of exploration and
mining operations.

(4) No bids or tenders can be performed if the mining area overlaps totally or
partially with an environment protected area

Article [_]: Joint exploration/exploitation licence for artisanal and small
scale mining.
(1) When a licence has been granted through a tender process, for an
artisanal and small scale development minerals exploration project, the
licensee shall have the right to begin the exploration phase without the need
of a new tender or the subscription of a contract with the [Regulating
Authority].

(2) In such case, the obligations and rights of the parties shall be regulated by
this [Law][Act][Code] and other applicable laws. No additional regulation
shall be enacted creating more burdens to the Licensees.

(3) Prior to start the exploitation phase, the Licensee should in any case
obtain, regardless of other legal requirements-


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   330 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(a) The environmental licence, following applicable regulation.
(b) The right of use the necessary land for the project.
(c) The water use permits, following applicable regulation.

30.2. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]: General rules for tenders                                             Drawn from Madagascar’s mining law (1999), this provision provides for the
(1) All licences for large scale exploration of development minerals shall be      issuance of an exploration licence to the first eligible applicant who submits a
granted by tender. The application for such exploration licence shall-             complete application for an available area. No proof of technical or financial
                                                                                   capacity is required; and no work program is reviewed as a requirement for the
(a) be in the prescribed tender form and accompanied by the prescribed             grant of the licence.
tender fee; and
                                                                                   Madagascar is an example of a jurisdiction that relies on ex-post requirements
(b) subject to the terms and conditions of the invitation to tender, include the   for maintaining the validity of an exploration licence rather than limiting access
matters required to be included in applications by this [Law][Act][Code].          to exploration licences by imposing requirements for their issuance.

(2) Applications made under subsection (1) and complying the terms and             In this case, there is a different procedure for exploration licensing between
conditions of the invitation shall be submitted to the [Regulating Authority]      large scale and SSM and ASM projects. While keeping tender for large scale
for the decision.                                                                  (for transparency purposes), this example uses the “first come, first served?
                                                                                   system for ASM, which might bring less burdens in the application process for
(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall consider the competing bids and shall         small players in the market.
select the bid which is most likely to promote the expeditious and beneficial
development of the mineral resources of the area having regard to                  The one-stop licence (exploration/exploitation) is maintained for ASM.


(a) the program of exploration operations which the applicant proposes to
carry out and the commitments as regards expenditure which the applicant is
prepared to make;
(b) the financial and technical resources of the applicant;

(c) the investment commitment for the program of exploration; and

(c) the previous experience of the applicant in the conduct of exploration and
mining operations.

Article [_] Exploration licences for artisanal and small scale development
minerals projects

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               331 | P a g e
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(1) Licences for artisanal and small scale development mineral projects shall
be granted under the system “first come, first served?. In that case, the
[entity/individual] may submit, at any moment, an application for a licence,
which shall contain-

(a) Identification of the applicant and its shareholders, if the applicant is an
    entity, including final beneficiaries of the entity.
(b) Description of the area applied for (including a map and coordinates),
(c) Mention of the minerals for which the licence is requested,
(d) The period for which the licence is requested, which shall be no more
    than ten years, and
(e) The proposed programs of work, including –
    (i) Details of the mineral deposit,
    (ii) estimated date by which applicant intends to start the exploration
          and exploitation phases,
    (iii) estimated capacity of production and scale of operations,
    (iv) characteristics of product,
    (v) envisaged marketing arrangements for sale of mineral product(s),

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall provide all facilities required for
development mineral artisanal mining licence applicants for the application
process. Those facilities might include the creation of standardized forms,
online application, training and direct help from officers, services that shall
be free of charge.

(3) For development minerals artisanal mining applications, the requisite
established in Article [_] (1) (e) above shall not be applied.

(4) An application for a minerals permit relating to —

(a) any area in respect of which consent is required under any written law
shall be accompanied by evidence that such consent has been obtained;

(b) land of which the applicant is not the owner shall be accompanied by
evidence that the consent of the owner, or, in the case of tribal territory, the
consent of the appropriate body, has been obtained; or



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  332 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(c) a prospecting area, retention area or mining area or part thereof shall be
accompanied by evidence that the consent of the holder of the prospecting
licence, retention licence or mining licence has been given, unless such
     holder
will not be prejudiced by the issue of a minerals permit.

Article [_]. Limitation to denial of granting licences
(1) The [Regulating Authority] shall grant an application for a licence which
has been properly made unless-

(c) the applicant is or was in default in respect of any other mineral right
    and has failed to rectify such default;

(d) the area for which application has been made or part of it covers or
      includes an area which is:
   (i) subject to another mineral right or
  (ii) an area which the Minister has approved in writing as a source of
building materials for the construction of tunnels, roads, dams, aerodromes
and similar public works;
  (iii) an area designated by the Minister as an area in respect of which
applications for the grant of a mineral right have been, or will be invited by
tender.
  (iv) the area requested overlaps totally or partially with an environment
protected area.

(2) No additional reasons for rejection of a licence may be included through
regulations or administrative decisions.

Article [_]: Joint exploration/exploitation licence for artisanal and small
scale mining.
(1) When a licence has been granted through a tender process, for an
artisanal and small scale development minerals exploration project, the
Licensee shall have the right, at any moment, to begin the exploration phase
without the need of a new tender or the subscription of a contract with the
[Regulating Authority].

(2) In such case, the obligations and rights of the parties shall be regulated by


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   333 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
this [Law][Act][Code] and other applicable laws. No additional regulation
shall be enacted creating more burdens to the Licensees.

(3) Prior to start the exploitation phase, the licensee should in any case
obtain, regardless of other legal requirements-

(a) The environmental licence, following applicable regulation.
(b) The right of use the necessary land for the project.
(c) The water use permits, following applicable regulation.


                                              30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                    30.3 Licence Refusal Appeal Process

In order for there to be accountability of the granting authority, there should not only be standards for the grant of licences that limit or eliminate
the granting authority’s discretion, but also a procedure for review of the authority’s decision to refuse to issue a licence.

A due process review procedure would include an initial procedure for reconsideration by the granting authority and/or his or her hierarchical
superior, followed by a judicial or review of the ultimate decision on reconsideration.

If a competitive bidding procedure is used to award the exploration licence, the bidding rules (either in the Mining law or regulations, or in a
separate law and regulations on public contracting) should include a clear statement of the procedure and criteria for challenging any awards of
exploration rights. If the bidding procedure involves a two-stage process (i.e., a bidder qualification stage to narrow the field of eligible bidders
and a bid evaluation stage to determine the prevailing bid, if any), then the rules should provide separate procedures for challenges of a
determination of ineligibility, on the one hand, and challenges of an award of a licence, on the other hand. The grounds for a challenge of a
decision in a competitive bidding process should be narrowly defined but should include, for example:

                Conflict of interest or misconduct by one or more members of the bid review commission affecting the outcome;
                Decision of the commission based on criteria or weighting other than those specified in the bidding rules;
                Improper influence on the decision of the commission; and
                Decision of the commission contrary to public policy established by law.

If a procedure other than competitive bidding is used to award the licence (e.g., first-come-first served, auction, or best offer), the licence refusal

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                    334 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
appeal process should be specified in the Mining law. That process should enable appeals of refusals by inaction as well as explicit refusals.

In order to enable appeals of licence refusals to potentially succeed, the licence granting procedure set forth in the Mining law should include clear
statements of the following elements:

                  The criteria for the grant of the licence;
                  A registry and mapping of all applications for exploration licences, accurately recording the name of the applicant, the location of
                   the exploration area sought, the mineral substances targeted and the date and time of filing the application;
                  The timeframe within which a decision to grant or refuse the licence must be made; and
                  The requirement that the reasons for the refusal of a licence must be provided by the granting authority to the applicant in writing;
                  The timeframe within which requests for reconsideration and appeals of refusals must be filed, and with which authority.

In jurisdictions that experience a high volume of applications for mineral rights, and an actual or potential high volume of disputes over mineral
rights, it may be desirable and justifiable to establish a special adjudicatory tribunal to resolve such conflicts, including appeals of licence refusals.
For example, such appeals could be submitted to a review board composed of members of a mineral resource development advisory commission
consisting of representatives of government, industry, artisanal and small scale mining, civil society and authorities and community leaders from
the affected areas.


30.3. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] The end of the application assessment                                  Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision provides for an expedited
(1) The assessment of an application for mining and/or quarrying rights shall      administrative and judicial appeal process in the case of refusal to grant a
come to an end on the day on which the applicant is notified of the decision to    licence under the general procedures for judicial review of administrative
grant the application or the Ministry of Mines is notified of the judge's          decisions. It includes:
decision as provided for in Article [_] (on registration through legal                   Filing a request for reconsideration with the granting authority within
channels) of the present [Act]Code][Law].                                                   30 days of the notification of the decision to refuse the licence.
                                                                                         Filing a request for judicial reversal within twenty days of the rejection
(2) In the event of a decision to refuse the application, and subject to the                of the request for reconsideration;
provisions of Article [_] (on the application of standard legal rules for                Filing of the briefs in opposition and the administrative record within
appeals to a higher administrative authority) and Article [_] (on the                       15 days of notification of the appeal;
shortening of time periods within which appeals may be brought) of the                   Limitation of the power of the court to grant filing deadline extensions:
present Code, the assessment of an application for mining and/or quarrying                  12 days maximum;
rights shall come to an end on the day on which the applicant is notified of the         Issuance of the decision of the Supreme Court of Justice within 30 days
decision.                                                                                   of closure of the pleadings.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              335 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
Article [_] The application of the common law
Subject to the provisions of Article [_] (on registration through legal
channels) and Article [_] (on matters which concern appeal proceedings) of
the present Code, an appeal against administrative acts decreed by
administrative authorities in application of, or in violation of, the provisions
of the present Code, or those of the Mining Regulations shall be governed by
the common law, in particular by the provisions of Articles [_] of the Code of
Judicial Organisation and Jurisdiction and by the [_] Law relating to
procedure before the [Supreme Court of Justice], as amended and
supplemented to date.

Article [_]. The shortening of time periods
(1) As an exception to the provisions of the Act mentioned above, the
applicant's preliminary appeal, as a litigant before the Administrative
Division of the [Supreme Court of Justice], to the authority which may set
aside or amend the act must be brought within thirty days of the date on
which the decision undertaken was published or the applicant was personally
notified of it. A request to set aside is to be brought within twenty days from
the day on which notification was given for the total or partial dismissal of
the appeal.

(2) The time limit for filing the answer and the one for the administrative file
shall be fifteen working days from the date of notification of the appeal. The
same time limit shall apply for the opinion of the Attorney General of the
Republic. An extension of the time limits imposed on the parties for sending in
the appeal and the reply, which may possibly be decided on by a reasoned
order of the President of the Administrative Division of the [Supreme Court of
Justice], may not exceed 12 working days.

(3) The shortening of the time limits provided for in the preceding paragraphs
of the present Article is only applicable to refusals to grant mining and/or
quarrying rights, and of the approval or realisation of a mortgage.

(4) In any case, the judgement of the [Supreme Court of Justice] shall be
delivered within thirty working days of the deliberations relating to the case.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  336 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
30.3. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision acknowledges a
(1) Any person whose rights or legitimate expectations have been materially         right of appeal under the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act and imposes
and adversely affected or who is aggrieved by any administrative decision in        an obligatory internal administrative appeal (a request for reconsideration) as a
terms of this [Law][Act][Code] may appeal in the prescribed manner to –             prerequisite. It does not establish expedited deadlines in the manner that the
                                                                                    DRC provision does.
(a) the [Regulating Authority], if it is an administrative decision by an officer
of the [Regulating Authority]; or

(b) the [Administrative Reviewer], if it is an administrative decision by the
[Regulating Authority].

(2) An appeal in terms of subsection (1) does not suspend the administrative
decision, unless it is suspended by the [Regulating Authority], as the case may
be.

(3) No person may apply to the court for the review of an administrative
decision contemplated in subsection (1) until that person has exhausted his or
her remedies in terms of that subsection.

(4) Sections [_] of the [Administrative Procedures Act], apply to any court
proceedings contemplated in this section.


                                                30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                                            30.4 Area

The area refers to the physical boundary marking the space grantable for exploration. Most laws only provide for the maximum size permitted
under the exploration licence, but a law may also provide the minimum threshold allowed. Some laws will mandate the licence holder to clearly
demarcate the granted space with physical markers (stones, pegs, wooden slats), while others require solely that the size of the property be listed in
the licence document itself, in the mining cadastre, and/or in the applicant’s application documents. The area covered by an exploration licence
should be subject to the requirements as to form and orientation imposed by the cadastral system.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               337 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
A licence should indicate the specific area granted to the licence holder, usually by geographic references but preferably official map coordinates.
Due to the larger footprint of prospecting/reconnaissance activities relative to exploration activities, the maximum grantable area for exploration is
usually smaller in size relative to the maximum grantable area for prospecting/reconnaissance, subject to being reduced over time either by
voluntary relinquishment or mandatory size reductions at renewals. Voluntary relinquishment can be encouraged by a system of gradually
increasing annual fees payable per unit of surface area.

30.4. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Section [_]                                                                         Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this example represents perhaps the
                                                                                    outer limit (1000 km2) of the maximum size of area available under an
Article [_] General principle of no overlapping licences                            exploration licence (called prospecting licence under the Botswana law). It is
(1) As general rule, no development mineral licence can be granted in the           fairly typical in requiring a reduction of at least half of the area upon each
same area over which a licence has been already granted.                            renewal, but allows some flexibility in the case of renewals after the first.

(2) In exceptional cases, when the [Regulating Authority] determines that           Areas covered by retention licences are eliminated because they come under a
there is no technical or operational conflict between two or more projects, the     separate licence (i.e., a licence holder may obtain a retention licence for part of a
[Regulating Authority] might grant two or more licences that can overlap            licence area while continuing to hold the rest under the prospecting licence).
between each other.
                                                                                    The provision for small scale mining limits the size of an SSM licence
(3) In no circumstance may the [Regulating Authority] grant more than one           (“minerals permit?) area to half of a square kilometre (i.e., 50 hec tares.) It does
licence to explore or exploit the same mineral in the same area.                    not permit any exceptions, but it also does not limit the number of SSM licences
                                                                                    that can be held by a single holder.
(4) No development minerals licences can be granted on environmental
protected areas.                                                                    The provision also requires the permit holder to demarcate the SSM permit area
                                                                                    within three (3) months of the issuance of the permit “in such manner as may be
Article [_] Area of large scale mining development mineral licence                  prescribed?.
(1) An exploration licence for large scale mining development minerals
project shall cover an area of no more than 1000 km2, determined in the
terms and conditions of the tender process.

(2) Subject to the provisions of subsection (4), the exploration area shall be
reduced in size to eliminate therefrom—

(a) at the end of the initial term of the exploration licence, not less than half
of the initial area;
(b) at the end of each period of renewal, half of the remaining area.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                  338 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(3) The holder of an exploration licence shall designate, prior to the end of
each of the periods referred to in subsection (2), the area or areas to be
eliminated from the exploration area and, in default thereof, the designation
shall be made by the [Regulating Authority].

(4) Where a person holds two or more contiguous exploration licences
covering the same period and the same mineral or minerals the [Regulating
Authority] shall, for the purposes of the elimination, under subsection (2), of
part of any of the areas thereof, permit the areas covered thereby to be
deemed to be one area, the subject of one such exploration licence.

(5) No compensation shall be payable to the holder of any exploration licence
arising out of reductions in area effected in terms of this article.

Article [_] Area of small scale development mineral licence.
(1) An exploration licence for artisanal and small scale mining development
minerals project shall cover an area of no more than 0,5 km2, as determined
by the [Regulating Authority] based on the petition of the Licencee.

(2) The holder of a minerals permit shall, within three months of the issue
thereof, secure the area covered by such licence.

Article [_] Area of artisanal development mineral licence.
(1) An artisanal mining licence area shall not be more than one half hectare
(5000 m2).

(2) Every artisanal mining licence area shall be determined in the field by a
government officer, jointly with the Licensee.

Article [_] Creation of special development mineral artisanal mining zones
(1) Considering the disperse nature of development minerals, artisanal
licences can be adjudicated in all the territory of the State.

(2) the [Regulating Authority], after technical and economic analysis, may
determine a specific zone as “Development Minerals Artisanal Mining Zone?,
where licences shall be granted to artisanal miners organized as

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                 339 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
cooperatives, under the national legislation.

(3) The government should carry an environmental study in order to decide
the creation of the Zones.

(4) When establishing these zones, the government shall organize plans to
support artisanal miners’ cooperatives working in such zones for-
(a) fund mining operations.
(b) train workers, especially in safety, security and environment matters.
(c) help licences holders to comply their environmental obligations

30.4. Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_] Determination of areas                                            In this case, the size of the areas is left to be decided by the regulating authority.
Considering the development of the sector, the [Regulating Authority] shall
determine the minimum and maximum area for development minerals large
scale, small scale and artisanal mining projects.


                                                30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                 30.5 Specific Obligations of a Licence Holder

Provisions that lay out, for the holder of an exploration licence, the necessary responsibility or duty to undertake certain actions or restriction from
undertaking certain actions or causing certain effects are collectively treated as obligations. Noncompliance with these obligations may lead to
fines and/or ordered suspensions of operations until the Licencee is in compliance. Where suspension occurs, continued, uncured non-compliance
beyond a specified time period may result in revocation of the licence.

Specific obligations of an exploration licence holder may include obligations before, during and after operations.
Obligations prior to the commencement of operations may include: (1) introduction and presentation to local authorities; (2) preparation and
regulatory approval of an environmental and social mitigation plan; and (3) establishment of an environmental restoration surety bond or fund.

Obligations during operations may include:
    Commencement of operations within a specified time period;
    Posting of an environmental surety;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                             340 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
        Payment of annual fees per unit of surface area held;
        Implementation of an approved work program;
        Filing regular reports on work and investment completed and results achieved (e.g., geological findings);
        Implementation of approved environmental and social mitigation plan, and filing of periodic reports thereon;
        Compliance with labour, health and safety regulations;
        Compliance with applicable immigration, customs and tax laws and regulations;
        Compliance with all applicable contract terms, in countries where a contract between the State and each exploration licence holder is
         required.

Obligations upon the closure of operations normally include a final report of work carried out and results achieved, as well as the implementation
of the site closure and restoration provisions of the approved environmental impact mitigation plan, unless the site is to be developed as a mine.
30.5. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Section [_]: Obligations for large-scale mining.                                    Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), the provision for large scale mining
                                                                                    deals with obligations in two chapters. Chapter 1 establishes the principle that
Article [_]: Obligations for maintaining the validity of the right                  the holders of all licences must comply with two specific obligations that have
                                                                                    specific time requirements in order maintain the validity of their rights:
(1) In order to maintain the validity of their mining or quarrying right, the
                                                                                          begin work within the time specified in article 197 of the Code; and
holder must:
                                                                                          pay the surface fee per square unit of area related to their title before
(a) commence work within the period specified in Article [_] of the present                   the deadline set in article 199 of the Code.
Code;
                                                                                    Failure to comply with either of these obligations results in the Licensee being
(b) pay the annual surface area fees per square relating to their title, each       stripped of the licence.
year before the deadline set in Article [_] (on the amounts due as annual
surface area fees per square) of the present Code.                                  The Licensee’s failure to comply with the obligations listed in the second
                                                                                    chapter will be penalized by fines and/or possible orders to suspend operations,
(c) pay the taxes and contributions determined in the present Code in the           or in the case of violations, by judicial process.
event that the duration of the mining licence is extended.

(2) Should one of these obligations not be fulfilled, the holder shall lose their   This bifurcation of obligations into two categories and the clarity and objectivity
right by application of the procedure provided for in Articles [_] (on failure      of the two obligations that are enforced by revocation of the title provides great
                                                                                    security of title to Licensees and also ensures prompt and complete payment of
to comply with administrative obligations, and the related penalties) of the
                                                                                    the fees that fund the work of the Regulating Authority.
present Code.

(3) Should the holder fail to comply with the obligations listed in the             The obligations in the second category are numerous and are only referenced


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                 341 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
following chapters, they shall be penalised with fines and/or possibly with an      here by article title, except for the obligation to prepare and obtain the approval
order to suspend or put an end to operations or, in the case of an offence,         of an Environmental Mitigation Plan (PAR) before commencing work (which
shall be prosecuted.                                                                must begin within 6 months of delivery of the licence). The process of approval
                                                                                    is expedited by a sectoral environmental review authority.
Article [_]: The obligation to commence work
                                                                                    Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), the provision for small scale
A Prospecting Licence holder shall be required to commence work within six          mining includes the following key obligations:
months of the date on which the prospecting right was issued.
                                                                                             - carrying out exploration and mining in a reasonable within the
Article [_]: The obligation to pay the annual surface area fees per square
                                                                                             required competence.
(1) To cover costs for the services and management relating to the rights                    - furnishing the required information to the Director of Mines
established by mining titles, annual surface area fees per square, for each                  - carrying directives promptly to ensure safe and good practices
                                                                                             - Appoint manager to supervise operations
mining or quarrying title which is issued, shall be collected for the Ministry of
                                                                                             - notifying appropriate local authorities when beginning or ceasing
Mines which shall redistribute a portion to the departments of [the regulatory               operations
authority] responsible for the administration of the present Code.                           - keeping accurate records and submitting required reports
(2) Holders of Prospecting Licences, Operating Licences, Operating Licences                  - selling minerals in prescribed manner
                                                                                             - complying with community development agreements
relating to Tailings, Operating Licences for Small-Scale Mining, Permits to
                                                                                             - carrying out required rehabilitation and reclamation of land
Prospect for Quarry Products and Permanent Quarry Operating Permits
shall pay the surface area fees for the first year when the mining or quarrying
                                                                                    In addition, an SSM licence holder should also have a scheme in place for
title is issued.
                                                                                    employing and training local people.
(3) The holder is to settle the annual surface area fees per square for each
following year before the end of the first quarter of the calendar year.            For the Artisanal mining licence, the example is also drawn from Sierra Leone’s
However, annual surface area fees are to be paid pro rata per square, when          mining law (2009), and includes the most essential obligations of Licensees.
the initial title is issued, or in the last year during which the title is valid.   Evidently, the bar is lowered in this case, however, the artisanal mining
                                                                                    Licensees need to comply at least a minimum set of duties, in order to ensure
(4) Annual surface area fees per square are to be paid at the relevant counter      the safety of the basic interest of the community.
at the Ministry of Mines which issued the mining or quarrying title, which
shall issue the holder with a receipt when payment is made.

Section [_]: Environmental Protection

Article [_]: During reconnaissance

(1) Before reconnaissance work relating to mining or quarry products may
commence, the holder of a Reconnaissance Licence or a Permit to Prospect


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                 342 | P a g e
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                  PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
for Quarry Products must draw up and obtain approval for a Mitigation and
Rehabilitation Plan (Plan d’Atténuation et de Réhabilitation (P AR)) for the
proposed activities.

(2) The terms of the PAR and its approval shall be laid down in the
regulations.

(3) The approval of a PAR shall fall under the jurisdiction of the department
responsible for environmental protection within the [the regulatory authority]
in collaboration with [the regulatory authority for the environment].

Section [_] The Protection of Cultural Heritage

Article [_] Declaration of indicators of an archaeological discovery

Article [_] The discovery of artefacts of national cultural heritage

Section [_] Health and Safety

Article [_] The jurisdiction of [the regulatory authority]

Article [_] The declaration of an accident in a mine or quarry

Article [_] The use of explosive products

Section [_] Various obligations

Article [_] The relationship with local authorities

Article [_] Registers and reports

Article [_] Inspections

Article [_] The opening and closure of a prospecting or operations centre.

(1) The holder of a small-scale mining licence shall–

(a)within the limits of its competence and resources, carry on in good faith, in
the licenced area, exploration or mining operations;



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  343 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(b)furnish the [Regulating Authority] with such information relating to its
exploration or mining operations as the [Regulating Authority] may
reasonably require or as may be prescribed;

(c)carry out promptly any directives relating to its exploration or mining
operations which may be given to the holder by the [Regulating Authority] for
the purposes of ensuring safety or good mining practices;

(d) if not personally supervising the exploration or mining operations under
the licence, employ a Mines Manager for the purpose of supervising its
exploration or mining operations provided that all such Mines Managers
must be approved by the [Regulating Authority] and shall carry with them
such means of identification as the [Regulating Authority] may direct;

(e) before beginning or ceasing any exploration or mining operations notify
the appropriate local government authority or local authority and an
authorized officer, of the intention to begin or cease exploration or mining, as
the case may be;

(f) substantially comply with any community development agreement required
under this [Law][Act][Code];

(g) sell the minerals obtained in the mining area as prescribed;

(h) carry out rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out areas;

(i) keep accurate records of winnings from the mining area and such records
shall be produced for inspection on demand by the [Regulating Authority] or
a duly authorized officer; and

(j) submit all reports as prescribed.

Article [_] Obligations for development minerals artisanal licence holders.

(1) The holder of an artisanal mining licence shall–

(a)within the limits of its competence and resources, carry on in good faith, in


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  344 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
the licenced area, exploration or mining operations;

(b) carry out rehabilitation and reclamation of mined areas as prescribed in
the law;

(c) Perform the operations applying health and safety standards for its
workers.

(d) Report to the government-

(i) annual production.

(ii) annual income.

(iii) compliance of environmental obligations.

(e) The [Regulating Authority] shall issue regulation that will organize the
reports to be submitted annually and jointly with the income tax reports.

(f) employ in the area in respect of which the licence is issued not more than
ten workers per artisanal mining licence;

(g) Allow officers of the [Regulating Authority] or other government entities
to inspect the site of operations when complains of any kind have been
reported.

30.5. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]. General rules for development minerals large scale operations.      Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision requires (for
(1) No person may prospect for or remove, mine, conduct, technical co-           exploration licences called prospecting permits) compliance with all of the
operation operations, reconnaissance operations, explore for and produce         obligations noted above and also:
any mineral or commence with any work incidental thereto on any area                  Approval of an environmental management plan (as part of the licence
without –                                                                                 grant process);
                                                                                      Notification and consultation with the landowner or lawful occupier;
(a) an approved environmental management program or approved                          Presentation of the licence to the Mining Titles office for registration;
environmental management plan, as the case may be;                                    Commencement of exploration (called prospecting) activities within
                                                                                          120 days of the effective date of the licence;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           345 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(b) a prospecting/reconnaissance permission, exploration right, permission to             Maintenance of records, drilling logs, etc.; and
remove, mining right, mining permit, retention permit, technical co-operation             Obtaining the [Regulating Authority]’s approval for any removal of
permit, reconnaissance permit, exploration right or production right, as the               bulk samples for testing.
case may be; and
                                                                                   This is a clear and comprehensive set of specific obligations of exploration
(c) obtaining rightful permission from the land owner, after due                   licence holders.
compensation.
Article [_] Obligations of holder of development minerals large scale
                                                                                   Provisions for small scale mining, drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006),
exploration licence
                                                                                   include many of the obligations in the previous example, but goes further to
(1) The holder of an exploration right must –
                                                                                   address compensation for the use of land, the use of explosives and the process
                                                                                   for adding additional minerals to the licence
(a) lodge such right for registration at the Mining Titles Office within 30 days
of the date on which the right –
 (i) becomes effective in accordance with the provisions of this
[Law][Act][Code]; or
 (ii) is renewed in accordance with the provisions of this [Law][Act][Code];

(b) commence with exploration activities within 120 days from the date on
which the exploration right becomes effective or such an extended period as
the [Regulating Authority] may authorize;

(c) continuously and actively conduct exploration operations in accordance
with the exploration work program;

(d) comply with the terms and conditions of the exploration right, relevant
provisions of this [Law][Act][Code] and any other relevant law;

(e) comply with the requirements of the approved environmental management
programme;

(f) pay the prescribed exploration fees to the State; and

(g) subject to section [_] (on the rules regarding the removal and disposition
of minerals), pay the State royalties in respect of any mineral removed and
disposed of during the course of exploration operations.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                             346 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
Article [_] Permission to remove and dispose of minerals
(1) Subject to subsection (2), the holder of an exploration right may      only
remove and dispose for his or her own account any mineral found by         such
holder in the course of exploration operations conducted pursuant to       such
exploration right in such quantities as may be required to conduct tests   on it
or to identify or analyse it

(2) The holder of an exploration right must obtain the [Regulating
Authority]'s written permission to remove and dispose for such holder's own
account of bulk samples of any other minerals found by such holder in the
course of exploration operations conducted pursuant to such exploration
right.

Article [_] Information and data in respect of prospecting/ reconnaissance
and exploration
(1) The holder of an exploration right or prospecting/reconnaissance
permission must –

(a) keep proper records, at the registered office or place of business, of
exploration operations and the results and expenditure connected therewith,
as well as borehole core data and core-log data, where appropriate; and

(b) submit progress reports and data, in the prescribed manner and at the
prescribed intervals, to the [Officer of the Regulating Authority] regarding
the exploration operations.

(2) No person may dispose of or destroy any record, borehole core data or
core-log data contemplated in subsection (1)(a) except in accordance with
written directions of the relevant [Officer of the Regulating Authority].
Article [_] Environmental management principles
(1) The principles set out in section [_] of the [National environmental
legislation] –

(a) apply to all exploration and mining operations, as the case may be, and
any matter or activity relating to such operation; and


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  347 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(b) serve as guidelines for the interpretation, administration and
implementation of the environmental requirements of this [Law][Act][Code].

(2) Any exploration or mining operation must be conducted in accordance
with generally accepted principles of sustainable development by integrating
social, economic and environmental factors into the planning and
implementation of exploration and mining projects in order to ensure that
exploitation of mineral resources serves present and future generations.
Article [_] Integrated environmental management and responsibility to
remedy
(1) The holder of a reconnaissance permission, exploration right, mining
right, mining permit or retention permit –

(a) must at all times give effect to the general objectives of integrated
environmental management laid down in the [National environmental
legislation];

(b) must consider, investigate, assess and communicate the impact of his or
her exploration or mining on the environment as contemplated in the
[National environmental legislation];

(c) must manage all environmental impacts –
 (i) in accordance with his or her environmental management plan or
approved environmental management program, where appropriate; and
 (ii) as an integral part of the prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or
mining operation, unless the [Regulating Authority] directs otherwise;

(d) must as far as it is reasonably practicable, rehabilitate the environment
affected by the exploration or mining operations to its natural or
predetermined state or to a land use which conforms to the generally
accepted principle of sustainable development; and

(e) is responsible for any environmental damage, pollution or ecological
degradation as a result of his or her prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration
or mining operations and which may occur inside and outside the boundaries


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E               348 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
of the area to which such right, permit or permission relates.

(2) Notwithstanding the [Companies Act], or the [Close Corporations Act],
the directors of a company or members of a close corporation are jointly and
severally liable for any unacceptable negative impact on the environment,
including damage, degradation or pollution.
Article [_] Financial provision for remediation of environmental damage
(1) The holder of an exploration right, mining right or mining permit must
annually assess his or her environmental liability and increase his or her
financial provision to the satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority].

(2) If the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied with the assessment and
financial provision contemplated in this section, the [Regulating Authority]
may appoint an independent assessor to rehabilitate the closed mining or
exploration operation in respect of latent or residual environmental impacts,
to be paid by the licence holder.

Article [_] Obligations of holder of development minerals small scale
exploration licence.
(1) Registration of small scale Licensees
(a) A person engaged in or wishing to undertake a type of small scale mining
operation shall register with the [cadastral registry] of the designated area
where the person operates or intends to operate.

(b) A person shall not be granted a licence under section 82(1) unless the
person is registered under this section.

(2) Operations of small scale miners
A person licenced under section [x] shall observe good mining practices,
health and safety rules and pay due regard to the protection of the
environment during mining operations

(3) Compensation for use of land
Where a licence is granted in a designated area to a person other than the
owner of the land, the Licensee shall pay compensation for the use of the land
and destruction of crops to the owner of the land that the [Regulating


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                349 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
Authority] in consultation with the [relevant government agencies] with
responsibility for valuation of public lands may prescribe

(4) Use of explosives
A small-scale miner shall not without the written permission of the
[Regulating Authority] use explosives in the area of operation

Article [_] Amendment of mineral at right to add other minerals

(1) Where in the course of exercising a mineral right under this
[Law][Act][Code], the holder discovers an indication of a mineral not
included in the mineral right, the holder shall within thirty days of the
discovery, notify the [Regulating Authority] in writing of the discovery

(2) The notification given under subsection (1) shall

(a) contain particulars of the discovery, and
(b) the site and circumstances of the discovery.
(3) The holder of the mineral right may in the prescribed form, apply for the
mineral right to be amended to

(a) include an additional mineral, or
(b) exclude a mineral

(4) Subject to this [Law][Act][Code] and unless the land which is the subject
of the mineral right, is subject to another mineral right in respect of the
mineral applied for under subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall
amend the mineral right on the terms and conditions that may be prescribed.

(5) A mineral right shall not be granted for another mineral over the same
area of land subject to an existing mineral right unless the holder of the
existing right is notified and given the first option of applying for the right.

(6) A notification given under subsection (5) shall contain

(a) particulars of the mineral applied for and
(b) the area applied for


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  350 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Article [_] Obligations of holders of mineral rights
(1) The holder of a mineral right shall at all times appoint a manager with the
requisite qualification and experience to be in charge of that holder’s mineral
operations

(2) The holder of a mineral right shall notify the [Regulating Authority] in
writing of the appointment of a manager and on each change of the manager

Article [_] Records of and reports by mineral right holders
(1) A holder of a mineral right shall maintain, at an address in [Country]
notified to the [regulating entity] for the purposes of this section, the
documents and records that may be prescribed and shall permit an authorized
officer of the [Regulating Authority] at a reasonable time to inspect the
documents and records and take copies of them.
(2) A holder of a mineral right shall furnish the [regulating entity] and other
persons prescribed, with such reports on the mineral operations of and
geological information attained by or on behalf of the holder.

Article [_] Obligations for development minerals artisanal licence holders
(1) The holder of an artisanal mining licence shall–

(a) within the limits of its competence and resources, carry on in good faith,
in the licenced area, exploration or mining operations;

(b) carry out rehabilitation and reclamation of mined areas as prescribed in
the law;

(e) Perform the operations applying health and safety standards for its
    workers

(d) Report to the government-
 (i) annual production.
 (ii) annual income.
 (iii) compliance of environmental obligations.

(e) employ in the area in respect of which the licence is issued not more than


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                 351 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
ten workers per artisanal mining licence;

(f) Allow officers of the [Regulating Authority] or other government entities to
inspect the site of operations when complains of any kind have been reported.

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall issue regulation that will organize the
reports to be submitted annually and jointly with the income tax reports.

                                                30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                            30.6 Rights of a Licence Holder

Provisions that address what possession of an exploration licence allows the licence holder to do or what the licence holder may be entitled to are
collectively treated as rights. The rights of an exploration licence holder are usually exclusive exploration rights at depth within the licenced
area. Although the licence usually relates to specified minerals only, under most mining laws no other exploration or mining licence can be
granted to another party over the same area.

The exploration licence entitles the holder to carry out exploration activities, as defined; but not to engage in mining. The exploration licence
holder generally also has the exclusive right to apply for an exploitation licence over the same area, in whole or in part, during the term of the
licence.

As a general matter, the rights of a SSM or artisanal licence holder within the licenced area are similar to those of a large-scale exploitation licence
holder within its licence area, except that the SSM and artisanal licence holder’s right may be limited to a certain maximum amount of production
or investment. In order to exceed that limit, the SSM or artisanal licence holder must convert the original licence to the type of exploitation
licence under which the projected higher level of production or investment is authorized.

Depending on the defined nature of the exploration right, the Licensee may have the right to pledge, mortgage or transfer the licence.
30.6. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] Rights applicable to all development minerals licence holders          Inspired by Côte d’Ivoire’s mining law (2014), Tanzania’s mining law (2010)
(1) Any licence holder of development minerals, regardless of the size of the      and Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this example includes a list of the rights
operation, shall have the following rights:                                        that might apply to any development minerals licence, regardless of the size of
                                                                                   the operation. Considering that this is an exploration licence, the approach might


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               352 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(a) To enter the area of licence.                                                  be useful to simplify the legislative process.
(b) To hold the exclusive right to explore for development minerals, as
specified in its licence.                                                          The exploration licence is eligible for pledge, mortgage or sublease with the
(c) To be protected from disturbance generated from third parties.                 approval of the Regulating Authority.
(d) To be able to explore the minerals it finds, after following the rules for
that phase, included in this [Law][Act][Code].
(e) To freely dispose the products obtained during the exploration phase, with
the purpose of geological essays.
(f) To transfer, mortgage or pledge the licence, with the consent of the
[Regulating Authority]

30.6. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Section [_]                                                                        Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), from the Democratic Republic of
                                                                                   the Congo’s mining law (2002) and from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this
Article [_] Rights of large scale exploration licence holders.                     example provides different rules for each kind of mineral activity, classified by
(1) Subject to the provisions of this [Law][Act][Code] and the Regulations,        size. This approach might result useful in the sense that more complex
an exploration licence confers on the holder the exclusive right to carry on       operations (large scale) might require a different set of rules. However, in
exploration operations in the exploration area for minerals to which the           general, exploitation licence grants similar rights to all kinds of Licensees.
licence applies.

(2) In the exercise of the rights conferred by this section, the holder may,
subject to section [_] (on restrictions on the right of a mineral licence holder
to enter land), either himself or by his employees or agents, enter upon the
exploration area and erect camps and temporary buildings and may erect
installations in any water forming part of the exploration area.

(3) The holder of an exploration licence for gemstones who in the course of
carrying out exploration operations under the exploration licence recovers
gemstones, may dispose of the gemstones by sale to a licenced dealer and
shall promptly following any such sale submit particulars thereof to the
[Regulating Authority], showing the name and business address of the dealer,
a description of the stones, their weight and a copy of a receipt given by the
purchaser for the price received.

(4) The holder of an exploration licence for gemstones who recovers
gemstones in the course of exploration operations shall for the purpose of


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                   353 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
holding the gemstones and selling them pursuant to subsection (3) be deemed
to be a mineral right holder.

(5) The exploration licence holder is authorized to apply for a retention
licence.

(6) The exploration licence holder is entitled to apply for and obtain a special
mining licence or a mining licence, subject to compliance with the application
requirements specified in other articles.

Article [_] The scope of an Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining
(1) The provisions of Article [_] of the present Code shall govern the scope of
an Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining.

(2) An Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining confers on the holder the
right to convert their Operating Licence if the technical conditions for the
operations warrant this.

Article [_]. The scope of the Operating Licence
(1) An Operating Licence confers on the holder an exclusive right, within the
area of the licence and during its period of validity, to carry out work relating
to prospecting, development, construction and operations to mine the mineral
substances for which the licence was granted, and for related substances if
the holder has applied for an extension in this regard. In addition, and
without limitation, it enables the holder to:

(a) enter the operating Area to carry out mining operations;

(b) build facilities and infrastructure required for the mining;

(c) use resources, namely water and wood, located within the Mining Area, as
required for the mining, in compliance with the standards defined in the EIA
and the EMP;

(d) freely dispose of, transport and market their marketable products
resulting from their mining in the operating Area for own account;



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   354 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(e) carry out operations for technical or metallurgical processing or
concentration, as well as for converting the mineral substances extracted
from the deposit within the operating Area;

(f) carry out work for the extension of the mine.

(2) For as long as an Area is the subject of an Operating Licence, no other
application for a mining or quarrying right for all or part of the same Area
may be considered.

(3) However, where the Operating Licence holder has refused to give consent
to an applicant who wishes to open a quarry in the Area, said applicant may
apply for a Quarry Operating Permit over a part of the Area which is the
subject of the Operating Licence but which is not being used for mining
operations.

(4) Where applicable, the application shall be examined and shall be made
the subject of an administrative dispute in which the holder and the applicant
are involved, if, together with their application, the applicant submits proof
that the holder refused to give consent in bad faith.

(5) The Mining Regulations shall determine the substantive and procedural
rules for the dispute.

Article [_] The extent of an Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining
(1) An Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining confers on the holder a
right to mine the mineral substances for which it was specially granted and
for which the holder has identified a deposit and shown that said deposit
exists.

(2) An Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining may be extended to include
related or unrelated materials in accordance with the conditions provided for
in Article [_] of the present [Code][Act][Law].
Article [_] The nature of an Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining
An Operating Licence for Small-Scale Mining is an immovable, exclusive
right, and may be assigned, subleased and transferred in accordance with the
provisions of the present [Code][Act][Law].


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                355 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Article [_] Rights of artisanal mining licence holders
An artisan's mining right shall confer on the person to whom it is granted, or
in the case of a right granted in accordance with subsection [_] of article [_],
on the community concerned, exclusive rights to mine according to its terms
in respect of the mineral specified in the permit within the area for which it is
granted.

                                                30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                                    30.7 Term of Licence

The term of the licence is the period of time during which it is valid. The mining law or regulation should establish the length of time or the
maximum length of time for which a licence is granted. The licence itself should specify the start date and the end date of its period of validity
(subject to possible early termination).

The term of an exploration licence should be long enough to allow time for enough investigation to enable the licence holder to make a
determination of whether to pursue intensive drilling and sampling of specific targets within the licence area, provided that renewal terms are
available during which deeper analysis, feasibility studies, environmental and social impact studies and required or necessary plans for local
procurement, hiring and training, and community development can be developed or negotiated. It is thought that the initial term should be short
enough to prevent Licensees from holding large areas for excessive periods without developing them; however, this goal could also be achieved by
gradually increasing the annual fees per unit area payable by the Licensees, to encourage voluntary relinquishment, or providing fixed an limited
renewals, with or without the previous authorization from the regulating entity, as we will develop in the examples.

It should be noted that as requirements are increased for the grant of a mining licence (for example, Economic and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA), community development agreement, local procurement, hiring and training programs), more time will be needed in order to accomplish
them.

The typical term of a large scale exploration licence for metal minerals in Africa is 3 years, or a period not exceeding three years. (Examples:
Botswana, Cameroon, CAR, Ghana, Guinea, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe.) The term is 4 years, or
for a period not exceeding four years, in Côte d’Ivoire, DRC for precious stones, Sierra Leone and Tanzania. The term is 5 ye ars in the DRC
except for precious stones, as well as in Madagascar and Mozambique. In Angola the term is set by contract.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                356 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
The terms of SSM licences are generally much shorter than the terms of large scale exploitation licences because by definition SSM is limited to
the exploitation of small scale deposits involving limited amounts of investment and/or production. Some mining laws that provide for SSM
licences also contemplate a process for an SSM licence to be transformed into an industrial mining licence with a longer term if justified by the
nature of the deposit and the technical operations during the course of operations under the SSM licence.

There is considerable variety in the terms of SSM licences under mining laws. There are examples for a term as short as three years, with
unlimited renewals, or for as long as ten years with no renewals.

Factors to be considered in setting the term of licences include:
     whether the licence covers the exploration and exploitation phases or only the exploitation phase (if the former, a longer term is probably
        justified);
     whether the licence is preceded by work of the applicant under an exploration licence (in which case, a shorter term may be appropriate);
     whether to set a fixed term or a maximum term length and allow the regulating authority to set the exact term of the licence subject to that
        maximum (depending on the enforcement capability of the regulating authority to terminate licences under which work has been
        abandoned);
     whether to set the term length in the law or in the regulations (security of title in the law versus flexibility to adjust to subsector conditions
        by regulation);
     the extent of the information about the deposit and the work program required to be submitted with an application for the licence (more
        information available would suggest greater confidence in a relatively short term); and
     the definition of in the mining law and the ability to transform the licence into a larger scale mining licence with a longer term.


30.7. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Inspired by Tanzania’s mining law (2010), Zambia’s mining law (2008) and
(1) Where an applicant is entitled to the grant of an exploration licence under    Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision reflects a progressive
the terms and conditions of this [Law][Act][Code], the licensing authority         awareness of the potential need for a somewhat longer than normal exploration
shall issue to the applicant the exploration licence as provided in that section   term as well the need to accomplish certain formalities and obtain certain
and the licence so issued shall subsist for the following periods-                 approvals before actual exploration work can begin.

(a) for the initial exploration period for which the applicant has applied, a
period not exceeding four years for large scale mining;
(b) a period not exceeding two years for small scale mining; and
(c) a period of one year for artisanal mining.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            357 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(2) In determining the date for the commencement of the period for which the
licence is granted, the licensing authority may take account of any period not
exceeding six months from the date of the grant which is required by the
applicant to make any necessary preparations for exploration operations.

30.7. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision sets a maximum
A minerals permit shall be valid for a period not exceeding five years, as the   term length of five years, but authorizes the regulating authority to set a shorter
[Regulating Authority] may determine and may, on application made to the         term for a particular licence. The provision also allows for unlimited renewals,
[Regulating Authority], be renewed for further periods not exceeding five        each similarly limited to no more than (but possibly less than) five years.
years at a time.
                                                                                 Overall, this is a balanced approach that seeks to set an appropriate term length
                                                                                 for the type of operation involved, in light of the pre-licence preparatory work
                                                                                 required. It provides flexibility while guarding against the risk of licence areas
                                                                                 being tied up for periods that exceed the time of their productivity. It might be
                                                                                 an option to establishing a limit in the law of the maximum number of renewals
                                                                                 that a Licensee can obtain, without moving forward to the exploitation phase.


                                              30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                               30.8 Renewal of Licence
Addressed often at the same time as the term of the licence, renewal of licence refers to provisions determining when, for how long, and how
many times a licence holder may extend the initial duration of the exploration licence. Given the relatively short initial term of exploration
licences, renewal terms are generally necessary for additional exploration, completion of the studies and plans required prior to mining operations.

Licence holders who are in compliance with the terms of their licence and their obligations under the mining law are generally entitled to
renewals.
Most countries in the region provide for two renewal terms, which may be of the same length as the initial term or may be for shorter periods.

Most countries have ultimate term limits on the combined initial and renewal terms; but ultimately, term limits are arbitrary and may be inadequate
for the necessary preparation to develop a complex deposit or one situated in an area presenting major logistical or environmental challenges, or
simply to finalize a feasibility study under difficult market conditions. To deal with such situations, Botswana, Namibia, Tanzania and Uganda
provide for the availability of a retention licence after the exhaustion of renewal terms under an exploration licence.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              358 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Mining laws generally require an application for the renewal of an exploration licence to be filed no later than a certain date prior to the end of the
initial term, in order to allow time for processing of the application before the initial term expires. The better mining laws also provide that an
exploration licence for which a renewal application has been timely filed are automatically extended until they are either renewed or the renewal is
definitively denied.

Most renewal provisions require the relinquishment of a percentage of the area held under the exploration licence (usually half) upon each
renewal. An alternative approach would be to permit the holder to retain a larger area upon the payment of an additional fee in order for the
licence holder to retain the area that would otherwise be subject to mandatory relinquishment (see Article 24 of the 2014 Mining Code of Côte
d’Ivoire, for example). As a general matter, mining laws make very la rge areas available for initial prospecting/reconnaissance activity, but
reduce the maximum size of the area that may be retained upon each renewal or transition from prospecting/reconnaissance to exploration and
from the latter to exploitation. In doing so, the laws seek to maximum efficiency on the part of licence holders so that the country’s mineral
resources are developed expeditiously, thereby generating employment, commercial activity and fiscal revenues that can be used for other national
purposes. Most mining laws require reduction of the area licenced for exploration upon renewals in order to prevent the tying up of areas larger
than are necessary for a normal exploration program and to make the excess area available to other prospective applicants who may be more
highly motivated to conduct exploration in the relinquished area than the initial licence holder.

Conditions are set under which renewal may be permitted and granted; and these may include:

                  Having met all the requirements of the licence during the preceding term such as fees, management of the environment, health,
                   safety and mine development;
                  Submission of an updated environmental impact assessment and mitigation and rehabilitation plan, if necessary;
                  Submission of an updated work program, if necessary;
                  There being enough resource to be exploited in the renewal period.


30.8. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_] Renewal for large scale development minerals licences                Drawn from Tanzania’s mining law (2010), this provision clearly states the
(1) Where an applicant is entitled to the grant of an exploration licence, the   conditions under which the exploration (called prospecting) Licencee is entitled
[Regulating Authority] shall issue to the applicant the exploration licence as   to renewals, when the applications must be filed, and the length of the renewal
provided in that section and the licence so issued shall subsist for the         terms.
following periods-
                                                                                 The terms of exploration licences for metallic and processed minerals decline


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            359 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(a) for the initial exploration period for which the applicant has applied, a       from 4 years to 3 years for the first renewal and 2 years for the second and third
period not exceeding four years;                                                    renewals. (For gemstones other than diamonds, there is only a one-year initial
                                                                                    term, non-renewable.) An exploration licence for such minerals can therefore
(b) where application for renewal has been made by the holder in the                be held for up to 11 years in Tanzania, which also provides for the issuance of a
prescribed form, for the first period of renewal for which the applicant has        retention licence for a term of 5 years, renewable once for a like term, if the
applied, a period not exceeding three years;                                        required justification is demonstrated. Reduction of the surface area by half is
                                                                                    required at each renewal, but not below 20 square kilometres.
(c) where application for renewal has been made by the holder in the
prescribed form, for the second period of renewal for which the applicant has       By contrast, the one-year terms of exploration licences for gemstones other than
applied, a period not exceeding two years;                                          kimberlitic diamonds and for building materials are not renewable.


(d) where the holder is not in default and at the end of the second period of       Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision enables the
renewal a further period is required to complete a feasibility study, already       regulating authority to grant multiple renewals of an SSM licence for renewal
commenced by the holder, for such further period as may be reasonably               terms of up to five years. This provides flexibility in light of the fairly short
required for that purpose, but not exceeding two years.                             term (5 years) of the SSM licence. However, in light of the definition of SSM
                                                                                    in Botswana’s mining law, which includes limits on annual production and
                                                                                    investment, it seems unlikely that an SSM licence holder will be able to obtain
(2) A holder of the licence who intends to renew the licence shall, not later       multiple renewals while retaining SSM status. Nevertheless, the potential
than one month before expiry date of the licence, submit an application for         availability of unlimited renewals enables very small scale subsistence miners to
renewal of the exploration licence.                                                 maintain their rights for as long as they can continue to profitably produce
                                                                                    marketable mineral products from their licenced areas while remaining within
(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on application of the holder of a licence     the definition of SSM. This reflects, in part, a poverty reduction strategy.
granted under subsection (1) of this section and on payment of prescribed fees      The renewal application is the same as the initial licence application, thus
for renewal, renew the exploration licence-                                         assuring that a renewal is justified by the nature of the deposit and the planned
                                                                                    work program, and adjusting the related environmental protection measures
(a) at the end of the initial exploration period or, as the case may be, at the     accordingly.
end of the first renewal period, for the period referred to in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of subsection (1);                                                          The deadline for submitting a renewal application, if any, is set in the
(b) at the end of the second renewal period, in a case falling under paragraph      regulations. Unfortunately, the mining law does not contain a provision that
(d) of subsection (1), for the period required to complete the feasibility study.   automatically extends the validity of the SSM licence until the final
                                                                                    administrative decision on a renewal application is issued.
(4) The obligation of the [Regulating Authority] to renew an exploration
licence is subject to the condition that-
                                                                                    Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), the regulations applicable for
(a) the holder is not in default except that the [Regulating Authority] shall not   artisanal mining in development minerals state that the licence is in general
reject an application to renew an exploration licence on the grounds that the       renewable, unless the area or the mineral covered are not considered anymore
holder is in default, without first serving on the holder a notice giving           subject of artisanal activity.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                360 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
particulars of the default and requiring the holder within a reasonable time
specified in the notice to remedy the default; and

(b) the holder, on renewal under paragraph (a) of subsection (3), has
relinquished in the case of a first renewal fifty per centum of the area held
during the initial exploration period and in the case of a second renewal fifty
per centum of the balance, and has by notice in writing to the [Regulating
Authority] given a sufficient description of the areas he is relinquishing.

(5) The relinquished areas shall be displayed on the notice board at the
[Regulating Authority] headquarters and local offices on a monthly basis.

(6) An exploration licence for gemstones other than kimberlitic diamonds,
and an exploration licence for building materials shall subsist for one year
from the date of grant and shall not be subject to renewal.

(7) The obligations of the [Regulating Authority] under paragraph (b) of
subsection (4) shall not apply in the case where the exploration area is not
more than twenty square kilometres.

Article [_] Renewal for small scale development minerals licences
(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (2), a minerals permit shall be
valid for such period, not exceeding five years, as the [Regulating Authority]
may determine and may, on application made to the [Regulating Authority],
be renewed for further periods not exceeding five years at a time.

(2) An application for renewal of the minerals permit shall be submitted no
later than such period of time prior to the expiration date of the minerals
permit as the [regulating authority] shall establish by regulation.

(3) The application for renewal shall provide the information and
accompanying documents required by [ First Schedule], which requires:

f) Identification of the applicant and its
   partners/directors/members/shareholders,
g) Description of the area applied for (including a map and coordinates),
h) Particulars of the minerals for which the permit is sought,


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                 361 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
i) The period for which the permit is sought, and
j) The proposed programs of work, including –
  (i) Details of the mineral deposit,
  (ii) estimated date by which applicant intends to work for profit,
  (iii) estimated capacity of production and scale of operations, nature of
product,
  (iv) envisaged marketing arrangements for sale of mineral product(s),
  (v) Brief environmental impact assessment study and
  (vi) Brief environmental reclamation program.

Article [_] Renewal for artisanal development minerals licences
(1) Subject to subsection (2), an artisanal exploration mining licence shall be
valid for a period of one year and may be renewed for up to three further
periods not exceeding one year at a time.

(2) An artisanal mining licence shall not be renewed pursuant to subsection
(1)–

(a)if the artisanal mining licence area has ceased to be an area declared for
artisanal mining operations;

(b)in respect of any mineral which has ceased to be a mineral prescribed for
artisanal mining operations;

(c)unless the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the applicant has carried
on, in good faith, within the limits of its competence and resources, mining
operations in the artisanal mining licence area and intends to continue doing
so;

(d)if the applicant has not carried out effective rehabilitation and reclamation
of the applicant’s mined out areas to the satisfaction of the [Regulating
Authority] and authorities responsible for the protection of the environment
or paid the prescribed fee;

(e)if the applicant has not reported diligently on its mining operations; or

(f) if the applicant is in default and the [Regulating Authority] is not prepared
to waive the default.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   362 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

30.8. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_] Renewal for large scale development minerals licences                Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision sets the initial
(1) The holder of an exploration licence may, not later than ninety calendar     exploration term of four years for large scale exploration licences that can be
days before the initial expiry of the licence, apply to the Mining Cadastre      renewed twice, for 3 years and 2 years respectively. This gradual reduction in
Office for a first renewal of the licence in respect of not more than one        term length encourages the licence holder to focus on the most prospective sites
hundred and twenty-five square kilometres of the exploration licence area,       within the licenced area and to conduct its exploration program expeditiously.
except that where the results of exploration to date strongly indicate the
presence of widespread mineralisation such that a surrender to one hundred       Unlike Tanzania, Sierra Leone’s mining law does not provide for a retention
                                                                                 licence. Thus, an exploration licence may be held for a maximum period of 9
and twenty-five square kilometres would result in some highly prospective
                                                                                 years in Sierra Leone. That period is likely to be sufficient for the identification
areas being surrendered, the [Regulating Authority], on the advice of the
                                                                                 of a small to medium sized commercial deposit and completion of the requisite
Minerals Advisory Board, may exceptionally allow such areas constituting         environmental and feasibility studies in order to progress to the exploitation
more than one hundred and twenty five square kilometres to be retained.          phase, but the 9-year limit may be problematic for the detailed study of a
                                                                                 complex or very large scale deposit in a challenging environment.
(2) An application for the first renewal of an exploration licence-
(a)shall be accompanied by-                                                      The article requires a mandatory reduction in size of the area to a maximum of
 (i)a detailed annual report as prescribed describing all operations carried     125 square kilometres for the first renewal that may be waived upon the
out in the previous year together with an annual financial report for the same   requisite showing to the Minerals Advisory Board and the Regulating
period, plus a surrender report as prescribed, covering in detail all work       Authority. No further reduction of area is required for the second renewal.
carried out over any portion of the ground to be surrendered and
accompanied by all results, data, information and interpretation since the       Renewals are not automatic under Sierra Leone’s law. The licence holder is
grant of the exploration licence;                                                required to submit a detailed annual report of operations carried out and results
 (ii)a proposed programme of exploration operations to be carried out during     achieved, as well as a proposed exploration work program for the requested
the period of first renewal and the estimated cost thereof;                      renewal period. The renewal must be approved by the Minerals Advisory
 (iii)a plan identifying that part of the exploration licence area for which     Board.
renewal is sought;
 (iv)a description of the contiguous blocks comprising the exploration licence   Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), the provisions related to small scale
area for which renewal is sought, identified in the prescribed manner; and       mining exploration licence provide for a single renewal of an SSM or small-
                                                                                 scale gemstone mining licence for a renewal term of up to ten years. As in the
(b)shall give particulars of any alteration in the matters stated in the         preceding example, the regulating authority is given the discretion to set the
application for the grant of the licence under paragraphs [_] of section [_]     renewal term shorter than the maximum period established in the law.
(on the required elements of an application for an exploration licence).         However, under Zambia’s mining la w only a single renewal is contemplated,
(3) The Mining Cadastre Office shall forward an application for the first        rather than multiple renewals. As in the preceding example, the renewal term is
renewal of an exploration licence to the Minerals Advisory Board.                the same as the initial term of the licence, but the term under Zambia’s law is
                                                                                 twice as long as the term in Botswana.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              363 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(4) Upon receipt of a completed application for the renewal of an
explorations licence from the Mining Cadastre Office, where the [statutory         The longer initial and renewal terms for both SSM and small scale gemstone
advisory board] has determined that an application for the renewal of an           mining (SSGM) reflect the Zambian policy orientation of creating special
exploration licence has met all the criteria for such licence the [statutory       subsectors for SSM and SSGM reserved for Zambian citizens, in order to
advisory board] shall certify to the [Regulating Authority] in the prescribed      promote local mining entrepreneurship. (SSM and SSGM are not defined by
form that it advises that the application be approved, and such certification      production or investment limitations under Zambia’s mining law.)
shall be recorded in the mining cadastre registry.
                                                                                   In contrast to Botswana’s law, the Zambian mining law limits the grounds on
(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, subject to all prescribed criteria of this   which the regulating authority can reject a renewal application, and further
[Law][Act][Code] and of the regulations, on the certified advice of the            requires the regulating authority to provide the licence holder with notice and an
Minerals Advisory Board, renew the licence for the reduced area applied for        opportunity to remedy three of the four potential grounds for non-renewal. This
                                                                                   provides some security of tenure to small scale miners. There is, however, a
with or without variation of the conditions of the initial licence, for a period
                                                                                   significant gap in this protection by omitting a requirement of notice and
not exceeding three years.
                                                                                   opportunity to remedy a “breach of any condition of the licence or any provision
(6) The holder of an exploration licence may, not later than ninety calendar       of? the mining law. Nonrenewal for a temporary breach of a minor condition
days before the expiry of a once-renewed licence apply to the Mining               under the act, with no opportunity to cure the breach, is a potentially harsh
Cadastre Office for a second renewal of the licence.                               penalty. SSM licence holders in Zambia are vulnerable to nonrenewal on such
                                                                                   grounds because the regulating entity has the discretion to deny renewal on any
(7) An application for the second renewal of an exploration licence-               such breach.
(a)shall be accompanied by-                                                        Zambia maintains parallel licensing regimes for SSM and small-scale gemstone
  (i)a report on exploration operations carried out so far and the direct costs    mining. The former requires the applicant for an SSM licence to possess an
incurred thereby;                                                                  exploration licence (prospecting permit) for the area as a prerequisite to
  (ii)a proposed programme of exploration operations, feasibility studies, and     obtaining a SSM licence. That is not required for a small-scale gemstone
environmental impact assessments to be carried out during the period of            mining licence. Small scale gemstone mining is often characterized by “rushes?
second renewal and the estimated cost thereof;                                     of small scale miners to sites where someone else has made an initial discovery,
  (iii)a plan identifying that part of the exploration licence area for which      so the lack of a prospecting permit requirement matches that reality with the
renewal is sought, which shall not be greater than one hundred and twenty-         objective of formalizing small scale gemstone mining activity as much as
five square kilometres unless it can be conclusively demonstrated that to do so    possible.
would unavoidably exclude part of an economically recoverable mineral
deposit;                                                                           The provisions of Zambia’s mining law on the term and renewals of SSM
  (iv)a description of the blocks comprising the exploration licence area for      licences and small scale gemstone licences are identical, however. In both cases
which renewal is sought, identified in the prescribed manner;                      the regulating authority is directed to attach the approved work program to the
                                                                                   renewed licence, such that it becomes a condition of the licence.
(b)shall give particulars of any alteration in the matters stated in the
application for the grant of the licence under paragraphs (a), (f), (h), (j) and   Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), the renewal of the artisanal scale
(k) of section [_] (on the required elements of an application for an              mining licence is suggested to be a simple and straight forward process, in order


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               364 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
exploration licence); and                                                           to encourage formalization of the sector.
(c) shall provide evidence that a mineral discovery has been made that may
be of commercial value.
(8) The Mining Cadastre Office shall forward an application for the second
renewal of an exploration licence to the Minerals Advisory Board.
(9) Upon receipt of a completed application for the second renewal of an
explorations licence from the Mining Cadastre Office, where the Minerals
Advisory Board has determined that an application for the second renewal of
an exploration licence has met all the criteria and where the holder of an
exploration licence who has made and reported a discovery of possible
commercial value, the Board shall certify to the [Regulating Authority] in the
prescribed form that it advises that the application be approved, and such
certification shall be recorded in the mining cadastre registry.

(10) The [Regulating Authority] shall on the certified advice of Minerals
Advisory Board confirming all prescribed criteria of this [Law][Act][Code]
and of the regulations have been met, renew the licence for a period not
exceeding two years.

(11) The applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision on renewal
applications, and if an application is refused, the [Regulating Authority] shall
give reasons for such refusal.

(12) Where the [Regulating Authority] has refused an application to renew an
exploration licence that is renewable and the cause given by the [Regulating
Authority] for such refusal can be remedied by the holder of the licence, if the
cause has been remedied with thirty calendar days of receiving the notice
under subsection (11), the licence holder may reapply for a renewal of the
licence within such thirty-day period.

Article [_] Renewal for small scale development minerals licences
(1) A holder of a small-scale mining licence may apply to the [regulating
entity] at least sixty days before the expiry of the small- scale mining licence,
for the renewal of the licence in the prescribed manner and form upon
payment of the prescribed fee.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               365 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(2) Subject to subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall, where an
application for the renewal of a small-scale mining licence complies with the
requirements of this [Law][Act][Code], renew the small-scale mining licence
for a period not exceeding ten years, on such terms and conditions as the
[Regulating Authority]] may determine.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall reject an application for the renewal of a
small-scale mining licence where-

(a) the development of the mining area has not proceeded according to the
programs initially agreed;

(b) minerals in workable quantities do not remain to be produced;

(c) the program of the intended mining operations will not ensure the proper
conservation and use in the national interest of the mineral resources of the
mining area; or

(d) the applicant is in breach of any condition of the licence or any provision
of this [Law][Act][Code].

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not reject an application on any ground
referred to in—

(a) paragraph (a) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has
given the applicant the details of the default and the applicant has failed to
remedy the default within three months of the notification;

(b) paragraph (b) of subsection (3), unless [Regulating Authority] has given
the applicant reasonable opportunity to make written representations thereon
to the [Regulating Authority] or (c) paragraph (c) of subsection (3), unless
the [Regulating Authority] has notified the applicant and the applicant has
failed to propose amendments to the operations within three months of the
notification.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on the renewal of a small-scale mining


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                 366 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
licence, attach to the licence the approved program of mining operations to
be carried out in the period of renewal.

2. Renewal of small-scale gemstone licence

(1) A holder of a small-scale gemstone licence may apply to the [Regulating
Authority] at least sixty days before the expiry of the licence, for the renewal
of the licence in the prescribed manner and form upon payment of the
prescribed fee.

(2) Subject to subsection (3), the [Regulating Authority] shall, where an
application for the renewal of a small-scale gemstone licence complies with
the requirements of this [Law][Act][Code], renew the small-scale gemstone
licence for a period not exceeding ten years, on such terms and conditions as
the [regulating entity] may determine.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall reject an application for renewal of a
small-scale gemstone licence where—

(a) the development of the mining area has not proceeded with reasonable
diligence;

(b) minerals in workable quantities do not remain to be produced;

(c) the programme of the intended mining operations will not ensure the
proper conservation and use in the national interest of the mineral resources
of the mining area; or

(d) the applicant is in breach of any condition of the licence or any provision
of this [Law][Act][Code].

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not reject an application on any ground
referred to in—

a) paragraph (a) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has
given the applicant the details of the default and the applicant has failed to
remedy the default within three months of the notification;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  367 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(b) paragraph (b) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has
given the applicant reasonable opportunity to make written representations
thereon to the [Regulating Authority] or

(c) paragraph (c) of subsection (3), unless the [Regulating Authority] has
notified the applicant and the applicant has failed to propose amendments to
the operations within three months of the notification.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall, on the renewal of a small-scale
gemstone licence, attach to the licence the program of mining operations to
be carried out in the period of renewal.

Article [_] Renewal for artisanal development minerals licences
(1) Artisanal licences would be renewed in terms of one (1) year, upon
petition of the Licensee, renewal that shall automatically.

                                             30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                           30.9 Suspension of Licence

Suspension of a licence may be a temporary sanction against a licence holder or a de facto suspension of the licence term due to a force majeure
event preventing the holder from conducting operations.

In the case of force majeure, the licence holder is excused from compliance with certain obligations during the reasonable duration of the event;
and the term of the licence may be extended for that period. Careful attention should be given to the drafting of what is considered a force
majeure event, the related notification requirement, the obligations of the licence holder to use best efforts to overcome the force majeure event as
expeditiously as practicable, the determination and notification of the end of the force majeure event, whether the term of the licence is extended
by the period of the force majeure event, and under what circumstances the licence may be terminated if the force majeure event continues beyond
a specified time limit.
A distinction should be made between suspension of the mineral licence, on the one hand, and suspensions of operations, on the other hand. When
the mineral licence is suspended, the rights of the holder of that title, as well as the term, are suspended; and this may complicate the remediation
of the breach that the suspension requires. It also raises collateral issues to be addressed such as whether and on what conditions a third party


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                   368 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
application for the area that is subject to the suspended licence can be submitted or accepted. The suspension of operations, on the other hand,
prohibits the mineral activity under the licence but does not alter the holder’s right to occupy the licenced area and undert ake whatever is
necessary in order to remedy the breach of an obligation; and the term of the licence continues to run.

A suspension of the licence may be an appropriate temporary sanction for failure of the licence holder to timely make required payments or file
required reports, because both the failure to meet those obligations and the remedy are administrative events wholly within the control of the
licence holder and do not require any operations at the site.

A suspension of operations may be the appropriate temporary sanction for failures to implement sufficient environmental protection measures, to
implement required social obligations or to meet health, safety, security and labour standards. Under such a suspension, the licence holder
maintains its mineral licence for the purpose of taking the necessary remedial action and comply its obligations, but is prohibited from conducting
exploration activities until the problem issues have been resolved to the satisfaction of the regulatory entity, evidently losing productive time in its
licence, which is itself the sanction.

Some mining laws provide for the suspension of operations or of the licence as a preliminary sanction to be followed by revocation of the licence
if the underlying cause for the suspension is not remedied within a specified time period.

30.9. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision is designed to
(1) The [Regulating Authority], or any person authorized by the [Regulating    apply to reconnaissance, exploration or mining licences. That is appropriate
Authority], may, in writing, order exploration operations to be temporarily    insofar as there can be a risk of dangerous activity taking place under a
suspended on an emergency basis, regardless of whether such operations are     prospecting/reconnaissance or exploration licence and there is no apparent
authorized by a mineral right, until such arrangements are made that are in    reason to be more tolerant of any of the stated grounds for suspension based on
the [Regulating Authority]’s opinion necessary to prevent danger to life,      the type of licence under which they have occurred.
property or the environment or to comply with this [Law][Act][Code].
                                                                               This provision makes the distinction between suspension of operations pending
(2) The [Regulating Authority] may cancel or vary the terms of any temporary   remediation of a condition that constitutes a danger to life, property or the
suspension order.                                                              environment or is in non-compliance with the mining law, on the one hand, and
                                                                               suspension of a mineral licence as a precursor to potential cancelation of the
(3) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall have the power to confirm a            licence in the event of non-remediation of any of the reasons listed, on the other
temporary suspension order made by the [Regulating Authority] and may not      hand. Whereas suspension of operations is not preceded by prior notice and an
delegate this power.                                                           opportunity to remedy the cause of the suspension, prior notice and such
                                                                               opportunity are required in the case of suspension of the licence.
(4) A temporary suspension order shall lapse after twenty-one days of its
                                                                               The Administrative Reviewer is the supervisory authority immediately superior


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           369 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
issuance, unless it is confirmed, in writing, by the [Administrative Reviewer].    to the Regulating Authority in the administrative hierarchy.

 (5) The [Administrative Reviewer] after consultation with the [statutory          This provision represents, in general, a balanced approach to protecting the
advisory body] may suspend a mineral right if the holder-                          interests of the State and affected stakeholders from harm in a manner consistent
                                                                                   with providing security of title to the licence holder. Failures to comply with
(a) fails to make any of the payments required by or under this                    specific obligations of the licence holder are sanctioned initially by suspensions
[Law][Act][Code] on the date due;                                                  of operations or rights, as the case may be, and the offending licence holder is
                                                                                   encouraged and given the opportunity to establish compliance before action to
(b) fails to meet any prescribed minimum annual program of work or work
                                                                                   cancel the licence is taken. Because of the breadth of some of the grounds
expenditure requirement;
                                                                                   stated for ultimate cancellation of the licence, the provision may heighten the
(c) grossly violates health and safety regulations or causes environmental         risk of loss of title more than necessary. This could be attenuated by limiting
harm;                                                                              the grounds for cancellation of the licence whilst maintaining broader grounds
                                                                                   for temporary suspension of operations which is a costly sanction in itself.
(d) employs or makes use of child workers;

(e) fails to submit reports required by this [Law][Act][Code];

(f) contravenes any of the provisions of this [Law][Act][Code] or the
conditions of his mineral right or the provisions of any other enactment
relating to mines and minerals;

(g) dies and his heir or successor in title is not qualified under this
[Law][Act][Code] to hold the mineral right, unless an application is received
from the heir or successor within ninety days of the death to transfer the right
to a third party who is so qualified and accepts all duties under the right;

(h) becomes an un-discharged bankrupt or becomes of unsound mind;

(i) makes any statement to the [Administrative Reviewer] in connection with
his mineral right which he knows or ought to have known to be false;

(j) fails to substantially comply with the terms of a community development
agreement when required by this [Law][Act][Code] to do so;

(k) for any reason becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under
article [_] (on eligibility rules).

(2) The [Administrative Reviewer] shall, before suspending any mineral right


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               370 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
give notice to the holder in such a manner as shall be prescribed and shall, in
such a notice require the holder to remedy in not less than thirty calendar
days any breach of the conditions of his mineral right.

(3) If the holder of a mineral right fails to remedy any failure or
contravention specified in paragraphs (c), (d) and (k) of subsection (1), the
[Regulating Authority] may, by notice to the holder thereof, suspend the
mineral right forthwith.

 (4) The powers of the [Regulating Authority] under this section shall, in
relation to artisanal mining licences, be exercised by the [Regulating
Authority], but need not consult the [statutory advisory board].

30.9. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from the DRC Mining Code (2002), these provisions represent a
(1) Any serious offence, as defined in the Mining Regulations, which is            different approach to suspension. The first article provides for a suspension of
committed by the holder shall be penalised with the immediate suspension of        work as a sanction for any “serious failure?. The provision delegates to the
work, decided on by [the Regulatory Authority], once prior notice has been         mining regulation the definition of “serious failure? and the length of the
given.                                                                             suspension, which is to be a function of the seriousness of the failure and its
                                                                                   effect on the environment and public health and safety. The provision
(2) The duration of the suspension shall be set in the regulations, according to   authorizes the Mining Administration to undertake the necessary remedial
the seriousness of the offence and its impact on the environment, and public       action if the licence holder fails to do so, at the licence holder’s expense.
health and safety.
                                                                                   The second article provides for suspension of operations for three months as the
(3) To remedy said serious offence, [the Regulatory Authority] may, of its own     sanction for a repeated failure by the licence holder to maintain required
accord or at the request of the local authorities concerned, require that the      documentation. In such case, a warning and opportunity to remedy is provided
holder carry out work which it deems necessary in order to protect public          before the imposition of the suspension order. The suspension is extended for a
health, the environment, workers or neighbouring mines. Should the holder          second period of three months if the underlying cause is not remedied by the
fail to perform timeously, [the Regulatory Authority] may have said work           end of the initial suspension period; and if still not remedied at the end of the
carried out by a third party, at the holder's expense.                             second suspension period, a fine of USD 500 per day is levied against the
                                                                                   licence holder until the documents are properly maintained.
Article [_]
(1) Should it be duly found that the required documents prescribed by the          The suspensions do not ultimately lead to cancellation of the licence in either
present Code have not been kept in proper order, [the Regulatory Authority]        case. This approach represents a philosophy that a costly sanction that does not
shall send a written warning to the mining operator concerned, if this failure     involve loss of rights is more conducive to remediation and compliance, as well
to comply does not constitute an offence.                                          as more attractive to long term investment, than a sanction that leads to
                                                                                   cancellation of rights. However, it does involve a risk that the Mining

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              371 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(2) Should the holder repeat the offence, its activities may be suspended by         Administration will not be able to cancel the mineral licence of a holder that
the [the Regulatory Authority], following the issue of a compliance notice, for      repeatedly fails to remedy a serious violation but nevertheless complies with the
a period of three months.                                                            obligations (stated elsewhere) necessary to maintain the licence in effect.

(3) At the end of the suspension period, [the Regulatory Authority] shall carry
out an audit. If it is found that the holder is now compliant, the suspension
shall be lifted. If not, it shall be renewed for a further period of three months.

(4) If the compliance notice has not had the required result by the end of the
second suspension period, the holder shall be subject to a penalty, the total
amount of which, in [national currency], shall be equivalent to [] [currency]
per day or part thereof, until the procedural defect has been cured.


                                                 30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                              30.10 Termination of Licence

A mining law should state clearly in one place the various ways in which an exploration licence can terminate, which would include expiration of
the term, surrender by the holder, and cancellation or withdrawal by the issuing authority. The law should make clear what the status of the
licenced area is upon termination in each manner and any remaining potential liabilities or incapacities that the licence holder may have upon
termination.

Some mining laws also provide that an exploration licence is automatically extended during the application process for a mining title once a timely
application by the holder has been filed.

The validity of a mining licence typically terminates in one of the following ways:

                 Upon its expiration date, unless and to the extent it is renewed or automatically extended by law; or
                 Upon nullification (e.g., if issued to an ineligible holder, or for mineral substances for which such licences are not authorized, or
                  over an area that is not available for a licence under the law, or if obtained by fraud); or
                 Upon revocation due to abandonment or breach of conditions that constitute grounds for revocation of the licence; or
                 Upon relinquishment or surrender of the licence by the holder prior to its expiration date.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                372 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
In the cases of small scale and artisanal scale licensing, the mining law may provide that a licence must be transformed into an industrial or large
scale exploitation licence if the mining operations exceed the parameters of small scale or artisanal scale production as defined in the law; and the
law may authorize the regulating authority to monitor the SSM activity and terminate non-performing licences in order to avoid excessive areas
being tied up by non-productive SSM licence holders.

It is important for termination provisions to specify the obligations of the licence holder in connection with termination of the licence. In addition,
many mining laws provide the Government with a right to either acquire equipment and installations at the mine site upon termination or require
their removal by the licence holder. The holder’s environmental rehabilitation obligation should apply regardless of the t ype of termination. It is
best practice to require, at the granting of the licence, the licence holder to provide a bank guarantee and/or environmental escrow account to
which the Government has access in order to pay for necessary environmental restoration if the licence holder abandons the mine without
performing the necessary clean-up in the case of termination by revocation.
30.10. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_] Termination of mineral rights                                         Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), these prov isions include a
“termination? means the lapse of a mineral right by expiry of time, surrender     definition of “termination? of a mineral right as including its expiration,
or cancellation; and where the surrender or cancellation is in respect of part    cancelation or surrender, which may be total or partial.
only of the area covered by the mineral right, then the mineral right shall be
deemed to have been surrendered or cancelled in respect of that surrendered       There are two general provisions on termination. The first governs (a) the
or cancelled area;                                                                required reporting and disposition of assets at the mining site, the reporting of
                                                                                  site conditions, and the regulating authority’s prerogatives in response to such
Article [_] Applicable to all mining rights licence holders                       reports; (b) the restoration of the rights of the property owner to the land, subject
(1) Where the holder of a mineral right intends to cease operations either        to the Government’s option to retain the land upon the payment of
during the period of or on termination of his mineral right, he shall, not less   compensation to the landowner; and (c) the maintenance intact of any fresh
than ninety calendar days or such other period as the [Regulating Authority]      water dam on the site.
may allow before such cessation or termination, furnish to the [regulating
authority], a full register of assets showing those assets which he intends to    The second general provision requires the submission to the regulating authority
remove and those which he intends to leave in the area covered by the             of all records, data, plans and maps required to be maintained under the mining
mineral right, and shall further notify the [Regulating Authority] of any         law and a final report summarizing all findings and work carried out under the
potentially hazardous substances, erections or excavations in that area.          mineral licence.

(2) On receipt of a notice in terms of subsection (1), the [Regulating            The specific provisions require the licence holder to notify “ the appropriate
Authority] may, if he deems it necessary-                                         local government authority or local authority and an authorized officer? in
                                                                                  advance of any planned cessation of exploration or mining operations under the
(a) certify that specified items of fixed machinery are necessary for the care    licence. They also require the licence holder to carry out rehabilitation and
and maintenance of the area covered by the mineral right and such items and       reclamation of the mined out areas.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                373 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
machinery shall not be removed;
                                                                                   These provisions apply in the case of any type of termination, and for any size
(b) require that specified buildings and other items of fixed machinery shall      of activity in development minerals.
be removed;

(c) require that potentially hazardous substances, erections and excavations
be removed or made safe in such manner as he may direct.

(3) If removal of specified assets which the holder has indicated that he
wishes to remove is prohibited under paragraph (a) of subsection (2), the
[supervising authority] shall pay reasonable compensation to the holder for
such assets and any person who acquires a mineral right over the area
concerned shall reimburse the sum equal to the compensation so paid.

(4) Upon cessation of operations by the holder of a mineral right, the area
covered by the mineral right shall revert to the owner thereof provided that if
the [regulating authority] determines that the area should be retained, it shall
be so retained by the [Regulating Authority] subject to payment of fair
compensation to the owner for such retention.

(5) Any fresh water dam and the waters impounded thereby shall be left intact
on cessation of operations or termination of a mineral right.

(6) Upon termination of any mineral right, the holder thereof shall deliver to
the [Regulating Authority] -

(a) all records which the holder is obliged under this [Law][Act][Code] to
maintain including full and detailed reports as prescribed containing all
information, results, interpretation, data and other related information
pertaining to the exploration and mining of minerals under the mineral right;

(b) all plans or maps of the area subject to the mineral right prepared by the
holder or at his instructions; and

(c) except for the holder of an artisanal mining licence, a final report which
shall be a summary of previous annual reports plus a detailed report on
containing all information, results, interpretation and data relating to all


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                             374 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
activities carried out in the final period of the licence since the previous
annual report.

(7) Where the former holder of a mineral right fails to deliver any document
required to be delivered under subsection (6), the [Regulating Authority]
shall call upon such former holder to comply with subsection (6).

30.10. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from the unofficial English translation of Guinea’s Amended Mining
(1) A mining right licence expires at the end of the period for which it was        Code (2011), this provision:
granted (including subsequent renewals thereof), by relinquishment or by
revocation. At the end of the term of a mining right licence, the rights                    States the three grounds on which mineral licences terminate: (i) at the
conferred on its holder revert to the State free of charge.                                  end of their term, (ii) by relinquishment, or (iii) by revocation;
                                                                                            Establishes that the rights revert to the State upon termination and that
(2) Rights granted by the holder to third parties over substances and within                 all rights granted to third parties lapse upon expiration;
the zone covered by the title, automatically lapse at the end of the term of                Preserves the obligations of the mineral licence or authorisation holder
such title.                                                                                  after expiration, particularly as to payments due and site rehabilitation;
                                                                                             and
(3) However, the holder of a mining right licence remains liable for the                    Requires the holder to submit a final report of work carried out to the
payment of outstanding duties and taxes and for the obligations incumbent                    Mining Administration.
upon it with respect to the environment and rehabilitation of the developed
sites, as well as for all the other obligations contemplated under this Code, its   Thus, these terms clarify the status of the mineral rights and related obligations
implementing regulations and in the terms of reference or the Mining                at termination of the mineral licence or authorisation.
Agreement.

(4) Furthermore, the titleholder shall provide the [Regulating Authority] of a      This provision applies to both exploration and exploitation licences.
detailed report on the work carried out. All information provided shall
become the property of the State.

                                                30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                              30.11 Revocation of Licence

A provision in which a licence is withdrawn and/or taken away by the Regulating Authority is referred to as revocation of the licence. Whereas


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                375 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
suspension or monetary penalties may be imposed for various failures to comply with health, safety, environmental protection and other qualitative
obligations – thereby providing an incentive to comply while protecting workers and communities from the consequences of such breaches,
revocation of the licence is the ultimate penalty, the grounds for which should be limited and clearly stated, and due process should be granted to
the Licencee, even in the administrative phase. The revocation provisions of the law should also state whether the ground for revocation is one
that can be cured and, if so, within what timeframe after notice.

30.11. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_] Revocation of licence                                                 Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this provision states clear causes for
(1) The [regulating entity] may revoke a licence granted where,                   the revocation of the licence granted by the government. It closes the door for
                                                                                  discretionary action from the government officers. Also, it includes the
(a) the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the Licencee has contravened     obligation of providing a term for defence of the Licencee, when it can justify or
or failed to comply with a term or condition of the licence or a requirement      remedy the problem presented and in consequence, continue executing its rights.
applicable to the Licencee,

(b) the Licencee is convicted of any offence relating to the smuggling or
illegal sale or dealing in minerals, or

(c) fails to make payment on the due date, whether due to the Republic or
another person, required by or under this [Law][Act][Code],

(d) becomes insolvent or bankrupt, enters into an agreement or scheme of
composition with the holder’s creditors, or takes advantage of an enactment
for the benefit of its debtors or goes into liquidation, except as part of a
scheme for an arrangement or amalgamation,

(e) makes a statement to the [regulating entity] in connection with the mineral
right which the holder knows or ought to have known to be materially false,
or

(f) for a reason, becomes ineligible to apply for a mineral right under this
[Law][Act][Code].

(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall, before suspending or cancelling a
mineral right under subsection (1), give notice to the holder and shall in the
notice, require the holder to remedy a breach of the condition of the mineral
right within a reasonable period, being not less than sixty days and no more


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              376 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
than 120 days, to show cause to the reasonable satisfaction of the [Regulating
Authority] why the mineral right should not be suspended or cancelled.

(3) On cancellation of a mineral right under this section, the right of the
holder shall cease but without prejudice to the liabilities or obligations
incurred by another person in relation to the mineral right prior to the date of
the cancellation.

(4) Without limiting the scope of section (2), the [Regulating Authority] shall
cancel a mining lease or a restricted mining lease if the holder has failed
other than for good cause, for a period of two years or more, to carry out any
or a material part of the holder’s program or mineral operations.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] shall before cancelling a mining lease give
notice to the holder and shall in the notice, require the holder to remedy the
breach within a reasonable period, being not less than one hundred and
twenty days, and where the breach cannot be remedied, to show cause to the
reasonable satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority] why the mining lease or
restricted mining lease should not be cancelled.

30.11. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision provides broader
(1) Subject to subsections (2), (3) and (4), the [Regulating Authority] may        grounds for the cancelation or revocation of an exploration licence (called
cancel or suspend any prospecting/reconnaissance permission, exploration           “prospecting right?) than do the provisions of the DRC Code. However, the
right, mining right, mining permit or retention permit if the holder thereof –     South African provision also provides due process safeguards in the form of
                                                                                   notice of grounds for revocation (to the Licensee and any mortgagees), an
(a) is conducting any prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or mining            opportunity for the Licensee to respond with justifications, and required
operation in contravention of this [Law][Act][Code];                               instructions for curative measures. The revocation can only proceed if the cause
                                                                                   is not cured within the allotted timeframe.
(b) breaches any material term or condition of such right, permit or
permission;

(c) is contravening the approved environmental management programme; or

(d) has submitted inaccurate, incorrect or misleading information in
connection with any matter required to be submitted under this

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              377 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
[Law][Act][Code].

(2) Before acting under subsection (1), the [Regulating Authority] must –

(a) give written notice to the holder indicating the intention to suspend or
cancel the right;
(b) set out the reasons why he or she is considering suspending or cancelling
the right;

(c) afford the holder a reasonable opportunity to show why the right, permit
or permission should not be suspended or cancelled; and

(d) notify the mortgagor, if any, of the exploration right, mining right or
mining permit concerned of his or her intention to suspend or cancel the right
or permit.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] must direct the holder to take specified
measures to remedy any contravention, breach or failure.

(4) If the holder does not comply with the direction given under subsection
(3), the [Regulating Authority] may act under subsection (1) against the
holder after having –

(a) given the holder a reasonable opportunity to make representations; and
(b) considered any such representations.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] may by written notice to the holder lift a
suspension if the holder –

(a) complies with a directive contemplated in subsection (3); or
(b) furnishes compelling reasons for the lifting of the suspension.


                                                30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                               30.12 Surrender of Licence


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                              378 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

A provision in which the licence holder gives up the mining right voluntarily before the term of the licence has run out is referred to as surrender
of the licence. Surrender of an exploration licence may be total or partial. Partial surrender or relinquishment of area subject to the licence might
require the issuance of a new exploration licence for the area not surrendered. Surrender/relinquishment may be automatic at the option of the
licence holder upon notice to the Regulating Authority, or it may require a decision of the authority.

An exploration licence holder may wish to surrender all or relinquish part of the licenced area when it has satisfied itself that the area in question
does not contain a commercial deposit of the minerals sought, or because the holder lacks the funds or does not wish to allocate further funds to
continue exploring for minerals in the area, or to reduce the amount of the annual fee that it must pay in order to maintain the licenced area in
subsequent years, or to reduce its aggregate licenced area holdings in order to qualify for a licence in a more attractive area that has become
available in the same jurisdiction.

It is considered to be in the interest of the State to facilitate surrender or partial relinquishment of areas held under exploration licences in order to
encourage exploration licence holders to focus their exploration efforts and investment expeditiously, and to make areas available for other
investors as soon as no further exploration activity in the area by the existing licence holder is to be expected. Therefore, the procedure for
surrender or partial relinquishment of licenced exploration areas may be simpler and faster than the corresponding procedure for the surrender or
relinquishment of a licence or licenced area for exploitation. However, such procedures tend to be similar across types of licences.

The mining law provision on surrender should (a) cover both total and partial surrenders of licenced area, (b) require that any partial surrender be
of blocks or segments that comply with the cadastral rules of shape and dimensions, (c) indicate whether an administrative approval is required in
order for the surrender to become effective, (d) clarify the consequence of a surrender with respect to responsibility for area-based fees paid or to
become due, (e) clarify the consequence of a surrender with respect to liabilities or responsibilities of the licence holder under the mining law and
other laws, in particular environmental laws, and related agreements, and (f) clarify the status and availability of the surrendered area, as well as
the responsibility of a subsequent holder of a licence for the area.

Care should be taken in the mining law and regulations and/or the environmental law and regulations to assure that an environmental bond, escrow
account or other surety mechanism is required and has been established and that either the surrendering/relinquishing exploration licence holder
has completed all necessary environmental rehabilitation work or that the [Regulating Authority] has access to a sufficient surety to complete all
necessary rehabilitation work.

30.12. Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), these two articles deal separately with
(1) The holder of a mining right licence may, upon application in the        the surrender of a mineral title, on the one hand, and the total or partial


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                       379 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
prescribed form and manner, and upon meeting prescribed conditions,                 relinquishment of land held under the mineral title, on the other hand.
surrender the mineral title.
                                                                                    The provisions apply to surrender of land held under all types of mineral
(2) The Mining Cadastre Office shall approve an application made under              licences, without distinction. That is probably appropriate as between
subsection (1) of this section to surrender the mining right if he is satisfied     exploration and exploitation, because exploration can involve the construction
that-                                                                               of access roads and camps, the introduction of chemicals for drilling, and
                                                                                    invasive exploration techniques. Prospecting/reconnaissance activity, on the
(a)the holder of the mining right has submitted the request for surrender in        other hand, does not present similar issues, so surrenders of area held under
the prescribed form and manner;                                                     prospecting/reconnaissance licences could be dealt with in more summary
                                                                                    fashion.
(b)the surrender will not affect any liability incurred by the mining right
holder before the surrender of the mining right, including environmental            These articles cover both total and partial surrenders of licenced area.
obligation;                                                                         Apparently, in the case of a total surrender of the licence, a two-stage procedure
                                                                                    is involved: first the surrender of the licenced land area (under the second
(c)all rents due and fees prescribed, if any, have been paid by the holder of       article), and then surrender of the licence (under the first article). The second
the mining right; and                                                               article requires, appropriately, that any surrender of licenced land area comply
                                                                                    with the prescriptions of the law and regulations as to geometry and dimension.
(d) the holder of the mining right has surrendered the original title document.
                                                                                    The surrender of land area, total or partial, appears to require an administrative
Article [_]
                                                                                    approval, whereas the surrender of the licence appears to be automatic if the
(1) The holder of a mining right may at any time during the period of the
                                                                                    stated conditions are met. The second article provides for adjustment of fees
validity of such mining right, upon application to the Mining Cadastre Office
                                                                                    payable on the basis of the area covered by the mineral title, to reflect any
in the prescribed form and manner and upon meeting prescribed conditions,
                                                                                    partial surrender or relinquishment. Both articles provide that the surrender of
relinquish the area or part of area covered by the mining right; provided, the
                                                                                    licenced land area or of the licence does not affect any liability of the licence
geometry and dimensions of each surrendered area shall satisfy the
                                                                                    holder incurred prior to the surrender, including environmental liability in
prescriptions of this [Law][Act][Code] and its Regulations
                                                                                    particular.
(2) Upon relinquishment of the area or part of the area covered by the mining       These provisions do not clarify the status of the surrendered area, however.
right in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, the      Ideally, provision would be made for an environmental audit or review before
fees payable on the basis of the area covered by the mining right shall be          the area becomes available to another Licencee and a clarification of the
adjusted proportionally taking into account the area relinquished.                  respective environmental liabilities of the surrendering licence holder and the
                                                                                    next licence holder. Clarification is also needed as to whether the surrendered
(3) The relinquishment of the area or part of the area covered by the mining        area will subsequently be made available for minerals exploration, and if so, by
right shall not affect the duration of the mining right.                            what method (for example, whether by competitive bid or by claim staking).
(4) The relinquishment of the area or part of the area shall not affect any
liability incurred by the mineral titleholder in respect of the area relinquished



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                380 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
prior to the relinquishment, including environmental obligations.

30.12. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this article combines the provisions for
(1) A holder of a mining right who wishes to surrender all or a part of the         total and partial relinquishment of licenced area and surrender of the licence. As
land subject to the mining right shall apply to the [Regulating Authority] for a    in the first example, the conditions and procedure are the same regardless of the
certificate of surrender not later than two months before the date on which         type of mineral right involved; and the coverage is similar.
the holder wishes the surrender to take effect.
                                                                                    However, in this example, stricter conditions apply for the issuance of the
(2) An application under subsection (1) shall be in accordance with                 certificate of surrender, and the conditions under which such a certificate shall
prescribed Regulations.                                                             not be issued are specified. These include, in particular, a failure to provide
                                                                                    records and reports of mineral operations (presumably as further detailed in
(3) Subject to subsection (4), upon an application duly made under subsection       regulations) and “where the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied that the
(1), the [Regulating Authority] shall issue a certificate of surrender in respect   applicant will surrender the land in a condition which is safe and accords with
of the land to which the application relates.                                       good mining practice?. The latter stipulation appears to require an inspection of
                                                                                    the area to be surrendered. Further clarification is needed as to whether the
(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall not issue a certificate of surrender           condition applies to environmental rehabilitation and as to the applicable
                                                                                    standard, both of which could be provided in the mining regulation.
(a) to an applicant who is in default,

(b) to an applicant who fails to give records and reports in relation to the
applicant’s mineral operations,

(c) where the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied that the applicant will
surrender the land in a condition which is safe and accords with good mining
practice, or

(d) in respect of land, if the remaining area of the land after the surrender
would be less than one block.

(5) Where a certificate of surrender is issued under this section, the
[Regulating Authority] shall, where only part of the land subject to the
mineral right is surrendered, amend the relevant licence accordingly or
cancel the mining right where the surrender is in respect of the whole area
covered by the mineral right.

(6) Land in respect of which a certificate of surrender is issued, shall be


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                381 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
treated as having been surrendered with effect from the date on which the
certificate of surrender is issued under subsection (3).

(7) The surrender of land under this section shall not affect a liability
incurred by a person in respect of that land before the date on which the
surrender took effect.

                                            30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                  30.13 Transfer/Assignment of Rights

Transfer and assignment of rights refers to provisions that deal with whether a licence holder may hand over, sell, rent (either in whole or in part)
or in any way encumber/place a lien on the licence for the benefit of another person or entity. The ability to transfer or assign rights to an
exploration licence, or ownership of the company holding the licence, and any conditions for such transfer or assignment, are key considerations in
a mining law. Most exploration work is carried out by junior mining companies, usually with the goal of discovering a commercial deposit and
then selling the rights to develop it – in whole or in part – to a major mining company. While transfer of exploration rights do not on their own
grant the transferee the right to exploit a mineral deposit, acqui sition of another company’s exploration licence covering a substantial identified
deposit can place a larger mining company in a preferential or exclusive position to acquire exploitation rights for the deposit, since most regimes
give the exploration licence holder a preferential or exclusive right to acquire such an exploitation licence during the term of the exploration
licence, subject to meeting the requirements for issuance of the exploitation licence.

If such transfers and sales are discouraged or rendered difficult, that in turn can have a negative impact on investment in exploration, since the vast
majority of investment in exploration in previously underexplored territory around the world since about 1990 has been made by or through junior
mining companies that lack the capability to develop and exploit a major mineral deposit on their own and who invest with the intent of
transferring their rights or shares to a major mining company if they make a substantial discovery. On the other hand, countries are entitled to
verify that the transferee is an eligible person who is not disqualified from holding the licence. Accordingly, review and control over transfers and
assignments to assure compliance with eligibility and capability requirements is the norm. In that sense, in most of the countries, the government
has the right to refuse the authorization for the transfer, if it considers the rights of the State will be undermined.

The transfer provisions should specify that the transferee assumes all of the obligations under the licence, and also whether the transferor remains
responsible or liable for obligations incurred during the transferor’s tenure.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                    382 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
30.13. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision establishes an
(1) Subject to this section, an exploration licence or any interest therein or      equilibrium between the licence holder’s right to transfer the licence and the
any controlling interest in the holder thereof may be transferred to any other      State’s right to require that the transferee be an eligible holder. It also clarifies
person provided that the [Regulating Authority] grants proper authorization         that the transferee assumes all of the transferor’s liabilities and duties under the
                                                                                    licence.
(2) In the petition for the authorization, the applicant shall give to the
[Regulating Authority] such details of the transferee as would be required in       This is a liberal transfer provision because:
the case of an application for an exploration licence.
                                                                                             It requires only the eligibility of the transferee; and
(3) Where the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the transferee is not                 The mining law does not state that the transferor continues to be liable
disqualified under any provision of this [Law][Act][Code] from holding an                     for the results of the transferor’s action or inaction during its tenure as
exploration licence, the [Regulating Authority] shall notify the applicant of                 holder of the licence.
approval of the transfer of the exploration licence or an interest therein.

(4) Upon the transfer of an exploration licence, the transferee shall assume
and be responsible for all rights, liabilities and duties of the transferor under
the licence.
30.13. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] Deeds of assignment                                                     Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), these articles provide a substantial
(1) Mining rights and [Permanent Quarry Operating Permits] may be the               amount of detail as to the treatment of various aspects and types of transfers of
subject of a total or partial cession or assignment. Said assignment shall be       mineral rights. The same procedures and standards apply for transfers of
final and irrevocable. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, the            exploration rights as for transfers of exploitation rights.
common law relating to assignment shall apply.
(2) Any partial assignment must comply with the provisions of Articles [_]          The first article establishes that mineral rights and quarry rights may be
and [_] (on the shape and location of mining areas) of the present Code.            transferred in whole or in part; that partial transfers must conform to cadastral
                                                                                    rules as to the size and form of licenced areas, specified in other articles; that
(3) In addition, any partial assignment of an operating right or a [Permanent       rights can only be transferred to an eligible person, and that the agreement of
Quarry Operating Permit] shall be effective only from when a new mine or            transfer must contain the engagement of the transferee to assume all of the
quarry operating right is granted.                                                  obligations of the transferor under the licence; as well as other details.

(4) It is a prerequisite that the assignee must be a person who is eligible to      The second article refers back to other articles for the details of the review of
request and hold the mining rights or the [Permanent Quarry Operating               applications for transfers of mineral rights and quarrying rights, respectively.
Permits].
                                                                                    The third article provides that a partial transfer is only enforceable when a new


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                   383 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                  PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(5) The deed of assignment must contain a commitment on the part of the           licence has been issued and registered.
assignee to assume all of the holder's obligations with regard to the State
which arise from the mining right or [the Permanent Quarry Operating              The fourth article establishes a time period for and the content of the technical
Permit] concerned.                                                                part of the review of a request for transfer. The technical review focuses on
                                                                                  verifying the financial capacity of the transferee, the latter’s assumption of the
Article [_]. The assessment of an assignment application                          obligations corresponding to the licence, and the acceptability of any changes
The assessment of an assignment application is to be done in accordance with      proposed by the transferee in the documents related to the licence, such as the
the provisions of Article [_] (on cadastral surveys) and Article [_] (on the      environmental management and site rehabilitation plans. The article requires
assessment of a subleasing application) of the present Code.                      written reasons for any refusal of a request for transfer and a right to appeal any
                                                                                  refusal. It also provides for the registration of the transfer immediately
Article [_] The registration and enforceability of the deed of assignment (1)     following notice of the approval of the transfer to the transferor and transferee.
In the event of the partial assignment of a mining or quarrying right for
prospecting, the Mining Cadastre shall issue a new mining or quarrying title.     The fifth article clarifies that a transfer of mineral rights does not free the
                                                                                  transferor from any payment obligations to the State incurred prior to the
(2) In the event of the partial assignment of an operating right or a             transfer, nor does it extinguish the initial licence holder’s environmental
[permanent quarry operating permit], the partial assignment shall be              rehabilitation obligations.
registered when the new right is granted.
                                                                                  The sixth article establishes that mineral rights are transferrable by succession,
(3) In order to be binding on third parties, the registration of the deed of      including corporate mergers in accordance with applicable provisions of general
assignment is to be done in accordance with the provisions of Article [_] (on     law, provided that the successor in interest must be eligible to hold the mineral
the registration and enforceability of mortgage deeds) of the present Code.       right.

Article [_] The transfer of a right                                               The seventh, eighth and ninth articles refer to other articles whose provisions
(1) Subject to the provisions of Article [_] (on cadastral surveys) and Article   must be complied with in the case of partial transfers by succession, transfers by
[_] (on the assessment of a subleasing application) of the present                merger, and transfers through the estate of a deceased individual.
[Code][Act][Law], the technical assessment of the application file for the
transfer of a mining right or a [Permanent Quarry Operating Permit] into the      The tenth article establishes that the transferee becomes responsible vis à vis the
transferee's name is to be carried out within twenty working days of the date     State and third parties for all obligations of the transferor in respect of the
on which the application file was sent to the [Technical Division] by the         transferred mineral rights, irrespective of any clause to the contrary in the
Mining Cadastre.                                                                  agreement between the transferor and the transferee. In other words, any
                                                                                  limitation of liability of the transferee in the agreement of transfer is only
(2) The technical assessment shall consist of:                                    binding as between the transferor and the transferee.

a) verifying the transferee's financial ability;                                  The eleventh article establishes that exploration licences, specifically, may be
                                                                                  subject to option rights, while the twelfth article provides (by cross-reference)
b) verifying that the transferee has assumed the transferor's obligations;        for the registration of option rights. These final provisions are designed to
                                                                                  promote investment in exploration through the popular forms of farm-outs and


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               384 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
c) determining, where appropriate, that any changes proposed by the               farm-ins.
transferee to the original documents which were the basis for the mining right
or [Permanent Quarry Operating Permit] being granted do not alter the
technical findings for the project.

(3) Should the transfer of a mining right or a [Permanent Quarry Operating
Permit] be refused, written reasons must be given and said refusal gives the
right to appeal as provided for in the provisions of Articles [_] and [_] (on
appeal proceedings) of the present [Code][Act][Law].

(4) The transfer of a mining right or a [Permanent Quarry Operating Permit]
shall be registered in the appropriate registry kept by the Mining Cadastre in
accordance with Article [_] (on the registration and enforceability of
mortgage deeds) immediately after the transferor and transferee have been
notified of the decision to approve the transfer.

(5) A transfer may only take place if it relates to mining rights or [Permanent
Quarry Operating Permits] which are currently valid.

Article [_] The obligations of the assignor after assignment
Notwithstanding any clause to the contrary, a transfer does not relieve the
original holder of their obligations, with regard to the State, to pay the fees
and charges which relate to their mining or quarrying title during the period
in which they were the holder, nor does it relieve the holder of their
obligations relating to environmental rehabilitation.

Article [_] Deeds of transfer
(1) Mining rights and [Permanent Quarry Operating Permits] may be
transferred in whole or in part under the terms of a merger agreement and on
account of death. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, the common
law relating to transfers shall apply.

(2) It is a prerequisite that the person to whom the right is to be transferred
must be eligible to hold mining or quarrying rights.

Article [_] Deeds of partial transfer
The partial transfer of mining rights and [Permanent Quarry Operating


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                             385 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
Permits] is to be done in compliance with the provisions of Articles [_] and
[_] (on the shape and location of mining areas) of the present
[Code][Act][Law].

Article [_] The registration and enforceability of deeds of transfer
In order to be binding on third parties, the registration of deeds of transfer is
to be done in accordance with the provisions of Article [_] (on the
registration and enforceability of mortgage deeds) and Article [_] (on the
registration and enforceability of a deed of assignment) of the present
[Code][Act][Law].

Article [_] A deed of transfer under the terms of a merger agreement and on
account of death
The terms and procedures for the admissibility and assessment of deeds of
transfer under a merger agreement and on account of death shall be those
provided for deeds of assignment relating to mining rights organised under
the present [Code][Act][Law].

Article [_] The obligations of the person to whom the right is transferred
Notwithstanding any clause to the contrary, the person to whom the right is
transferred shall remain liable with regard to the State and third parties to
fulfil all of the obligations of the original holder of the mining right or
[Permanent Quarry Operating Permit].

Article [_] Option contracts
A Prospecting Licence may be the subject of an option contract. Such a
contract may be freely concluded between the parties and gives the recipient
the right to obtain an interest in the enjoyment of an operating right following
on from a Prospecting Licence or in the total or partial alteration of it if a
certain investment is realised and/or specific work is completed as part of the
mining activities relating to the Prospecting Licence in question.

Article [_] The registration of option contracts
The registration of option contracts is to be done in accordance with the
provisions of Article [_] (on the registration and enforceability of mortgage
deeds) of the present [Code][Act][Law].



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   386 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
                                                 30. Development Minerals Exploration Licence
                                                       30.14 Specific Violations and Penalties

In addition to the General Offenses and Penalties described earlier at No. 22 of the Guiding Template, the common specific violations and
penalties that apply to Exploration Licences are (1) conducting exploration activities in an area for which the operator does not hold an exploration
licence, (2) engaging in mining under an exploration licence, and (3) not meeting the applicable work and expenditure requirements. It is therefore
of critical importance, notably in cases where a mining right may ultimately attach to an exploration licence, to clearly define and distinguish
between what activities are permitted under exploration licences and mining titles, respectively – particularly with respect to the taking and
disposal of samples under an exploration licence. Typical penalties include fines, suspension of the mineral right, and seizure `of minerals (that are
mined illegally). Prison is not recommended, as these are usually economic and administrative offenses.
30.14. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), this provision articulates the classic
(1) The following shall be penalised with imprisonment for a period of               prohibition against engaging in exploration without a licence or outside of the
between two months and three years and with a fine of between [_] and [_]            licence area and the prohibition against engaging in mining (exploitation) while
[national currency] or with only one of these two penalties: whoever is              only holding an exploration licence. The law provides for a range of financial
engaged in prospecting or mining work relating to a mine or quarry without a         penalties dependent on the type of violation, as well as seizure of any mineral
title, or outside of the limits for their title, or whoever undertakes mining work   products obtained in the course of the violation.
with a prospecting licence.
                                                                                     Though no amounts are specifically given in the example, the fine amount
(2) The above fine shall be between [_] and [_] [national currency] if the           should be significant enough to meet the deterrence objective of sanctions.
related substance is diamonds or another gem.

(3) A conviction shall result in the State seizing the fraudulently mined
products and the relevant instruments used for this.

(4) Should the offence be repeated, the fine shall be tripled and the prison
sentence doubled.

30.14. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision contains a more
(2) A person who—                                                                    generic description of the violations discussed above. Notably, the Nigerian law
                                                                                     covers a broader range of offences, including but not limited to knowingly


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                387 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(a) conducts exploration or mines minerals otherwise than in accordance with        giving false and misleading information or failing to declare relevant
the provisions of the [Law][Act][Code];                                             information. While it can be of value to provide a broader range of offences as
                                                                                    shown in this example, for organizational clarity it may serve a mining law to
(b) in making application for mineral title, knowingly makes a statement            place offences that occur across all mining licences in a general offences and
which is false or misleading in any material particular;                            penalties section, restricting offences discussed here to those that are narrowly
                                                                                    specific to the particular licence.
(c) in any report, return or affidavit submitted in pursuance of the provisions
of this [Law][Act][Code], knowingly gives any information which is false or
misleading or fails to declare in any material particular;

(d) removes, possesses or disposes of any mineral contrary to the provisions
of this [Law][Act][Code], commits an offence.

(e) does not make the investments compromised at the moment of the licence
granting.

(2) A mineral title holder who is guilty of an offence under article [_] (on
illegal mining, false and misleading statements, false or non-declaration and
smuggling) is liable to have his licence revoked and on conviction at the first
instance, to a fine not less than [_][national currency], if the offence is a
continuing one, whether or not it is a first offence, the person convicted shall,
in addition, be liable to a fine of [_] [national currency] in respect of each
day during which the offence continues.

(3) A person who-

(a) places or deposits, or causes to be placed or deposited in a place any
minerals, with the intention to mislead any other person as to the mineral
possibilities of the place; or

(b) mingles or causes to be mingled, with samples or ore, any substances
which may enhance the value or in any way change the nature of the ore, with
the intention to cheat, deceive or defraud; or engages in the business of
milling, leaching, sampling, concentrating, reducing, assaying, transporting,
or dealing in ores, metals or minerals, contrary to the provisions of this
[Law][Act][Code], commits an offence under this [Law][Act][Code] and is


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               388 | P a g e
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
liable on conviction to a fine of not less than [_][national currency] or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or to both fine and
imprisonment.


                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence

Development minerals encompass a range of minerals and materials that may be mined with little or no exploration or extensive exploration as
required in metals mining. For instance, building and construction minerals and materials like sand, clays and aggregates may not require
exploration before they are mined, and minerals like limestone, barite, and some kaolin require exploration to determine the extent and quality of
the deposit before exploitation is planned. Thus, this topic provides for cases where an exploration licence holder can upgrade to an exploitation
licence upon meeting the minimum work requirements as well as cases where an applicant applies for an exploitation right at first instance without
progressing from an exploration right. The latter process is particularly suitable for artisanal and small scale mining where applicants typically lack
resources for exploration or consider the requirement of exploration a disincentive to formalization. In most cases, however, the minerals mined by
artisanal and small scale miners do not require exploration. Countries that have sufficient geological data on development minerals may also grant
exploitation rights without a prior exploration rights. In such cases, exploitation licences may require applicants to submit feasibility study reports
within up to six months or a year and to commence mining operations not later than the same period.

Where sufficient geological data is available, countries may also consider using auction processes to allocate exploitation rights. Auctions are not
commonly used in the mining sector because countries often do not have sufficient geo-scientific data to interest multiple bidders. Where such
data is available, auctions can be used to ensure optimal allocation of mineral resources. This is particularly true of development minerals whose
occurrence or deposits can be established with limited or no exploration. For auction regimes to be effective, rules and regulations must be put in
place to ensure that they are transparent, objective, and competitive.

                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                           31.1. Eligibility

This topic provides the minimum qualification for applying for a large scale development minerals exploitation licence. The main criteria for
eligibility is citizenship, which is basic for all the mineral rights that may be granted in respect of development minerals. Other criteria like
incorporation are required of large scale applicants. In the case of artisanal and small scale mining individuals or cooperatives may be considered.
Citizens of other countries or within a region may also be included dependi ng on a country or region’s development mineral plans. To promote


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                    389 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
local involvement in the economic development of development minerals some countries have set a high bar for entry by non-citizens.
31.1. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_] Application for exploitation licence by a holder of an exploration    This example allows either a holder of a prior exploration licence or a “fresh
licence                                                                           applicant? to apply for a development mineral exploitation licence. Apart from
A holder of a development licence exploration licence may not later than [_]      local incorporation requirement which is similar to most mining regimes, this
days before the expiration of the licence, apply in the prescribed form for an    example also allows for regional development of minerals to be considered as
exploitation licence in respect of the area or part of the area subject to the    planned or agreed with other countries.
exploration licence.

Article [_] Application for exploitation licence by any other person
A person may apply for a development mineral exploitation licence in the
prescribed form in accordance with the regulations

Article [_]
(1) A person shall be eligible for the grant of a large scale development
mineral exploitation licence if the person:

(a) is a body corporate incorporated under [relevant related law]; and
(b) is citizen of [country] or in respect of [list particular development
mineral] is a citizen of [list countries or region];

31.1. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Inspired by Ghana’s mining law provision on industrial minerals, this example
(1) A person shall be eligible for the grant of a large scale development         makes citizens of a country or a region eligible provided they are locally
mineral exploitation licence if the person:                                       incorporated whilst non-citizens are eligible only if they partner with citizens or
                                                                                  commit to invest a specified amount in the mineral operations in addition to
(a) is a body corporate incorporated under [state appropriate law]; and           local incorporation. The minimum investment threshold may be provided in the
(b) is citizen of [country] or in respect of …… [list particular development      definitions section in this part or prescribed in regulations.
minerals] is a citizen of [list countries or region]; or
(c) has at least [_] % of its shares held by citizens of [Country]; or
(d) where the person is a non-citizen, the person shall be required to meet the
minimum investment threshold [as defined in article [_] / as prescribed under
regulations].


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               390 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

                                              31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                31.2 Requirements for Licence Applications

In addition to the usual requirements for application for an exploitation right, an applicant is required to submit a development or industrialization
impact plan which considers the local, national, or regional development impacts of the exploitation of the mineral, including plans for local value
addition and beneficiation. Just as the completion of standard application forms are aimed at simplifying the application and reviewing processes,
it is recommended that guidelines are provided for preparing the development/industrialization impact plan to facilitate compliance and
comparison.
31.2. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This example provides the complete list of documentation or information
An application for a large-scale development mineral exploitation licence        required to be submitted by an applicant for a mining right, including the
shall include the following:                                                     recommended development/industrialization impact plan.

(a) A completed application form (where applicable);
(b) Particulars of incorporation;
(c) Particulars of technical capacity to undertake the proposed mineral
activity;
(d) Particulars of financial capacity to undertake the proposed mineral
activity;
(e) Feasibility study report in accordance with prescribed guidelines;
(f) [Development/industrialization] impact plan in accordance with
prescribed guidelines;
(g) Applicable fee

31.2. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      In this example, it is assumed that the provisions of the law already require
In addition to the requirements for application of a mining lease as provided    certain documents or information to be provided and only the recommended
in [_] of this Law, an application submitted by an applicant for a large scale   development/industrialization impact plan is to be provided by an applicant for a
development      minerals     exploitation    licence   shall    include     a   development mineral.
development/industrialization impact plan.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            391 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
                                          31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                  31.3 Environmental Impact Assessment / Environmental Permit
Environmental regulation of mineral operations is important. And extensive provisions exist in this template on this subject. Therefore, it does not
bear repeating such provisions in this part. However, it is claimed by some experts that the environmental impact of mining development minerals
does not require the extensive environment assessments provided for mining metals such as iron, gold, or copper. Some of the common
environmental issues associated with development minerals include dust and noise pollution. Therefore, the objective is to provide where
appropriate simplified environmental regulation to facilitate the exploitation of development minerals. It must be noted that this provision is not
intended to excuse the environmental responsibility or liability of applicants or holders of development mineral rights.

31.3. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This example gives the environmental authority power to make changes in the
An applicant for a holder of a development mineral exploitation licence shall    existing environmental regime to accommodate any unique characteristics of
comply with the environmental provisions of this [Law][Act]][Code] and           development minerals and to ensure that their development is not hindered by
[Applicable Environmental Laws] subject to such modifications as shall be        undue environmental regulation.
made by [Regulating Authorities] to facilitate the exploitation of the mineral
without causing damage to the environment.

31.3. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This example seeks to simplify the environmental permitting process by
Prior to commencement of mineral operations, a holder of a development           ensuring that where certain information regarding the environmental impact of
mineral exploitation licence shall obtain an environmental permit from           the proposed mining operations is provided an environmental permit would be
[Regulating Authority] upon submitting the following information [or as          granted. To do this efficiently, it is useful to have pre-established baseline
provided in regulations]:                                                        environmental conditions in the relevant areas.

(a) [              ]
(b) [              ]
(c) [              ]

                                              31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                         31.4. Grant of Licence

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           392 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
The provisions for the grant of a licence under the mining law are generally applicable, subject to the authority determined to be the grantor as
discussed above. Where a state or other local government authority is determined to be the grantor this may require clarifications in this part
regarding how such grants may be effected. Additionally, an improvement worth considering, even for other grants of mineral rights generally, is
the allocation of unique licence numbers that must be exhibited on the land.

31.4. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example requires that a document evidencing the grant of an exploitation
(1) The grant of a development mineral exploitation licence shall be in the     right contains sufficient relevant information including a unique number that
prescribed form and shall include the following:                                with the use of appropriate technology can indicate the holder’s geo -location.
                                                                                This ensures that licence holders who stray from their location can be identified
(a) a unique licence number;                                                    and disciplined.
(b) a description of the area;
(c) the name of the grantee;
(d) the date of the grant;
(e) the term of the licence;
(f) confirmation of the grant by the [Regulating Authority];
(g) the terms and conditions of the licence.

31.4. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example provides for situations where auctions may be used to allocate
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may grant exploitation licences by auction       exploitation rights.
where:

(a) sufficient geo-scientific data is available for the area to warrant an
auction;

(b) an area was subject to previous mining activities or produced significant
quantities of minerals;

(c) two or more applications are received at the same time in respect of the
same area;
(c) the [Regulating Authority] considers that an auction is the most
appropriate method for granting rights over an area.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           393 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

(2) Auctions shall be conducted in accordance with prescribed regulations.

                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                        31.5. Area

Development minerals as distinguished from other minerals may require different boundary size limitations (typically smaller because
development minerals tend to be more concentrated and homogenous in their formation), and this ought to be clearly stipulated in the law to avoid
ambiguity and for optimal exploitation of the mineral resource. Apart from commercial and local economic considerations, the size of the area
granted for mining may also be dependent on the rate of mining allowed or approved by the Regulating entity. Accordingly, this provision requires
that consideration is given to all these factors in determining the appropriate size grantable for exploitation of the various development minerals.
Rules in respect of contiguity and shapes that are applicable to other mineral rights should be applicable.
31.5. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example allows the Regulating entity to determine a maximum area based
The area granted for a large scale development mineral licence shall be         on economic and other considerations as well as on the nature or characteristics
determined by [Regulating Authority] in accordance with the nature or           of the mineral resources and the proposed mining operations. The minimum
characteristics of the deposit and the method of mining but in any case shall   area may be determined by the maximum area of other mining rights, such as a
not cover an area greater than [_].                                             small scale mining right and an artisanal mining right.

31.5. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example simply provides the lower and upper limit of the size of a large
An area subject to a large scale mineral development exploitation licence       scale development mineral exploitation licence. Rules of contiguity and may be
shall be at least [_] [units/blocks] and not more that [_] [units/blocks].      included if it is not provided in another part of the law.
[units/blocks] shall be contiguous and have a side in common with at least
one another.

                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                     31.6 Rights of a Licence Holder

This refers to the rights attached to the mining licence that empower the holder to undertake the mining operations as well as other activities

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           394 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
related to the operations, such as construction and transportation. For development minerals, the condition for local processing or beneficiation
require that rights such as processing, trading or dealing (which are also licenced under the law) are granted to the holder if it wishes to undertake
such activities.

31.6. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         In contrast with example 2, this provision stipulates the particular rights
(1) A large scale development minerals exploitation licence confers on the          conferred on a holder of a large scale development mineral exploitation licence.
holder of the licence in respect of the area covered by the licence-

(a) authority to enter the area covered by the licence to conduct approved
mining operations;

(b) exclusive rights to conduct exploration and exploitation in respect of the
mineral the subject of the licence;

(c) rights to use the water and wood and other construction materials found
in the licence area as necessary for the mineral operations subject to
obtaining appropriate permits and in accordance with appropriate
regulations;

(d) rights to store, remove, transport, submit to treatment, transform and
process the mineral resources, and dispose of any waste; and

(e) rights to process, transport, market, sell, export or otherwise dispose of
the mineral products resulting from the mining operations subject to
appropriate conditions or authorization of [Regulating Authority]

31.6. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Without expressly stating them, this example grants to a holder of a
(1) The rights of a holder of large scale development mineral exploitation          development mineral exploitation licence the same rights due to a holder of an
licence shall be the same as those of a holder of a mining right subject to such    exploitation licence for higher value minerals. This example presupposes that
modifications as shall be made by the [Regulating Authority] including the          such rights have been stipulated in respect of higher value minerals in another
following:                                                                          part of the law.

(a) the right to process, transport, market, sell, export or otherwise dispose of


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               395 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
the mineral products resulting from the mining operations subject to
appropriate conditions or authorization of [Regulating Authority];

                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                   31.7 Obligations of licence holder

The obligations of a holder of an exploitation right are sufficiently discussed elsewhere in the GT. These include work obligations, commencement
within a stipulated time, reporting, health, safety and environmental requirements and fee payments. To these may be added the principal
requirement in relation to development minerals, i.e. the obligation to process or beneficiate minerals locally. Also, where a minimum investment
threshold is required, this provision may stipulate the obligation to make the investment.

31.7. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example requires the holder to comply with the approved development
(1) A holder of a large scale development mineral exploitation licence shall    impact plan. This plan, the format of which is to be designed by governments,
process or add value within the [Country] [Region] to the mineral exploited     will determine the level of processing or beneficiation required of the mineral to
under the licence in accordance with the holder’s approved                      be exploited. The plan shall also provide for situations where the holder
development/industrialization impact plan.                                      proposes to undertake exploitation only and supply the minerals to a holder of a
                                                                                processing licence. In such cases the holder must ensure that the mineral is
(2) A holder shall not dispose of or export any mineral that has not been       supplied to an approved local processing facility.
processed or beneficiated otherwise than as approved under the
development/industrialization impact plan or by the [Regulating Authority].

31.7. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This is an example provision to require compliance with the minimum
A holder of a large scale development mineral exploitation licence who is not   investment threshold to be made by non-citizen applicants for large scale
a citizen shall make the investments required under the minimum investment      development mineral exploitation licences.
threshold within the period stipulated in this [Law][Act][Code] or by
regulations.

                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                         31.8 Term of licence

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            396 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

Refer to example provisions for mining licences. Many countries however provide shorter terms for development minerals because the areas
granted are smaller than for other minerals and the rate of exploitation is faster. In addition to determining an appropriate term that accounts for the
type of mineral, mining methods, and return on investment, a maximum term with the right of renewal subject to specific conditions such as
performance should guarantee against sterilization, under-utilization or speculation.

31.8. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example allows the regulating entity to determine the appropriate term
A large scale development mineral exploitation licence shall be for a period    suitable for the development of the mineral, but such term shall not exceed a
determined by [Regulating Authority] upon review of the approved feasibility    stipulated term that is reasonably sufficient for profitable exploitation of the
study report and the development impact plan and shall not exceed [_] years.    mineral.

                                             31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                        31.9 Renewal of licence

Refer to example provisions for mining licences. In addition to the considerations discussed under those provisions, it is recommended that
reporting requirements should be included as a condition for renewal. This is one way of ensuring that holders of development minerals provide
accurate data required for policy analyses and formulation.

31.9. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example aims to emphasise data collection for better policy analysis in a
[Regulating Authority] may reject an application for renewal of a licence if    sector that is dogged by inaccurate and poor data.
the holder fails to comply with reporting requirements in relation to the
mineral operations or willingly or negligently submits inaccurate reports.

31.9. Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This example provides assurance that the licence will be renewed if the holder
Upon satisfying the conditions for renewal of a large scale development         meets the conditions of the licence as provided in the law or in the licence.
mineral exploitation licence, the licence shall be renewed by the [Regulating


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           397 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                 PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
Authority] for a period of [_] years.

                                                31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                   31.10 Suspension/Termination of licence

Refer to example provisions for mining licences. To these may be added circumstances where reports are not submitted on time or are inaccurate,
non-compliance with the non-citizen minimum investment threshold, or non-compliance with the development impact plan. These provisions may
also serve as grounds for termination of the licence.

31.10. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         This example provides a list of additional conditions under which a regulating
(1) Subject to the provisions of this [Law][Act][Code], the [Regulating             entity may suspend a development mineral exploitation licence.
Authority] may suspend or terminate a development mineral exploitation
licence if the holder:

(a) fails to submit the reports required by law within the time stipulated in the
[Law][Act][Code];
(b) submits inaccurate reports;
(c) being a non-citizen fails to invest the amounts required under the
minimum investment threshold;
(d) at any time does not meet local shareholding requirement;
(e) at any time fails to comply with the approved development impact plan.

(2) A licence shall not be terminated unless the holder is given an opportunity
to remedy the breach within [_] days and fails to do so or where the breach is
not remediable.

                                                31. Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                                     31.11 Transfer/Assignment of Rights

Refer to example provisions for mining licences. In view of the restrictions on a non-citizen’s right to hold a development mineral exploitation

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              398 | P a g e
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
licence, additional conditions must be stipulated for transfer or assignment of rights.

31.11. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Whilst transfers of mineral rights are generally not prohibited in order to
No transfer of a development mineral exploitation licence to a non-citizen      facilitate exploration and development of mineral resources, the standard to be
shall be valid if the non-citizen fails to comply with the requirements for     met by a potential transferee is the standard for acquiring the licence de novo. In
acquiring a development mineral exploitation licence.                           the case of development minerals where a minimum investment threshold is
                                                                                required for non-citizens to acquire a mineral right, this provision ensures that
                                                                                transfers are not used to bypass this requirement.

                              32. Artisanal/Small Scale Development Minerals Exploitation Licence
                                               32.1 Eligibility and Requirements

The provisions of the large scale development minerals exploitation licence may apply to small scale licences subject to appropriate modifications,
including those provided in the provisions below. Limited rights and obligations may be provided for small scale and artisanal licences. Artisanal
and small scale licences may be further differentiated by size, term, investment limit, production limit, etc.

32.1. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_] Eligibility                                                         In many jurisdictions, the bureaucracy involved in obtaining artisanal or small
Notwithstanding article [_], an artisanal or small scale development mineral    scale licences contributes to increased illegal mining activities. Rather than
exploitation licence shall not be granted to a non-citizen.                     proscribing the submission of certain, licensing times can be shortened or
                                                                                facilitated by providing simple forms for submitting information on technical
Article [_] Requirements for application                                        and financial capacity, feasibility reports and development impact plans for
(1) An application for an artisanal or small scale development mineral          small scale and artisanal mining applications without unduly burdening the
exploitation licence may be made by an individual, cooperative or               applicants.
incorporated body of persons and shall include:

(a) A completed application form (where applicable);
(b) Particulars of incorporation/formation of cooperative (where applicable);
(c) Evidence of citizenship;
(d) Particulars of technical capacity to undertake the proposed mineral



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            399 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
activity;
(e) Particulars of financial capacity to undertake the proposed mineral
activity;
[(f) Feasibility study report in accordance with prescribed guidelines;]
[(g) [Development/industrialization] impact plan in accordance with
prescribed guidelines;]
(h) Applicable fee

Article [_] Rights

Article [_] Obligations

32.1. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_] Exclusive areas for [artisanal/small scale] mining                   This example provides for where an exclusive area is designated for small scale
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may from time to time designate areas for         mining
artisanal or small scale mining as prescribed in regulations.

(2) The areas designated for artisanal or small scale mining shall be reserved
exclusively for artisanal or small scale mining.

(3) An application for artisanal or small scale mining licence shall not be
valid unless it is made in an area designated for artisanal or small scale
mining in accordance with this [Law][Act][Code] and accompanying
regulations.

Article [_] Upgrading or conversion from artisanal to small scale to large
scale
(1) A holder of an artisanal licence may convert to a small scale licence by
applying in the prescribed form to the [Regulating Authority].

(2) Where the [Regulating Authority] determines that an artisanal mining
licence holder’s operations have progressed to a small scale mining
operation, the holder shall be required to apply to convert the licence to a
small scale mining licence.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           400 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals

                                             33. General Provisions for Development Minerals

The provisions contained in this part will cover miscellaneous or general issues that are common to mineral rights for development minerals,
including health and safety, environment, fiscal issues, appeals, and gender issues.
33. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_] Mine health and safety                                                This example provides for certain matters concerning development minerals to
The rules applicable to health, safety and environmental practices to be          be prescribed in regulations since they are to be determined distinctly from what
observed in an artisanal, small scale or large scale mine for development         is generally applicable to other minerals. A novel provision is included for
minerals shall be as prescribed in regulations.                                   promoting equality and empowerment of women and girls as advocated by the
                                                                                  UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5.
Article [_] Fiscal provisions
The fees, taxes, royalties and other imposts payable in respect of an artisanal
small scale or large scale mining licence for development minerals shall be as
prescribed in regulations.

Article [_] Appeals
An appeal against the rejection of an application for an artisanal, small scale
or large scale development minerals exploitation licence shall be made to the
appropriate authority as prescribed in regulations.

Article [_] Gender mainstreaming
In granting mineral rights for exploitation of development minerals by
auction, [the regulating entity] shall ensure that applicants who are women
or include women are entitled to at least [28] points/marks to be reckoned in
the evaluation of bids.

                                                       34. Specific Violations and Penalties

This part deals with contraventions of the law and requirements relating to development minerals and provides corresponding penalties that seek to
deter non-compliance. Depending on how the mining law is structured, the provisions of this part may form part of the main offences provisions of


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                             401 | P a g e
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
the law or be dealt with separately in the development minerals section. Some of the contraventions listed here also apply to dealings in minerals
generally.
34. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_] Specific violations [or breaches]                                     This example attempts to provide an elaborate list of likely offences that can
                                                                                  apply to dealings in development minerals. More or others may be added to the
(1) Notwithstanding any violations and penalties provided in any part of this     list depending on a country’s particular circumstances and the particular issues it
    law, any of the following shall constitute a violation under this part:       wishes to prevent or discourage. It is also expressed widely to include
(a) Making a false statement knowingly or negligently pursuant to a               conspirators in the commission of the breach and persons who without
    provision of this law;                                                        justification prevent an authorised officer from carrying out their duties under
(b) Failure to pay royalties, taxes, fees or charges imposed under this law;      the law. In this example, the Regulatory Authority is authorised to determine the
(c) Failure to comply with the minimum investment threshold requirement;          severity of the breach and to apply the appropriate penalty/penalties from a
(d) Transfer or assignment of a right contrary to the provisions of this law;     number of penalties provided in the law. It is important that notice is given of
(e) Conduct of operations without appropriate authorisation;                      the breach and a reasonable time is given for the breach to be remedied before a
(f) Conduct of operations outside authorised areas or in prohibited areas;        more severe penalty like revocation is applied. This example does not provide
(g) Failure or refusal to comply with a direction or order lawfully given         an elaborate appeal process as this is normally provided in the mining law or is
    under this law;                                                               available under the general laws of a country.
(h) Obstruction of an authorised officer in the performance of the officer’s
    duties under this law;
(i) Engaging in wasteful mining practices or operations that do not accord
    with good mining practice;
(j) Acting with another person to commit the above breaches or contravene
    any provision of this law.

(2) Where a person commits any of the violations in [Article__], the
    [Regulating Authority] shall notify the person of the breach committed
    and impose an appropriate penalty subject to the severity of the breach:
(a) A fine not exceeding [US$______] or [___ penalty/currency units]
(b) Seizure of equipment used in commission of breach;
(c) Confiscation of minerals that are obtained illegally or in contravention of
    this law;
(d) Suspension of licence for specified period or until the breach has been
    remedied;



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                               402 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
(e) Revocation of licence or rights granted under this law if a breach is not
    remediable or remedied within a specified period;
34. Example 2:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       In cases where a regulatory authority is considered to have limited capacity or
                                                                                  where one seeks to eliminate unfair use of discretion or bias in enforcing
Notwithstanding any violations and penalties provided in any part of this law,    penalties, the provisions may be expressed more definitely by matching a
any of the following shall constitute a violation under this part for which the   specific penalty (or penalties) to a violation. In this way, the regulatory authority
stipulated penalty applies:                                                       simply applies the law irrespective of the severity of the violation. A drawback
                                                                                  of this approach is that the law tends to be rigid and may not account for less
(a) For making a false statement knowingly or negligently pursuant to a           severe violations or the circumstances of each case.
    provision of this law, a fine of [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency units];
(b) For failure to pay royalties, taxes, fees or charges imposed under this
    law, a fine of [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency units];
(c) For failure to comply with the minimum investment threshold
    requirement, a fine of [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency units] and/or
    suspension of licence for a specified period or until the breach has been
    remedied, and/or confiscation of minerals that are obtained illegally or
    in contravention of this law, and/or revocation of licence or rights
    granted under this law if a breach is not remediable or remedied within a
    specified period;
(d) For transfer or assignment of a right contrary to the provisions of this
    law, a fine of [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency units];
(e) For conduct of operations without appropriate authorisation, a fine of
    [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency units] and suspension of licence for
    specified period or until the breach has been remedied;
(f) For conduct of operations outside authorised areas or in prohibited
    areas, confiscation of minerals that are obtained illegally or in
    contravention of this law, a fine of [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency
    units] and/or suspension of licence for specified period or until the
    breach has been remedied;
(g) For failure or refusal to comply with a direction or order lawfully given
    under this law, a fine of [US$___] or [___ penalty/currency Units];
(h) For obstruction of an authorised officer in the performance of the


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                403 | P a g e
                                             AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B-5: Mineral Licences – Development Minerals
    officer’s duties under this law, a fine of [US$___] or [___
    penalty/currency units];
(i) For engaging in wasteful mining practices or operations that do not
    accord with good mining practice, a fine of [US$___] or [___
    penalty/currency units];
(j) For acting with another person to commit the above breaches or
    contravene any provision of this law, a fine of [US$___] or [___
    penalty/currency units].




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E           404 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                                     35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
Unlike in other resource-rich countries such as China, Brazil, Australia or Canada, in many African countries, the refinement of extracted
minerals to increase their value takes place outside of the country in which they are mined. To address this, a mining code may include
beneficiation which encourages or requires mining licence holders to establish facilities that enhance or beneficiate extracted minerals within
the country’s borders before exportation abroad. The “requirement option? ensures that there are clear obligations on mining companies.
However, to succeed such obligations on mining companies must be realistic and correspondingly supported by a strong and comprehensive
national industrialization policy. Note that in some countries beneficiation of minerals may be addressed in its own law, separate from the
country’s general mining law.

A key element for designing successful policies in this area is to first conduct a sound economic and environmental analysis in order to
identify sound beneficiation and commercialization opportunities and constraints. In this regard, it is interesting to consider opportunities at
national level but also at a regional level, as some constraints might be better addressed in coordination with other regional countries rather
than each individual country standing alone.

This topic may also deal with authorisation for the transport, processing, refining, cutting, polishing or trading of mineral products. In some
cases, commercialization may be addressed to specific minerals. In some cases, a specific mineral will have a separate piece of legislation
rather than provisions within the mining law that address this topic. In these circumstances, a country is treated as having multiple primary
mining laws for the purpose of the AMLA platform. For example, diamonds typically have separate provisions or legislation to address how
and under what circumstances diamonds may be transported and refined for selling. Elsewhere, provisions may address the sale of jewellery
or other final products made from minerals, and in some cases will lay out a licensing process, with only authorised buyer and seller licence
holders permitted to engage in the commercialization of minerals.

For the purpose of the Guiding Template, the sample topics here apply only to development minerals (see Part B-5 for the explanation on
development minerals) because it is an area where the current African context and capacities can prove fertile in the short to medium term,
and a swift uptake by African countries of a comprehensive regional beneficiation and commercialization policy underpinned by a strong
legal framework that utilizes some of the guidance outlined here can bring about transformational development dividends at both the national
and continental level.

Processing, trade and transport of development mineral products may be conducted as part of an integrated mining operation or they may be
conducted separately by independent actors. As such they may be governed by the mining law or by other laws or by a combination of the
two. In any event, the mining law should be the law that establishes the overall policy and institutional framework for these activities.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           405 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
Given that each of these activities could be undertaken separately and independently, provisions governing each type of activity are
necessary.


                                   35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                   35.1 Institutional Framework for Beneficiation and Trade of Development Minerals
The mining law should make provision for an institutional framework for the licensing and regulation of processing, trade and transport of
development minerals that is most expedient, efficient and appropriate for the promotion of the subsector. It should also be consistent with
the Constitution and government structure of the country and with other laws and rights that might apply or be affected.

When these activities are conducted as part of an integrated mining operation, they should generally be licenced and regulated by the
Regulating Authority as part of the integrated mining project.

However, when development mineral beneficiation is conducted separately by independent actors, depending on the scope, type and
complexity of the activity, it may be licenced by a national authority or by a provincial regulating entity that coordinates with the national
Regulating Authority responsible for mining. For example, licensing of a cement plant might be by a national authority whereas a crushing
plant for aggregates might be licenced by a provincial or state regulating entity. Similarly, the licensing of trader/dealers who trade in a
national or regional market and the licensing of transporters who transport development minerals throughout a national or regional market
should be the responsibility of a national licensing authority, whereas a provincial/state regulating entity should have responsibility for the
licensing of such activities that operate solely within a single province/state. Furthermore, the national licensing authority for a complex
processing facility, or a nationwide or regional trader or transporter may be different than the Regulating Authority that issues mineral
licences.

Multiple licences from multiple regulating entities may be necessary for these activities (e.g., business, environmental, etc.). However,
licensing requirements should be tailored to the national and regional context and capabilities, avoiding overlapping and excessive burdens
while protecting the public interest. Therefore, an institutional framework for coordination among the regulating entities involved is highly
desirable.

The mining law should specify which regulating entities or authorities are responsible for issuing standards and regulations for the
implementation of the law with respect to the various activities, including in particular the sequencing of any multiple licensing requirements.

35.1. Example 1:                                                         Annotation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           406 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

Article [_]                                                                        This provision distinguishes between processing, trade and transport of
(1) Integrated projects to mine, process, transport and trade development          development minerals that are part of an integrated project and those that are
minerals shall be licenced and regulated by the [Regulating Authority],            conducted separately from the extraction of the minerals. It provides that
which shall issue regulations specifying the applicable requirements               the Regulating Authority (e.g., often the Mines Ministry) shall be the
consistent with the provisions of this Act.                                        licensing and regulating authority of the integrated projects. This provides a
                                                                                   one stop shop for the licensing and regulation of the integrated projects and
(2) Independent processing of development minerals, whether integrated             nationwide consistency in the application of policy to them.
with transport and/or trade of such minerals or separate, shall be licenced
                                                                                   The provision states that a national or provincial regulating entity shall be
and regulated by the [national regulating entity] in the case of [processing
                                                                                   the licensing and regulating authority for the licensing of independent
facilities specified here or in the regulations] and in all other cases by [the    development minerals processing, trading and transport, depending on the
provincial/state regulating entity].       The national or provincial/state        type of processing facilities and the scope of the trade or transport activities.
licensing authority shall issue regulations specifying the requirements            The larger scale and more complex processing facilities such as cement
applicable to the processing facilities, trade and transport activities for        plants would be licenced by a national regulating entity, which may be the
which they are the licensing authority, consistent with the provisions of this     Ministry of Industry rather than the Mines Ministry. The smaller scale and
[Act][Code][Law].                                                                  less complex processing facilities such as crushing plants for aggregates
                                                                                   would be licenced by a provincial or state regulating entity.
(3) Independent trade in development minerals shall be licenced and
regulated by the [national regulating entity] in the case of [trade activities     Similarly, the provision also states that trade and transport of development
that are national or regional in scope] and by [the provincial/state               minerals that are conducted separately from extraction by independent
regulating entity] in the case of trade activities that are carried out solely     actors would be licenced and regulated by a national regulating entity if the
                                                                                   activities are national or regional in scope, but would be licenced and
within the province/state. The national or provincial/state licensing
                                                                                   regulated by a provincial or state regulating entity if the activities are to be
authority shall issue regulations specifying the requirements applicable to
                                                                                   conducted solely within a single province or state. Since these activities are
the trade activities for which they are the licensing authority, consistent with   commercial activities that do not involve extraction of minerals, they can be
the provisions of this Act.                                                        appropriately licenced and regulated at the provincial/state level, which is
                                                                                   more readily accessible and provides greater flexibility, when the activities
(4) Independent transport of development minerals shall be licenced and            take place solely within that jurisdiction.         Trade and transport of
regulated by the [national regulating entity] in the case of [transport            development minerals that are national or regional in scope must be licenced
activities that are national or regional in scope] and by [the provincial/state    and regulated at the national level in order to be able to operate in multiple
regulating entity] in the case of trade and/or transport activities that are       provinces or states, and within neighbouring countries.
carried out solely within the province/state. The national or provincial/state
licensing authority shall issue regulations specifying the requirements            For both trade and transport of development minerals, the licensing and
applicable to the transport activities for which they are the licensing            regulating entity may be different from the Regulating Authority for mining;
authority, consistent with the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].                and different licensing authorities may be responsible for trade and
                                                                                   transport, respectively (for example, the Ministry or Department of


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                             407 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                                                                                Commerce and Trade, on the one hand, and the Ministry or Department of
(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, other licences from other authorities may    Transportation, on the other hand), at both the national and provincial/state
be required for these activities.                                               levels.

(6)The licensing authority specified in this [Act][Code][Law for the            The example provides that the entity responsible for licensing and regulating
particular activity shall be the lead authority for purposes of organizing a    the activity is the entity authorised to issue regulations for the activity,
                                                                                provided that they must be consistent with the provisions of the Act.
coordinating mechanism among multiple licensing authorities.
                                                                                Finally, the provision makes clear that other licensing requirements may
                                                                                apply, in which case it provides that the entity that is the licensing authority
                                                                                under the Act is to be the lead authority for organizing a coordinating
                                                                                mechanism to enhance efficiency, proper sequencing and reduction of
                                                                                overlaps.

                                      35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                35.2 Authorised Possession [General Prohibition and Penalties]
Possession of development minerals in commercial quantities is authorised by licensing for either an integrated project or separate processing,
trade and transport activities. Possession of commercial quantities of such minerals without the requisite licence is prohibited and subject to
penalties. What constitute “commercial quantities? of development minerals should be defined in the mining law. The definit ion should
exclude quantities that are sufficient for personal or domestic use rather than commercial sales.

35.2. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     This provision includes both a definition of Commercial Quantities of
“Commercial Quantities? of development minerals are those quantities of         development minerals and a straightforward proposition that it is prohibited
such minerals that are sold or are destined for sale by an individual or        to engage in any of the licenced activities with respect to development
entity to a third party for use in a processing, construction, fortification,   minerals in commercial quantities, or to otherwise deal in or possess them,
renovation, decoration or related project of any kind. Quantities of            unless one is licenced. It is advisable to supplement this definition with
development minerals intended for personal or domestic use are excluded         greater specificity in regulations adopted by the Regulating Authority.
from the definition of Commercial Quantities of development minerals.           Violations of this prohibition should be punished by fines and/or
                                                                                imprisonment.
Article [_]
No person shall process, transport, trade or otherwise deal in or possess
commercial quantities of development minerals, as defined in this


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         408 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
[Act][Code][Law] (the regulations implementing this Act), unless that
person is currently and validly licenced in accordance with the terms of this
[Act][Code][Law].

                                         35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                      35.3 Eligibility for Licence
This section sets forth the eligibility requirements for licences to engage in processing and/or trade and/or transport of development minerals
when those activities are conducted separately and independently from minerals extraction. As noted above, integrated mining projects that
include these activities should be licenced by the Regulating Authority through a single process. When processing, trade and/or transport of
development minerals are conducted independently, however, they are industrial and commercial activities rather than mining activities. As
such, depending on the jurisdiction, they will generally be licenced by an authority other than the Regulating Authority for exploration and
exploitation of minerals (e.g., by the Ministry of Industry and Trade and/or a provincial/state regulating entity). Nevertheless, to assure
consistency and clarity, the related eligibility and licensing requirements can be set forth in the mining law, to be implemented by the
appropriate licensing authority.

The provisions on eligibility state who may apply for a licence to engage in processing, trade and/or transport of development minerals, as
well as who may not do so. The eligibility provisions may include stipulations as to origin, residency and type of person or entity.

Because processing, trade and transport of development minerals can be licenced separately and by different regulating entities, the eligibility
requirements for each type of licence may vary.

                                      35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                     35.3 Eligibility for Licence
                                 35.3(a) Eligibility for Licence as Authorised Processing Facility
Eligibility for licensing to engage in processing of development minerals should be limited to individuals or entities organized under the law
of the jurisdiction who are registered to do business in the jurisdiction. If an entity, its authorised powers and business registration should
include engaging in minerals processing. Any national or local ownership requirements should be specified. It is generally advisable to
require that eligible companies only be involved in the minerals processing business and related activities, including trade, transport and other
industrial activities that will use the products of the processing operations, in order to avoid abuse of any import or other fiscal privileges and
to minimize tax avoidance by offsetting profits in one line of business with losses in another unrelated line.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                              409 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

35.3(a) Example:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        The example incorporates the parameters for both individuals and
(1) Individuals of at least 18 years of age who are citizens of a member state     companies permitted to carry out business in the jurisdiction. For
of the African Union and whose principal residence is located in [the              individuals, there are four requirements: (1) they must be at least 18 years
jurisdiction], duly registered and authorised to do business as mineral            old, (2) they must be citizens of a member state of the AU, (3) they must
processors in [the jurisdiction] shall be eligible to be licenced as an            have their principal residence in the licensing jurisdiction, and (4) they must
Authorised Processing Facility.                                                    be duly registered and authorised to engage in the business of development
                                                                                   mineral processing under the applicable commercial registration law.
(2) Entities shall be eligible to be licenced as an Authorised Processing
Facility, provided that they meet the following requirements:                      The example imposes 6 eligibility requirements on entities.

(a) they are organized under the laws of [the jurisdiction]                        For those entities that propose to operate a large scale, complex processing
(b) they have the power under their charter document to engage in                  facility that would be licenced by the national regulating entity, the
processing of development minerals                                                 company must be at least 51% owned and controlled by Africans. For those
                                                                                   entities that propose to operate a processing facility that would be licenced
(c) for licences issued by the national regulating entity, no less than 51% of     by the provincial or state regulating entity, the company must be at least
the ownership shares of the entity are ultimately held and controlled by           100% owned and controlled by Africans, of which 40% must be citizens of
citizens of member states of the African Union,                                    the licensing jurisdiction.

(d) for licences issued by the [provincial/state] regulating entity, 100% of       The example also requires that companies be limited to those solely engaged
the ownership shares of the entity are ultimately held and controlled by           in mineral development processing and related activities, as defined in the
citizens of member states of the African Union, of which no less than 40%          regulations. The related activities should include, for example, trade and
are ultimately held and controlled by nationals (i.e., citizens of the licensing   transport of development minerals and other industrial activities that would
jurisdiction),                                                                     utilize the products of the proposed processing facility. The limitation to
                                                                                   engage only in the operation of the intended processing facility is purposely
(e) they are registered and authorised to do business as mineral processors        to avoid abuse of any fiscal incentives that may be provided under this or
in [the jurisdiction], and                                                         any other Act and to minimize tax avoidance by offsetting losses against
                                                                                   profits in consolidated financial statements for tax purposes.
(f) they are only authorised to engage in processing of development
minerals and associated activities as defined in the regulations.                  This provision further specifies those persons ineligible, in particular for
                                                                                   lack of financial capacity, previous malfeasance or conflict of interest.
(3) The following persons or entities shall not be eligible for licensing as an
Authorised Processing Facility:

(a) Persons who are bankrupt or subject to bankruptcy, receivership or


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                           410 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
reorganization/liquidation proceedings;

(b) Persons whose licence under any of the activities provided for in this
[Act][Code][Law] has been revoked within the past [_] years.

(c) Persons who have been found guilty of fraud, money laundering or
corrupt activities

(d) Persons engaged in activities other than processing, trade and transport
of development minerals and associated activities.

(e) Any staff member of the [Regulating Authority] or a regulating entity
under this [Act][Code][Law].

                                        35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                       35.3 Eligibility for Licence
                                     35.3(b) Eligibility for Licence as Authorised Trader/Dealer
Licensing in this area may already be contemplated by existing general business regulating laws and authorities in the jurisdiction. In that
case, these provisions should guide and, if necessary, amend the existing business regulating laws.

Eligibility for licensing to engage in trade or deal in development minerals should be limited to individuals or entities who are registered to do
business in the jurisdiction. If an entity, it should be organized under the law of the jurisdiction, and its authorised powers and business
registration should include engaging in minerals trade. Any national ownership requirements should be specified. It is generally advisable to
require that eligible companies only be involved in the minerals trade business and related activities, including processing and transport, in
order to avoid abuse of any import or other fiscal privileges and to minimize tax avoidance by mining rights licence holders offsetting profits
in one line of business with losses in another unrelated line.
35.3(b) Example:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]:                                                                      The example is the same as the prior example for individuals, adjusted for
(1) Individuals of at least 18 years of age who are citizens of a member state    the type of activity licenced.
of the African Union and whose principal residence is located in [the
jurisdiction], duly registered and authorised to do business as mineral           For entities, this example proposes that the ownership be at least 51%
traders in [the jurisdiction] shall be eligible to be licenced as an Authorised   national, with the balance held by citizens of other AU member states.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                       411 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
Trader/Dealer.
                                                                                In other respects, the eligibility and ineligibility provisions in this example
(2) Entities shall be eligible to be licenced as an Authorised Trader/Dealer,   are the same as for the processing licence.
provided that they meet the following requirements:

(a) they are organized under the laws of [the jurisdiction],

(b) they have the power under their charter document to engage in trading
of development minerals,

(c) 100% of the ownership shares of the entity are ultimately held and
controlled by citizens of member states of the African Union, of which no
less than 51% are ultimately held and controlled by nationals (i.e., citizens
of the licensing jurisdiction),

(d) they are registered and authorised to do business as mineral traders in
[the jurisdiction], and

(e) they are only authorised to engage in trading of development minerals
and associated activities as defined in the regulations.

(3) Persons or entities not eligible for licensing as an Authorised
Trader/Dealer includes:

(a) Persons who are bankrupt or subject to bankruptcy, receivership or
reorganization/liquidation proceedings;

(b) Persons whose licence under any of the activities provided for in this
[Act][Code][Law] has been revoked within the past [_] years.

(c) Persons who have been found guilty of fraud, money laundering or
corrupt activities.

(d) Persons engaged in activities other than processing, trade and transport
of development minerals and associated activities.

(e) Any staff member of the [provincial/state] regulating entity under this


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        412 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
[Act][Code][Law].

                                        35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                        35.3 Eligibility for Licence
                                       35.3(c) Eligibility for Licence as Authorised Transporter
Licensing in this area may already be contemplated by existing general business regulating laws and authorities in the jurisdiction. In that
case, these provisions should guide and, if necessary, amend the existing business regulating laws, mindful that these activities may be
subject to other laws (e.g., environmental and road safety laws) as well.

Eligibility for licensing to engage in transport of development minerals should be limited to individuals or entities organized under the law of
the jurisdiction who are registered to do business in the jurisdiction. If an entity, its authorised powers and business registration should
include engaging in minerals transportation. Any national ownership requirements should be specified. It is generally advisable to require
that eligible companies only be involved in the minerals transportation business and related activities, including processing and trade, in order
to avoid abuse of any import or other fiscal privileges and to avoid offsetting profits in one line of business with losses in another unrelated
line.

35.3(c) Example:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       In this example, only individuals who are nationals of the licensing
(1) Individuals of at least 18 years of age who are nationals of [the licensing   jurisdiction are eligible to apply for the development minerals transporter
jurisdiction], duly registered and authorised to do business as mineral           licence. Residence in the jurisdiction is not a requirement, because it is
transporters in [the jurisdiction] shall be eligible to be licenced as an         presumed that any individual national applicant will be a resident.
Authorised Transporter of development minerals.                                   Eligibility is reserved for nationals because transportation of development
                                                                                  minerals is not a subsector that requires foreign capital or expertise.
(2) Entities shall be eligible to be licenced as an Authorised Transporter,
provided that they meet the following requirements:                               For entities, this example requires that the ownership be 100% national.

(a) they are organized under the laws of [the jurisdiction],                      In other respects, the eligibility and ineligibility provisions in this example
                                                                                  are the same as for the trading licence.
(b) they have the power under their charter document to engage in transport
of development minerals,

(c) 100% of the ownership shares of the entity are ultimately held and


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          413 | P a g e
                                                             AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
controlled by nationals (i.e., citizens of the licensing jurisdiction),

(d) they are registered and authorised to do business as mineral
transporters in [the jurisdiction], and

(e) they are only authorised to engage in transportation of development
minerals and associated activities as defined in the regulations.

(3) Persons or entities not eligible for licensing as an Authorised
Transporter includes:

(a) persons who are bankrupt or subject to bankruptcy, receivership or
reorganization/liquidation proceedings;

(b) persons whose licence under any of the activities provided for in this
[Act][Code][Law] has been revoked within the past [_] years.

(c) persons who have been found guilty of fraud, money laundering or
corrupt activities.

(d) persons engaged in activities other than processing, trade and transport
of development minerals and associated activities.

(e) any staff member of the [provincial/state] regulating entity under this
[Act][Code][Law].

                                            35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                          35.4 Requirements for Applicants

Once eligibility has been determined, an applicant must meet specific requirements related to his application for a specific licence to be
granted under this Act. As noted above, depending on the jurisdiction, processing, trade and/or transportation of development minerals
conducted as a business separate from extraction of those minerals will generally be licenced by an authority other than the Regulating
Authority for exploration and exploitation of minerals, such as the Ministry of Industry and Trade or the Ministry of Transportation and/or a
provincial/state regulating entity. In the case of large scale, complex processing and national or regional trade and transportation, the

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                         414 | P a g e
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
licensing should be the responsibility of a national regulating entity; while in the case of small and medium scale processing, and trade and
transportation of development minerals within a single province or state, the licensing should be the responsibility of a provincial/state
regulating entity. However, to assure consistency and clarity, the application requirements for all of these licences can be set forth in the
mining law, to be implemented by the appropriate licensing authority.

This provision will describe the documentation required for each licence so as provide a universal and uniform understanding of the
requirements to fulfil in order for applications to be successfully processed and licences issued by the relevant authorising entities.

                                  35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                              35.4 Requirements for Applicants
                        35.4(a) Application requirements for an Authorised Processing Facility Licence

Provisions in this section should require demonstration that the applicant is capable technically and financially to develop and operate a
processing plant that is economically viable as a condition for the issuance of a processing licence.
This section would require information establishing the eligibility of the applicant for the licence as well as a business plan for the proposed
processing plant. The required contents of the business plan can be specified in the regulations, and should include, for example:
    a)   development minerals inputs;
    b)   processing methodology;
    c)   products to be produced and intended markets for sale;
    d)   professional/registered/qualified staff;
    e)   plant size and capacity;
    f)   location and site arrangement;
    g)   storage facility for inputs and products; and
    h)   financial resources available.
Other information that should be provided in the application would include (i) the applicant’s knowledge and experience in mi nerals
processing; and (ii) minerals processing licences previously granted to the applicant.
In addition, the mining law should require the applicant to submit, as part of the application, proof of submission of the required
environmental impact statement, assessment or study to the environmental permitting authority. The environmental law and regulation will


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           415 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
usually determine the environmental documentation requirement that applies to the particular type of processing facility. The mining law
should specify that the proper environmental permit or authorisation must be obtained from the environmental regulatory authority prior to
the commencement of operations of the processing plant.
35.4(a) Example:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      The first section in the example sets forth the application requirements for a
(1) The applicant for a licence as an Authorised Processing Facility shall       processing licence which includes all the information necessary for the
submit the following to [the licensing entity]:                                  regulating entity to make the determination contemplated by the second
                                                                                 section.
(a) application in the prescribed form as provided in the [Act][Code][Law]
(information identifying applicant) together with supporting documentation;      The environmental documentation requirement would apply to most
                                                                                 medium and large scale processing plants, depending on the jurisdiction’s
(b) Business plan for the processing facility as prescribed in the               environmental law and regulations. Proof of submission of the required
regulations;                                                                     environmental documentation, if any, would be sufficient for purposes of
                                                                                 review of the processing licence application by the authority responsible for
(c) a statement of the applicant’s knowledge and experience in minerals          that licensing. In this example, the processing licence could be issued prior
processing;                                                                      to the issuance of a permit or authorisation by the environmental regulatory
                                                                                 authority; but the issuance of such environmental permit or authorisation
(d) reference to all licences as an Authorised Processing Facility previously    would be a condition that must be fulfilled before operation of the
granted to the applicant; and                                                    processing plant could commence.

(e) proof of submission of the required environmental documentation to the       The second section provides a statutory timeframe for the processing of the
environmental permitting authority, if applicable.                               application, the standard of review and the obligation of the regulating entity
                                                                                 to provide reasons for any rejection of an application.
Article [_]
(1) Within [_] days of the submission of an application, the regulating entity   The second section further provides for the possibility of a supplemental
may grant an Authorised Processing Facility licence, or request additional       filing if the application is deficient or an appeal where it has been rejected.
information from the applicant, or reject the application and provide            The appeal procedures will be set forth in another section of the Act.
reasons for the rejection.
                                                                                 A processing licence should be valid for a term which is sufficient to enable
(2) Any rejection of an application is subject to appeal within [_] days from    the holder to recover his investment and make a reasonable profit but short
the date of notification of such rejection to the applicant in accordance with   enough to assure proper oversight and to motivate the licence holder to
the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].                                         comply with the obligations and conditions of the licence. The licence
                                                                                 should be renewable as long as the licence holder is in compliance with the
(3) An Authorised Processing Facility licence shall be granted when the          licence obligations and conditions and remains eligible.
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the regulating


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         416 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
entity that the applicant is capable technically and financially to develop
and operate the proposed processing plant in an economically viable
manner. If an environmental permit or authorisation is required for the
processing facility and has not yet been issued to the applicant, the
Authorised Processing Facility licence shall be granted subject to the
condition that the applicant obtain the proper environmental permit or
authorisation from the environmental regulatory authority prior to the
commencement of operations of the processing plant.

Article [_]
An Authorised Processing Facility licence shall be granted for a term of [_]
years, renewable for a like term without limitation.

Article [_]
(1) The mining right licence holder may surrender the Authorised
Processing Facility licence at any time; however, the mining right licence
holder shall remain liable for any damages caused by the processing
operations and for environmental rehabilitation requirements related to the
processing operation.

(2) In such case, the regulating entity shall issue a certificate of surrender
which may be with or without conditions.

                                         35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                      35.4 Requirements for Applicants
                        35.4(b) Application requirements for an Authorised Trader/Dealer Licence


This section would require information from the applicant with respect to trading of development minerals, including:
    a) type of development minerals to be traded;
    b) storage facilities of development minerals;
    c) office location(s);

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                       417 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
    d) financial resources available; and
    e) trading licences previously granted.
Provisions in this section should require demonstration that the applicant is capable technically and financially to trade in development
minerals on an economically sustainable basis.

It is not anticipated that an environmental permit or authorisation would be necessary in order to engage in the business of trading
development mineral products. However, a licenced trader should be subject to environmental regulations applicable to the storage and
handling of traded development mineral commodities.

35.4(b) Example:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      The first section in the example sets forth the application requirements for a
(1) The applicant for an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence shall submit the       trading licence which includes all the information necessary for the
following to [the licensing entity]:                                             regulating entity to make the determination contemplated by the second
                                                                                 section.
(a) application in the prescribed form as provided in the [Act][Code][Law]
[information identifying applicant] together with supporting documentation;      No environmental compliance requirements with respect to a trading
                                                                                 licence. However, depending on the jurisdiction the applicant might need to
(b) information pertaining to:                                                   obtain a warehousing permit.
      the type of development minerals to be traded;
      storage facilities for the development minerals;                          The second section provides a statutory timeframe for the processing of the
      office location(s);                                                       application, the standard of review and the obligation of the regulating entity
                                                                                 to provide reasons for any rejection of an application.
      financial resources available; and

(c) reference to all Authorised Trader/Dealer licences previously granted to     The second section further provides for the possibility of a supplemental
the applicant.                                                                   filing if the application is deficient or to an appeal where it has been
                                                                                 rejected. The appeal procedures will be set forth in another section of the
Article [_]                                                                      Act.
(1) Within [_] days of the submission of an application, the regulating entity
may grant an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence, or request additional             A trading licence should be valid for a term which is sufficient to enable the
information from the applicant, or reject the application and provide            holder to recover his investment and make a reasonable profit but short
reasons for the rejection.                                                       enough to assure proper oversight and to motivate the licence holder to
                                                                                 comply with the obligations and conditions of the licence. The licence
(2) Any rejection of an application is subject to appeal within [_] days from    should be renewable as long as the licence holder is in compliance with the
the date of notification of such rejection to the applicant in accordance with   licence obligations and conditions and remains eligible.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         418 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].

(3) An Authorised Trader/Dealer licence shall be granted when the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the regulating
entity that the applicant is capable technically and financially to trade in
development minerals on an economically sustainable basis.

Article [_]
(1) An Authorised Trader/Dealer licence shall be granted for a term of [_]
years, renewable for a like term without limitation.

(2) The licence shall authorise trading or dealing in development minerals
in accordance with the terms of this [Act][Code][Law] and the related
regulations within the jurisdiction that issues the licence.

Article [_]
(1) The mining right licence holder may surrender the Authorised
Trader/Dealer licence at any time.

(2) In such case, the regulating entity shall issue a certificate of surrender
which may be with or without conditions.

                                           35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                      35.4 Requirements for Applicants
                           35.4(c) Application requirements for an Authorised Transporter Licence


This section would require information from the applicant with respect to transportation of development minerals, including:
    a) office location(s);
    b) types of development minerals to be transported;
    c) transportation methods and equipment to be utilized;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                         419 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
    d)   financial and other resources available; and
    e)    Authorised Transporter licences previously granted.
Provisions in this section should require demonstration that the applicant is capable technically and financially to transport development
minerals nationally or regionally, as the case may be, on a safe and reliable basis that also facilitates certification of origin, subject to the
provisions of this Act and any other applicable Acts.

It is not proposed to require an environmental impact assessment in connection with the licensing of Authorised Transporters; but the
environmental laws of the jurisdiction will determine what activities require an environmental impact assessment, mitigation plan and related
environmental authorisation or permit. The regulations on the obligations of Authorised Transporters should include environmental impact
mitigation guidelines and requirements to be followed in development minerals transportation operations.

35.4(c) Example                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      The first section in the example sets forth the application requirements for a
(1) The applicant for an Authorised Transporter transport licence shall          transport licence which includes all the information necessary for the
submit the following:                                                            regulating entity to make the determination contemplated by the second
                                                                                 section.
(a) application in the prescribed form as provided in the [Act][Code][Law]
[information identifying applicant] together with supporting documentation       No environmental compliance requirements with respect to a transport
                                                                                 licence.
(b) Information pertaining to:
      office location(s);                                                       The second section provides a statutory timeframe for the processing of the
      types of development minerals to be transported;                          application, the standard of review and the obligation of the regulating entity
      transportation methods to be utilized; and                                to provide reasons for any rejection of an application.
      financial and other resources available to the applicant.
                                                                                 The second section further provides for the possibility of a supplemental
(c) reference to all Authorised Transporter licences previously granted to       filing if the application is deficient or to appeal where it has been rejected.
the applicant;                                                                   The appeal procedures will be set forth in another section of the Act.

Article [_]                                                                      A transport licence should be valid for a term of [_] which is sufficient to
(1) Within [_] days of the submission of an application, the regulating entity   enable the holder to recover his investment and make a reasonable profit.
may grant an Authorised Transporter licence, or request additional
information from the applicant, or reject the application and provide            The incentives to be provided under this Act shall be with respect to a
reasons for the rejection.                                                       specified radius depending on where the development minerals to be
                                                                                 transported were sourced. For those sourced from the mine area, the radius


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         420 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
(2) Any rejection of an application is subject to appeal within [_] days from    should be larger than those sourced from a processing plant. And also
the date of notification of such rejection to the applicant in accordance with   whether these are being transported regionally. For development minerals
the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law].                                         being transported regionally, there shall be no limitation in radius.

(3) An Authorised Transporter licence shall be granted when the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the regulating entity that the
applicant is capable technically and financially to transport development
minerals on a safe and environmentally acceptable basis that also facilitates
certification of origin.

Article [_]
The Authorised Transporter licence shall specify the area or radius within
which the mineral right holder is authorised to transport development
minerals.

Article [_]
(1) A transport licence shall be granted for a term of [_] years, renewable
for a like term without limitation.

(2) The licence shall authorise transportation of development minerals in
accordance with the terms of this [Act][Code][Law] and the related
regulations within the jurisdiction that issues the licence.

Article [_]
(1) The mineral right holder may surrender the licence at any time.

(2) In such case, the regulating entity shall issue a certificate of surrender
which may be with or without conditions.

                                                  35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                 35.5 Certification of Development Minerals Products

Certification of development mineral products refers to the processes to be followed in establishing the quality, origin and compliance with
public policy of those products. Certification will also ensure that development mineral products are compliant with other laws such as EITI


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                    421 | P a g e
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                           PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
laws, environmental laws and labour laws (i.e. child labour). The objective is to inform the markets for those products as to their quality and
origin so that the markets may exert pressure on producers and traders to provide products that meet certain standards as to quality, origin and
compliance. This in turn should foster improvement in the quality of development minerals, better health, safety and labour practices by the
development minerals sector, and improvement in the sector’s environmental protection practices. Such improvements should contribute to
the enhancement of the value of development minerals, improvements in the quality of local construction generally and the expansion of the
markets for development minerals.

Certification involves standards, a process for verifying the extent to which the standards have been met, and procedures that assure that the
final products delivered to the consumer do in fact meet the relevant standards. Institutionally, this requires an authoritative institution that
establishes standards, an independent authority that conducts verification by testing and analysis, and a regulatory unit that monitors and
enforces tracking of products through the value chain and publishes the results of its findings.

This section deals with the rules and information necessary in order to establish and maintain standards and enable their enforcement along
the value chain.

                                      35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                     35.5 Certification of Development Minerals Products
                                                 35.5(a) Certification of Quality
Certification of quality refers to the authenticity of the content of development minerals that are sold in commerce. Certification by
international specialists of the mineral content of metallic and non-metallic mineral products that are sold in international commerce is
typically required for such sales. Development minerals are sold primarily in the domestic marketplace where quality verification may be
less rigorous. The standards for the specific mineral content of development minerals should be established by the national standards agency.
The national minerals laboratory should be the agency responsible for certifying the quality of development minerals from any particular
source.

Certification of quality should be an option for the buyer of any development minerals until sellers begin obtaining certification to obtain
competitive advantage.

35.5(a) Example:                                                         Annotation

Article [_]                                                              This example makes available to sellers and buyers the possibility of quality
Any person who directly disposes of any development minerals locally,    certification of development mineral products and by-products by an official


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                422 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
nationally or regionally shall either (a) deliver a certificate of quality of the   laboratory. Certification is not mandatory but optional; and sellers must
development mineral as prescribed in the Regulations to the party to whom           either deliver a certificate of quality or sell their products as uncertified.
he is disposing the development minerals or (b) sell the development                This enables market pressure to gradually force compliance with
minerals as uncertified with respect to quality.                                    certification on sellers for major projects, without overly burdening
                                                                                    suppliers of small projects. Uncertified development minerals will
Article [_]                                                                         inevitably trade at a lower price than development minerals that are certified
A certificate of quality of a development mineral or a development mineral          as to quality.
by-product shall be issued by the [national or provincial/state official
minerals laboratory] after analysis of samples based on the standards               This example also authorises the official laboratory (which may be national
established by the [national bureau of standards].                                  or provincial/state) to make site investigations - not only of mines but also
                                                                                    of processing, storage, trading and transportation facilities - to verify the
Article [_]                                                                         mineral content of development minerals that are in commerce. That
(1) The [national or provincial/state official minerals laboratory] is              provides an important check on the quality of development mineral products
authorised to make investigations from time to time of any site for the             in the stream of commerce and provides information for development of
extraction, processing, storage, trading or transport of development                policy and enforcement actions.
minerals for the purpose of verifying the mineral content of development
minerals in commerce. Such investigations shall take place during normal            The example also provides for the publication of the results of site
business hours and shall follow the procedures in the Regulations.                  inspections by the officials of the laboratory so that the market has objective
                                                                                    information about the relationship between what is reported and what is
(2) The [national or provincial/state official minerals laboratory] shall           observed in reality. In light of the possibility of errors in reporting and
publish the results of its findings during such investigations on its website.      publication, the example provides a mechanism whereby an aggrieved party
Such findings shall also be published on the website of the [Regulating             can challenge the published results of a site investigation.
Authority].

(3) Any person whose site has been investigated pursuant to this provision
and who contests the results as published may challenge such findings by
administrative and judicial appeal in accordance with the provisions of this
[Act][Code][Law].

                                           35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                          35.5 Certification of Development Minerals Products
                                                       35.5(b) Certification of Origin
This section should deal with the requirement that each development mineral product or by-product should be certified so as to identify the
source of the development mineral through its value chain. As such, the miner, processing plant, trader and transporter all must ensure that


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            423 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
their products carry a certificate of origin for traceability purposes which will also assist to enhance compliance with other laws
(environmental, labour, trade licensing, etc.). The specifics of who is authorised to do the certification of origin, and what it should include,
should be set forth in the regulations, based on what is feasible and workable in the existing national and local context.

35.5(b) Example:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     The example does not require all actors in the development minerals sector
Each holder of an exploitation licence for development minerals who             to provide a certificate of origin. Rather, it requires them to either provide
directly disposes of any development minerals to a third party shall either     such a certificate or to explicitly sell their development mineral as
(a) deliver a certificate of origin of the development minerals as prescribed   uncertified with respect to origin. It therefore does not burden small scale
in the Regulations to the party to whom he is disposing the development         and artisanal miners of development minerals; but it provides the buyers of
minerals or (b) sell the development minerals as uncertified with respect to    such products with the ability to pressure their sellers for certification.
origin.
                                                                                The example also requires every participant in the value chain to either
Article [_]                                                                     provide the original or a copy of the certificate of origin or declare the
Every Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader or Authorised           development minerals that they are selling or transporting to be uncertified
Transporter shall either (a) provide to the authorities and to their buyers,    with respect to origin. The expectation is that all major projects in the
on demand, the original or a copy of the certificate of origin of the           market will require their suppliers to provide certification of origin.
development minerals in their custody or (b) declare to the authorities and
to their buyers that such development minerals are not certified with respect   The example leaves to the regulations the specifics of who is authorised to
to origin.                                                                      establish certificates of origin, as well as what their scope should be; but it
                                                                                provides some guidance with regard to scope. The regulations will also
Article [_]                                                                     specify the procedures that all licenced Processing Facilities, Traders and
(1) A certificate of origin of development minerals shall be established by     Transporters are to follow in order to ensure that development minerals for
the person(s) authorised to do so in the regulations for the implementation     which the origin is certified are kept separate from development minerals
of this [Act][Code][Law] and shall certify as to the matters prescribed in      whose origin has not been certified (the price for which will presumably be
the regulation in accordance with the procedure and conditions set forth        lower).
therein.
                                                                                For purposes of verification, the example provides for a copy of every
(2) In general, a certificate of origin of development minerals and related     certificate of origin to be filed with a specified department of the Regulating
mineral by-products shall certify the site from which such products were        Authority, which is to maintain a database of such certificates that the public
extracted and further certify that:                                             can consult.

(a) the minerals were extracted under a valid licence for exploitation of the
development minerals at the site;




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        424 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
(b) the site was not under the control of any armed military group;

(c) the minerals were extracted by labour that was independent or employed
without coercion, and not by children under the age of [18]; and

(d) based on due diligence conducted by the person establishing the
certificate, the source of the working capital used in the extraction
operation is known and does not include any illegal activity in the
jurisdiction or, to the best of the exploitation licensee’s knowledge, in
another country.

Article [_]
A copy of every certificate of origin of development minerals shall be
deposited with the [department] of the [Regulating Authority] by the person
who issues the certificate. The [Regulating Authority] shall maintain a
database of all certificates of origin of development minerals that shall be
available for consultation by the public.

Article [_]
The regulations shall specify the procedures to be followed by all holders of
exploitation licences for development minerals, all Authorised Processing
Facilities, all Authorised Trader/Dealers and all Authorised Transporters to
assure the continuity of the identification of development minerals that are
certified with respect to origin and those that are not so certified,
respectively, throughout the value chain from extraction up until delivery to
the ultimate consumer.

                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
This section should stipulate the various obligations of an Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer and Authorised
Transporter after they have been licenced by the respective licensing authorities. In addition to the aforementioned obligations with respect to
certification of quality and origin, the obligations of such licensees should generally include obligations to maintain registers and records and
file reports; obligations to utilize domestic and regional inputs; and obligations to utilize domestic and regional labour.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                            425 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                              35.6(a) Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements
For various information purposes, it is important that Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter licensees keep records
and provide reports pertaining to their transactions concerning development minerals. The purpose of the registers is to record the nature,
quality, quantity and price of development mineral products received and sold or delivered by them, respectively. The purpose of the reports
is to provide to the Regulating Authority for the development minerals subsector the information necessary for monitoring performance,
compiling statistics and publishing information useful to the markets for development mineral products.

35.6(a) Example:                                                               Annotation:

Article [_]                                                                    The first section requires that Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised
(1) Each Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer and          Trader/Dealer and Authorised Transporter licensees record certain
Authorised Transporter shall keep a register in which the following            information concerning the characteristics and movement of development
information, and such additional information for the purpose of monitoring     minerals in their custody from time to time. Such information would be
the type, physical characteristics and quantity of development minerals        relevant for the sector and the public for purposes of ascertaining the origin
present in different stages of commerce as is required by the applicable       of development minerals, production from processing facilities and
regulations shall be kept:                                                     movement to and by traders and/or transporters locally, nationally and
                                                                               regionally.
(a) Type, physical characteristics, quantity, source, seller and purchase
price of development minerals purchased or received each day;                  The example establishes a daily record keeping obligation for each
                                                                               Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer and Authorised
(b) Results of any analysis or identification of development minerals;         Transporter. It does not require daily reporting of the recorded information,
                                                                               but provides instead for inspections of the daily registers by official agents
(c) Costs incurred;                                                            of the licensing entity from time to time. This recordkeeping requirement is
                                                                               designed to establish a basis for the collection of data on the performance of
(d) Identification number or code for the shipment purchased or received;      the development minerals subsector of the mining industry and also to track
                                                                               the movement of such minerals through commerce, for purposes of
(e) For each transaction, whether the shipment is certified with respect to    verifying quality and origin.
quality and origin, respectively, or not;
                                                                               The example also imposes a periodic price reporting obligation for
(f) In the case of Authorised Processing Facilities and Authorised             Authorised Processing Facility and Authorised Trader/Dealer licensees, in
Trader/Dealers, the purchase price paid for the shipment, if applicable; and   order to enable the regulators to provide important information on the
if not applicable the nature of the transaction;                               quantities, characteristics and price of various development minerals and


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                      426 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                                                                                mineral products to the market for such minerals and products. The
(g) Type, physical characteristics, quantity, source, purchaser and sale        frequency with which the price reports are to be held is not specified. The
price of development minerals sold or delivered each day;                       goal should be to shorten the reporting period gradually as licensees become
                                                                                used to the reporting obligation. At the outset, it should probably be
(h) Identification number or code for the shipment sold or delivered.           quarterly, then become monthly at some point and then weekly (or even
                                                                                more frequently) once that is feasible, so that information is provided to the
(2) The registers maintained as required in subsection (1) shall be available   market in as close to real time as possible.)
for inspection by authorised inspectors of the entity that issued the
Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer or Authorised          The example further requires the filing of quarterly reports for statistical
Transporter licence to the licensee during regular business hours.              purposes by all licensees.

(3) Each Authorised Processing Facility and Authorised Trader/Dealer            These recordkeeping and reporting requirements together are designed to
shall submit to the regulating entity that issued its licence, a                enable the regulators to establish a statistical database and provide important
[weekly/monthly/quarterly] report, in the form prescribed by the                information to the market for development minerals while also tracking the
regulations, of the following information:                                      movement of such minerals through commerce, for purposes of verifying
                                                                                quality, origin and ownership.
(a) The high, low and average unit price paid by the licensee for each type
of development mineral purchased during the reporting period; and

(b) The high, low and average unit price for which the licensee sold each
type of development mineral during the reporting period.

(4) Each Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer and
Authorised Transporter shall submit to the entity that issued its licence, a
quarterly report for each calendar quarter, of the aggregate information
recorded in accordance with subsection (1) in such form as shall be
prescribed in the regulations.

                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                                  35.6(b) Use of Domestic and Regional Inputs
Use of domestic and regional inputs refers to an obligation to procure goods and services necessary to the licensee’s business from sources
that are indigenous to the African jurisdiction or region. Consistent with the goal of promoting linkages in the extraction, processing,
marketing and transportation of development minerals, as contemplated by the African Mining Vision, this obligation aims to promote the

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        427 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
procurement of goods and services for the licensee’s operations from local African sources. This is relevant to Authorised P rocessing
Facilities.

35.6(b) Example:                                                                   Annotation:

Article [_]                                                                        This provision requires every Authorised Processing Facility to prepare a
(1) Unless otherwise excused by the licensing entity, an Authorised                plan for the procurement of local goods and services; and where such local
Processing Facility shall develop a plan for the procurement of goods and          goods and services are not available in the jurisdiction, to procure them
services available in [jurisdiction] and in particular within the area of          from sources within any AU member state. Provision is made for the
operations of the processing facility, or if the goods and services are not        possible exemption of small licensees by the licensing entity.
available within said area, then from sources based within the national
jurisdiction of the processing facility, failing which the Authorised              The plan is to be filed with the licence issuing entity for review and
Processing Facility may source from member states of the African Union.            approval. The licensing entity must either review and approve the plan or
                                                                                   request additional information or modification within 30 days of the filing
(2) The plan referred to in subsection (1) above shall be submitted to the         or any supplemental filing. In this example, the plan would be developed
entity that issued the Authorised Processing Facility licence within [_] days      and submitted by the licensee after receiving the licence. Alternatively, it
of the issue of the licence.                                                       could be required as an element of the application for an Authorised
                                                                                   Processing Facility licence, with implementation of the approved plan being
(3) The licensing entity shall review the plan, which shall comply with this       a condition of the licence.
[Act][Code][Law] and the business laws of [Country] [or of the
provincial/state jurisdiction of the regulating authority] and where               The Authorised Processing Facility is required to implement the approved
necessary may consult with the [entity regulating commerce and trade in the        plan and file annual reports on the results achieved by the implementation of
jurisdiction]. The licensing entity may require additional information or          the plan (except in the case of excused licensees).
modification of the plan by written notice to the Authorised Processing
Facility licensee within [thirty] days of the date of submission of the plan or
of any subsequent submission in response to a request of the licensing
entity.

(4) The licensing entity shall issue its approval of the plan within thirty days
of the submission of the plan or of the latest submission in response to a
request from the licensing entity for additional information or modification
of the plan, provided that there is no further request for additional
information or modification of the proposed procurement plan outstanding.

(5) Unless excused as provided in subsection (1), the Authorised Processing
Facility licensee shall implement the procurement plan approved by the
regulating entity.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          428 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

(6) Unless excused as provided in subsection (1), the Authorised Processing
Facility licensee shall file an annual report with the entity setting forth the
results of the implementation of the plan during the covered year, as further
specified in the regulations.

                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                             35.6(c) Employment of domestic and regional labour
Employment of domestic and regional labour refers to the obligation of the licensee to recruit, hire, train, and promote candidates from the
local labour force for employment at all levels of the enterprise, consistent with the AU Mining Vision.

35.6(c) Example:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       This section is to ensure that local communities in particular benefit from
(1) An Authorised Processing Facility and an Authorised Trader shall              the presence of an Authorised Processing Facility which should enhance
employ and train citizens of [jurisdiction] and implement a succession plan       local participation and capacity building. As such, in order for local
for the replacement of expatriate employees in accordance with the labour         communities to benefit directly from development minerals, the processing
laws of [jurisdiction]. In as far as possible priority shall be given in          facility should ensure employment and training of nationals and persons
employment of nationals from the jurisdiction of the processing plant.            within local communities situated within the vicinity of the processing
                                                                                  facility, as well as procurement of goods and services nationally and locally.
(2) where an Authorised Processing Facility or an Authorised Trader are
unable to find a citizen of [jurisdiction] who is qualified for a particular      Where employment requires technical know-how and no such person is
technical or managerial position, they may employ citizens of any AU              available nationally and in accordance to labour laws [of each jurisdiction]
member state subject to the labour laws [of jurisdiction]. The burden of          the Authorised Processing Facility and Authorised Trade may employ a
proof shall be on the employer.                                                   citizen of an AU member state.

Article [_]                                                                       Authorised Transporters would not be entitled to employ non-citizens, in
An Authorised Transporter shall not employ persons who are not citizens of        line with the eligibility requirements to be an Authorised Transporter.
[jurisdiction].
                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         429 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                                 35.6(d) Environmental Impact Mitigation, Safety and Security
Authorised Processing Facility licensees may be subject to obligations to prepare an environmental impact assessments and an environmental
impact management and mitigation plan, and to implement the plan once approved by the environmental regulation authority. Although
Authorised Trader/Dealers and Transporters are not expected to be subject to environmental impact assessment studies as a prerequisite for
conducting operations under their licences, they and Authorised Processing Facilities will be subject to obligations to follow certain rules to
guard against or mitigate the impact of their activities on the natural and social environment, as well as rules on security, safety and hygiene.
This section refers to those rules, which may be in the environmental legislation or regulations applicable in the jurisdiction, or in health and
safety law and regulations applicable to all commercial establishments, or in regulations under the mining law, and should reflect, among
other things, climate change commitments of the host state.

35.6(d) Example:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                    The example establishes the principle that all Authorised Processing Facility
(1) If applicable, Authorised Processing Facility licensees shall implement    and Authorised Trader/Dealer and Authorised Transporter licensees shall be
their environmental impact management and mitigation plans that have           subject to regulations for environmental protection, security, safety and
been approved by the environmental regulation authorities, perform the         hygiene. It contains a section for each type of licensee, listing the respective
required monitoring and evaluation, submit the related reports as required     subject of regulation to which they are subject.
by regulations and take all necessary remedial measures.
                                                                               Some Authorised Processing Facility licensees may be subject to
(2) All Authorised Processing Facility licensees shall comply with standards   environmental impact assessment and environmental permitting
and procedures for security, safety and hygiene as set forth in the            requirements under the environmental laws and regulations of the
regulations with respect to:                                                   jurisdiction. The section on Authorised Processing Facility licensees
                                                                               requires that they implement their approved environmental management and
(a) stockpiling, warehousing and handling of development minerals,             mitigation plans and the related required monitoring and evaluation.
chemicals and mineral products;
(b) operation of machinery and equipment;                                      Authorised Processing Facility licensees have the most obligations, because
(c) control of toxic and particulate emissions and dust;                       they construct, operate and maintain industrial processing facilities.
(d) disposal of chemicals, fuels and lubricants;
(e) prevention and control of fire and explosions;                             Authorised Trader/Dealer licensees have the fewest environmental
(f) storage, treatment and usage of water; and                                 obligations because their activities have the least impact on the
(g) site access, appearance, maintenance and eventual restoration.             environment.

Article [_]                                                                    The common obligation among all three types of licensee is the obligation to
Authorised Trader/Dealer licensees shall comply with standards and             comply with standards and procedures for security, safety and hygiene with


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        430 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
procedures for security, safety and hygiene as set forth in the regulations      respect to stockpiling, warehousing and handling of development minerals
with respect to stockpiling, warehousing and handling of development             and mineral products.
minerals and mineral products.

Article [_]
Authorised Transporter licensees shall comply with standards and
procedures for security, safety and hygiene as set forth in the regulations
with respect to:

(a) stockpiling, warehousing and handling of development minerals and
mineral products;
(b) transportation of development minerals and mineral products;
(c) driver training, preparedness and safety;
(d) vehicle operation and maintenance; and
(e) vehicle security and safety.

                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                                            35.6(e) Trading Practices
Authorised Trader/Dealers should be subject to obligations under existing law and regulations or new provisions enacted to promote the use
of fair trade practices and prevent or penalize the use of unfair or deceptive trade practices.

35.6(e) Example                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This provision requires all Authorised Trader/Dealers to comply with
(1) Authorised Trader/Dealer licensees shall comply with the general law         general law and regulations with respect to fair trade practices, as well as
and regulations on fair trade practices and such regulations on fair trade       any regulations on such subject adopted by the regulating entity that issued
practices as may be adopted by the regulating entity that issued the             the licensee’s licence.
licensee’s licence.
                                                                                 The example authorises the respective regulating entities to adopt
(2) In the absence of provisions of general law and regulations to curb any      regulations to curb any trade practices that they “reasonably determine? to
trade practices that it reasonably determines after investigation to be unfair   be unfair, provided that an investigation of the practices has been conducted
or deceptive, the regulating entity shall adopt regulations to prohibit and      before the adoption of such measures. This enables those regulating entities
penalize such practices on the part of persons to whom it issues licences,       to plug any holes in existing regulations that may become apparent.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        431 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
consistent with the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law] on penalties for
offenses.

                              35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
     35.6 Obligations of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                                              35.6(f) Land Access
The siting of an Authorised Processing Facility presents land access issues. In general, the Authorised Processing Facility is subject to the
general land laws and must secure its plant site legally. Since not all sites will have a legally registered title holder, but may have lawful
occupants under either formal law or tribal custom, it is desirable to state clearly in the mining law that Authorised Processing Facility licence
holders are subject to the obligation to obtain the consent of such lawful occupants and to abide by land law provisions regarding
compensation, resettlement or relocation of them in connection with securing the site for the processing facility.

35.6(f) Example                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      An Authorised Processing Facility licence holder must obtain various
(1) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence shall seek the       consents with respect to land that is owned or occupied by a lawful occupier
prior written consent from the lawful occupants, and in consultation with        and protected lands that are regulated under separate laws.
the local government authority, with respect to any occupied land or land
that is being used as farm land on which the licensee intends to construct its
processing plant and related facilities, and shall comply with the land laws
with respect to compensation, resettlement and relocation of any occupants
of land.

(2) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence shall obtain the
prior consent from the regulatory authority in charge with respect to land
situated in a game reserve, national park, forest or wildlife reserve before
engaging in any activities on such sites.

                               35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
         35.7 Rights of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
This section provides for specific rights attached to the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter licences. The


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                       432 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
preceding provisions dealt with the obligations of the holders of such licences; but this section will now deal with their respective rights.

                                35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
         35.7 Rights of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                         35.7(a) Rights of the Authorised Processing Facility Licence Holder
The rights of an Authorised Processing Facility Licence holder should include the rights to purchase inputs for its licenced processing facility
at freely negotiated prices, the right to process those inputs as contemplated by the licence, and the right to sell those inputs at prices freely
determined or negotiated. The territory within which the licence holder is authorised to exercise its rights should be consistent with the
territory of the jurisdiction that issued the licence – i.e., the province or state for licensees whose licences were issued by provincial/state
regulating authorities, and the national government and the African region for those licensees whose licence was issued by the national
regulating entity.

35.7(a) Example                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        This example provides the Authorised Processing Facility licence holder
(1) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence shall have the         with the rights to buy development mineral inputs, process such minerals,
following rights, during the term of the licence, and subject to the terms and     and sell the processed mineral products. It also provides the licence holder
conditions of this [Act][Code][Law] and of the licence:                            with the right to process development minerals for third parties, to sell those
                                                                                   minerals for its own account when it has not been paid by the third parties,
(a) to purchase raw development minerals for its processing facility from          and to engage in necessary ancillary activities.
  (i) legal sellers of such minerals within the jurisdiction that issued the
licence, or                                                                        If the licence was issued by the national regulating entity, the licence holder
  (ii) if the licence was issued by the national regulating entity, from legal     is entitled to purchase development mineral inputs from any legal seller in
sellers within any member state of the African Union;                              the country that issued the licence, or in a member state of the AU. It has
                                                                                   similar freedom to sell its products throughout the country and the member
(b) to engage in the type of processing of development minerals for which          states of the AU.
the licence was issued, whether for its own account or for the account of a
third party;                                                                        If the licence was issued by a provincial or state regulating entity, the
                                                                                   licence holder is entitled to purchase development mineral inputs from any
(c) to sell, at prices that it freely determines or agrees to, processed mineral   legal seller in the province or state that issued the licence. (This could
products that it has produced for its own account or for the account of a          include a nationally licenced Authorised Trader/Dealer selling development
third party to –                                                                   minerals in the local province or state.) If licenced by a province or state, it
 (i) purchasers within the jurisdiction that issued the licence, and               is entitled to sell its processed products only to purchasers within the


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            433 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
 (ii) if the licence was issued by the national regulating entity, to             licensing jurisdiction (which could include a nationally licenced Authorised
purchasers within any member state of the African Union; and                      Trader/Dealer purchasing development minerals in the local province or
                                                                                  state.)
(d) to engage in necessary ancillary activities in connection with the
foregoing.                                                                        The licence holder has the freedom to set or agree to prices for its products.

(2) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence shall have the        The example also states that the licence holder is entitled to the benefit of
right to benefit from the incentives provided for development minerals            the incentives provided in this Act and in other applicable laws.
processing in this [Act][Code][Law] and in applicable tax and finance
laws.                                                                             Because the Authorised Processing Facility Licence holder may have
                                                                                  significant power supply needs which the local electric utility may not be
(3) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence shall have the        capable of providing, the provision authorises the licence holder to construct
right to construct and operate power supply generation facilities utilizing       and operate its own power supply plant using renewable resources and the
renewable resources (e.g., hydro, wind, solar or biomass) to provide some         rights to purchase back-up power and ancillary services from the electric
or all of the electric power and energy supply needs of the licensee’s            utility at capped rates, as well as the right to sell surplus power and energy
processing plant and related facilities. The holder shall also have the right,    to the electric utility at the licensee’s average cost of production.
but not the obligation:

(a) to purchase ancillary services and back-up power from the electric
utility authorised to provide electric service in the area where the licensee’s
processing facility is situated at rates that are no greater than the lesser of
(i) the utility’s average system cost and (ii) its marginal cost; and
(b) to sell surplus electric energy from its renewable energy power plant to
the electric utility authorised to provide electric service in the area where
the licensee’s processing facility is situated, at the licence holder’s average
cost of producing the electric energy.

                               35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
         35.7 Rights of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                          35.7(b) Rights of the Authorised Trader/Dealer Licence Holder
The rights of the Authorised Trader/Dealer licence holder are those special rights conferred upon the holder by the licence and include the
rights to purchase and to sell raw and processed development minerals at prices that are freely determined or negotiated, within the territory
of the jurisdiction that issued the licence. If the licence was issued by the national Regulating Authority, then the licence holder can buy and
sell both nationally and throughout the regional market (i.e., within the member states of the AU).

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          434 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

35.7(b) Example                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       This example is very similar to the previous example for Authorised
(1) The holder of an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence shall have the              Processing Facility licence holders, but simpler. It provides that Authorised
following rights, during the term of the licence, and subject to the terms and    Trader/Dealer licence holders have the right to buy and sell raw or
conditions of this [Act][Code][Law] and of the licence:                           processed development minerals for their own account or for the account of
                                                                                  a third party client.
(a) to purchase raw and processed development minerals, for its own
account or for the account of a third party, from legal sellers of such           If the licence was issued by a provincial or state regulating entity, the
minerals within the jurisdiction that issued the licence or, if the licence was   licence holder may purchase from sellers and sell to purchasers only within
issued by the national regulating entity, from legal sellers within any           the licensing province or state. If the licence was issued by the national
member state of the African Union;                                                regulating entity, the licence holder can purchase from sellers and sell to
                                                                                  purchasers within any member state of the AU (subject to applicable laws of
(b) to sell raw or processed mineral products for its own account or for the      each member state).
account of third parties to purchasers within the jurisdiction that issued the
licence or, if the licence was issued by the national regulating entity, to       The licence holder has the freedom to set or agree to its own prices.
purchasers within any member state of the African Union at prices it freely
determines or agrees to; and                                                      Authorised Trader/Dealer licence holders also have the right to engage in
                                                                                  necessary ancillary activities (such as storage of development minerals or
(c) to engage in necessary ancillary activities in connection with the            mineral products) and to enjoy the benefits of the incentives provided for
foregoing.                                                                        trading in development minerals in the mining law or other legislation.

(2) The holder of an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence shall have the right
to benefit from the incentives provided for development minerals trading in
this [Act][Code][Law] and in applicable tax and finance laws.

                                35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
         35.7 Rights of the Authorised Processing Facility, Trader/Dealer and Transporter Licence Holder
                            35.7(c) Rights of the Authorised Transporter Licence Holder
The rights conferred upon the holder of an Authorised Transport licence include the rights to freely transport development minerals within the
jurisdiction that issued the licence, and within the African region if the licence was issued by the national Regulating Authority, and to freely
set or negotiate prices for such services.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          435 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
35.7(c) Example                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        The rights of the holder of an Authorised Transporter licence include the
(1) The holder of an Authorised Transporter licence shall have the following       right to transport both raw and processed development minerals, for its own
rights, during the term of the licence, and subject to the terms and               account and for the account of others. A licence holder may wish to
conditions of this [Act][Code][Law]and of the licence:                             transport development minerals or products for its own account if it is also
                                                                                   licenced to process or trade in such minerals, for example.
(a) to transport raw and processed development minerals, for its own
account or for the account of a third party,                                       As with the other two types of licensees discussed above, the Authorised
  (i) from legal owners or sellers of such minerals within the jurisdiction that   Transporter licence holder is limited to providing services in the province or
issued the licence or, if the licence was issued by the national regulating        state that issued the licence; but if the licence was issued by the national
entity, from legal sellers within any member state of the African Union, and       regulating entity, the licence holder has the right to provide development
  (ii) to the owners or buyers of such minerals within the jurisdiction that       mineral transport services throughout the country and the member states of
issued the licence or, if the licence was issued by the national regulating        the AU (subject to their respective laws and regulations).
entity, to buyers within any member state of the African Union;
                                                                                   The Authorised Transporter licence holder also has the freedom to set or
(b) to freely determine or agree to prices for its development mineral             agree to its own prices for its services.
transport services; and
                                                                                   Authorised Transport licence holders also have the right to engage in
(c) to engage in necessary ancillary activities in connection with the             necessary ancillary activities (such as storage of development minerals or
foregoing.                                                                         mineral products) and to enjoy the benefits of the incentives provided for
                                                                                   trading in development minerals in the mining law or other legislation.
(2) The holder of an Authorised Transporter licence shall have the right to
benefit from the incentives provided for development minerals trading in
this [Act][Code][Law] and in applicable tax and finance laws.

                                          35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                        35.8 Price Transparency
In the interest of promoting price transparency and greater consistency in the pricing of raw and processed development minerals and
transport services, the Regulating Authority may be authorised to regularly publish aggregate price data (high low and average per unit
volume during the reporting period) for types and qualities of such minerals and processed mineral products, as well as aggregate price data
for the transport of raw and processed development minerals between major quarry sites and processing plants or usage centres. Such price
information would be based on transaction prices reported to the Regulating Authority by licence holders (under Obligations, above) and/or
surveys conducted by the Regulating Authority.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          436 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

35.8 Example                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     The example instructs the Regulating Authority to develop the capability to
(1) Within [12 months] after the date when this [Act][Code][Law] enters         regularly publish pricing data relevant to the development minerals industry
into effect, the [Regulating Authority] shall develop the capability to         and its clientele within, for example, twelve months after the legislation
regularly publish periodic data on the pricing of:                              enters into effect. There will have to be a lead time in order for the
                                                                                Regulating Authority to receive and compile data from the reports of
(a) sales of different types of raw development minerals with similar           licensees, and to develop an appropriate publishing format.
characteristics,
                                                                                The data to be published will depend on what is submitted by the licence
(b) sales of different types of processed development minerals with similar     holders. It is probable that there will be sufficient pricing data points to
characteristics, and                                                            warrant publication of prices for some but not all types of development
                                                                                mineral products.
(c) services for the transport of raw and processed development minerals
between major sources of supply of such minerals and product and major          The pricing data must be aggregated for all development minerals or
centres of usage (processing plants, major construction sites, major            products with similar characteristics. The published information will not
infrastructure projects)                                                        disclose the identities of buyers or sellers. It will be anonymous.

(2) The data referred to in subsection (1) shall be developed from              The pricing data should be published on the official website of the
information reported by the holders of licences for Authorised Processing       Regulating Authority, or on a dedicated website reachable by link from the
Facilities, Authorised Trader/Dealers and Authorised Transporters and           official website, in order to facilitate easy accessibility for the public. Such
from surveys conducted by or on behalf of the [Regulating Authority].           information should also be published in a widely circulating newspaper
                                                                                which will be beneficial especially to those with limited internet
(3) The data to be published will be anonymous and will list high, low and      connectivity.
average unit prices for each type and quality of development minerals or
mineral products for which data is available.

(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall publish the pricing data on its official
website, or on a dedicated site for which there is a clearly identified and
functional link on the [Regulating Authority]’s official website and shall
update the information regularly and promptly after it receives the inputs
for the data. Such information shall also be published in a newspaper of
wide circulation in the licensing jurisdiction.

                                         35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         437 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                                                                   35.9 Domestic Sales
Domestic sales refer to the rules or conditions that govern sales of development minerals and mineral products within the internal market of
the licensing country. In order to promote the growth of the domestic development minerals subsector, participation in the domestic market
for development minerals should be restricted to licenced integrated producers of such minerals and Authorised Processing Facility,
Authorised Trader/Dealer and Authorised Transporter licence holders. Imports of development minerals should only be made by licenced
Authorised Processing Facilities and Authorised Trader/Dealers.

The terms, including price, of all domestic sales of development minerals should be freely negotiated between purchasers and licenced
sellers. General laws on fair trade should protect against the exercise of market power or any deceptive or manipulative practice by any seller
or buyer to artificially inflate or depress prices. Licenced sellers should be required to sell their products as either certified as to quality
and/or origin or not, and to regularly report unit prices at which they have sold specific types of development minerals or mineral products of
a particular quality, as indicated above.

The Government may be authorised to implement certain measures to promote domestic sales if there is an insufficiency of supply to meet
domestic demand, or in the case of an opportunity to promote the development of a domestic project with significant and sustainable
multiplier effects.

35.9 Example                                                                        Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         This example reserves the domestic market for development minerals and
Subject to the terms of any binding international trade agreements to which         processed mineral products to licence holders under the Act. This is subject
[country] is a party, sales of development minerals and processed                   to any binding international trade agreements to which the country is a
development mineral products within [Country] may only be made by                   party.
Authorised Processing Facilities and Authorised Trader/Dealers in
accordance with the terms of this [Act][Code][Law].                                 The authorised sellers are required to either furnish certificates of quality
                                                                                    and origin to their purchasers or sell their products as uncertified with
Article [_]                                                                         respect to quality and origin. The principle of freedom of terms of sale,
All sellers of development minerals or processed development mineral                including price, is established by this example.
products in [Country] must either (a) furnish to their purchaser a copy of
the certificate of quality and the certificate of origin of their products or (b)   The example also provides the Government with the authority to take
sell their development minerals or processed development mineral products           temporary measures to relieve any shortages in the domestic market, subject
as uncertified with respect to quality and origin.                                  to strict requirements to report to the Legislature on the reasons for such
                                                                                    measures and the results achieved.
Article [_]


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                           438 | P a g e
                                                       AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
The terms of sale, including prices, of development minerals and processed
development mineral products sold within [Country] shall be freely
determined by the sellers and buyers in the domestic market for such
products.

Article [_]
(1) In the event of shortages of development minerals and processed
products in the domestic market, the Government may implement temporary
measures to relieve such shortages provided that such measures do no
lasting damage to the natural or social environment. Such measures may
include authorising imports from other sources, stabilizing prices and
restricting exports.

(2) In the event that any such temporary measures are implemented, the
Government shall report to the [Legislature] on the measures implemented
and the justification for such measures within their implementation and
shall furnish such reports to [Legislature] on the results of such measures
as the Legislature shall request.

                                        35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                         35.10 Export Sales
The section on export sales refers to the rules or conditions that govern sales of development minerals and mineral products from the
licensing country to a purchaser in another country. The sellers authorised to make such sales should be limited to nationally licenced
Authorised Processing Facilities and Authorised Trader/Dealers.

The law may provide the Government with the authority to restrict export sales when there is a shortage of supply to the domestic market.

35.10 Example                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   This example provides that only holders of Authorised Processing Facility
(1) Subject to the following section, export sales of development minerals    licences and Authorised Trader/Dealer licences issued by the national
and processed development mineral products may be made only by holders        regulating entity are authorised to make export sales of development
of Authorised Processing Facility licences and Authorised Trader/Dealer       minerals and processed mineral products. Furthermore, such export sales
licences issued by the national regulating entity.                            may only be made within the African Union member states.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                  439 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

(2) Such sales by such licensees may only be made in member states of the        The example provides the Government with the authority to take temporary
African Union.                                                                   measures to relieve any shortages in the domestic market by restricting
                                                                                 exports, provided that it cannot restrict shipments pursuant to long term
Article [_]                                                                      contracts signed at least two months before the announcement of the
(1) In the event of shortages of development minerals and processed              temporary measures and subject to strict requirements to report to the
products in the domestic market, the Government may implement temporary          Legislature on the reasons for such measures and the results achieved.
measures to relieve such shortages in part by restricting export sales of such
minerals and products, provided that no such restrictions will apply to
future shipments made in fulfilment of an existing long-term contract under
which shipments commenced at least one month before the announcement of
the measures.

(2) In the event that any such temporary measures are implemented, the
Government shall report to the [Legislature] on the measures implemented
and the justification for such measures within their implementation and
shall furnish such reports to [Legislature] on the results of such measures
as the Legislature shall request.

                                         35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                 35.11 Civil Violations and Penalties
Civil violations of the Act are those violations that do not involve criminal intent. A person may commit a civil violation of a requirement or
obligation under the Act unintentionally. Thus, the failure to comply with reporting requirements or environmental mitigation, health and
safety obligations of the licensee would constitute civil violations.

The burden of proof of the Government or the enforcement agency to show that a civil violation has been committed is not as high as the
burden of proof for a criminal conviction. A civil violation may be found by an administrative body or tribunal rather than a court of law.

Civil violations of the law may be punishable (i) by a fine which may be assessed per violation or per day, week or month of continuation of a
condition in violation of the Act, (iii) by an injunctive order to carry out corrective action, or (iii) by suspension or revocation of a licence.
Civil violations are not punished by imprisonment; and they do not constitute part of a person’s criminal record.

In the interest of enforcement of the provisions of the Act, the relevant jurisdiction may incentivize citizens to report violations of the Act by
granting them a share of the fines assessed and recovered for violations duly found by the administrative adjudicatory body.

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     440 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

35.11 Example                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      The example articulates the penalties that apply to all of the various civil
Any seller of development minerals who fails to comply with the                  violations of the provisions of this Part that impose requirements or
requirement to either (a) furnish his purchaser with a certificate of quality    obligations on the holders of Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised
or a certificate of origin of the development minerals or (b) sell the           Trader/Dealer and Authorised Transporter licences. In most cases, the
development minerals as uncertified with respect to quality or origin, will be   penalties consist of fines that apply per transaction or per period of the
subject to a fine in an amount not less than [_] and not more than [_] per       continuation of the civil violation. In certain cases, the penalty consists of
transaction.                                                                     suspension of the licence.

Article [_]                                                                      The example also provides that a licence can be revoked if a suspension of a
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer        licence is not lifted or a fine is not paid within a certain timeframe.
or Authorised Transporter licence who fails to record the information
concerning all of his transactions in development minerals as required by        It also provides that the regulating entity that issued the licence is authorised
section [_] above shall pay a fine of [_] per month until the holder’s           to impose the penalties for civil violations, provided that it does so in
recordkeeping is in compliance with the requirement.                             writing with justification after notice to the offending licence holder and a
                                                                                 hearing. The orders of the regulating entity imposing penalties should be
Article [_]                                                                      subject to appeal under the applicable Administrative Procedures Act of the
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer        jurisdiction, as stated in the example.
or Authorised Transporter licence who fails to submit by the official
deadline the annual report summarizing in the aggregate information on           Finally, in order to incentivize enforcement by citizens, the last section of
transactions recorded as required by Section [_] above shall be subject to a     the example provides for the payment of 50% of the recovered fine to the
fine of [_] per day until the report is filed.                                   person who notified the Regulating Authority or the regulating entity of the
                                                                                 suspected violation that was confirmed and resulted in the collection of the
Article [_]                                                                      fine.
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility, or Authorised
Trader/Dealer licence who fails to report required pricing data as required
by the terms of this Part by the statutory deadline shall be subject to a fine
of [_] per [week] month until the report is filed.

Article [_]
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility or Authorised
Trader/Dealer licence who fails to comply with the applicable requirements
to hire and train citizens of the jurisdiction in accordance with the
regulations under this Part shall be subject to a fine of [_] per month until
the licence holder is in compliance.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                           441 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

Article [_]
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence who fails to timely
submit or to implement a local procurement plan as required by Section [_]
above shall be subject to a fine of [__] per month until the required plan is
submitted or implemented.

Article [_]
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence who fails to comply
with the requirements of Section [_] above and the implementing
regulations regarding access to land shall be subject to a fine of [_] per
month until the licence holder is in compliance with such requirements.

Article [_]
Any holder of an Authorised Transporter licence who hires a non-citizen of
[Country] in connection with his development minerals transport business
shall pay a fine of not less than [_] and not more than [_] per week of such
employment.

Article [_]
Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility or Authorised
Trader/Dealer licence who makes sales of development minerals or
development mineral products outside of the territory within which such
sales are authorised by the licence shall be subject to a fine of [_] per
transaction or to the suspension of its licence for [one month] by the
regulating entity that issued the licence or to both penalties.

Article [_]
Any holder of an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence who fails to comply with
applicable regulations on fair trade practices shall be subject to a fine of
not less than [_] and not more than [_] per violation.

Article [_]
Without prejudice to the provisions of any other applicable law and
regulations, any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised
Trader/Dealer or Authorised Transporter licence who fails to comply with
the requirements and regulations for the protection of the environment,


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                      442 | P a g e
                                                           AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                               PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
security, safety and hygiene under this Part shall be subject to the
suspension of the holder’s licence until the holder is in compliance.

Article [_]
The regulating entity that delivered the licence to any holder of an
Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised Trader/Dealer or Authorised
Transporter licence may direct the licence holder to take any corrective
action that it deems reasonably necessary in order to comply with the
provisions of this Part and the regulations hereunder and within such
timeframe as it reasonably deems to be appropriate. Failure of the licence
holder to timely comply may result in the suspension of the licence by the
regulating entity.

Article [_]
If a penalty of suspension of the licence of an Authorised Processing
Facility, an Authorised Trader/Dealer or an Authorised Transporter is not
lifted after [6 months/one year], or if a fine is not paid by the holder against
whom it was assessed within [sixty (60) days] of notification of the fine, the
regulating entity may revoke the holder’s licence.

Article [_]
For any other violations of the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law]
committed by an Authorised Processing Facility, an Authorised
Trader/Dealer or an Authorised Transporter not provided for herein, the
licence holder shall be subject to a fine not exceeding [$ ] to be paid to its
licensing entity.

Article [_]
(1) The penalties for civil violations of the provisions of this Part shall be
ordered and levied by the regulating entity that issued the licence to the
holder.

(2) Before imposing any civil penalty under the provisions of this Part, the
regulating entity shall provide the licence holder with notification in writing
of the nature of the violation and the potential penalty and a fair hearing at
which the licence holder will have the opportunity to present a defence.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                       443 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
(3) All penalties ordered or levied by a regulating entity under this Part
must be stated in writing with the reasons for the imposition of the penalty
and delivered to the holder who is the subject of the penalty.

(4) Any penalty ordered for a civil violation of this Part will be subject to
administrative appeal to the Administrative Reviewer within thirty (30) days
after the notification thereof to the offending holder. The Administrative
Reviewer shall issue its decision on appeal in writing stating the grounds
thereof within sixty (60) days of the filing of the administrative appeal by or
on behalf of the licence holder. The decision shall be recorded by the
regulating entity, immediately notified to the licence holder and published.

(5) A final decision by the Reviewing Authority shall be subject to judicial
review in accordance with the [Administrative/Civil Procedures Act] of
[Country].

Article [_]
A person who notifies the [Regulating Authority] or the provincial/state
regulating entity, as the case may be, of a suspected violation that is
confirmed and results in the recovery of a fine by the [Regulating Authority]
or the provincial/state regulating entity shall be entitled to receive payment
of [50%] of the fine paid.

                                          35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                                                35.12 Criminal Violations and Penalties
Criminal violations are those wilful acts in violation of the law that are punishable by fines and imprisonment after conviction by a judicial
tribunal following due process of law, where the burden of proof on the state is higher than that required to find a person guilty of a civil
offense. The penalties for criminal violations typically increase in the case of repeat offenses.

35.12 Example                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       The assumption is that each jurisdiction has laws governing criminal acts,
(1) Any person who knowingly violates Article [_] (on the prohibition             including money laundering, theft, fraud, forgery etc. As such, any criminal
against processing, trading or dealing in, and transporting development           act committed in the processing, trading, transportation or in any way


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        444 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
minerals without a licence issued under the [Act][Code][Law]), commits an         dealing in development mineral would be prosecuted pursuant to such
offense that shall be punishable by a fine of not more than [_] or                national laws against criminal acts.
imprisonment for a term not exceeding [_] or both.
                                                                                  The principle aim of the provisions in the example is to make it illegal for
(2) Any holder of an Authorised Processing Facility, Authorised                   any individual or company to process, trade, deal in, transport or stack,
Trader/Dealer or Authorised Transporter licence who knowingly engages in          store, warehouse any development mineral without being licenced to do so.
the trading, sale or transport of minerals other than the development
minerals for which his licence was issued without a licence or other              The example also establishes that falsifying a certificate of origin or any
authorisation to deal in such other minerals commits an offense that shall be     information on it is a fraud for which the perpetrator will be liable to all
punishable by a fine of not more than [_] or imprisonment for a term not          subsequent purchasers of the development minerals in question; and that the
exceeding [_] or both.                                                            fraud will also be punishable as a crime. It further lists deliberate
                                                                                  falsification of applications and reports, as well as deceptive practices with
Article [_]                                                                       respect to the nature and quality of development minerals, as criminal
(1) Any person who knowingly falsifies a certificate of origin or any             violations that will be punished by fines or imprisonment.
material information on a certificate of origin of development minerals shall
be guilty of fraud on the person to whom the falsifying party sells or delivers   This example also renders companies and their officers liable for any
such minerals and to all subsequent parties who purchase the same                 criminal acts committed with respect to development minerals.
minerals without knowledge of the fraud.

(2) Any person who commits the fraudulent acts cited in subsection (1)
above commits an offense that shall be punishable by a fine of twice the
price for which the person sold or transported the development minerals, or
imprisonment for [_] year(s), or both.

Article [_]
(1) Any person who -

(a) in any application under this [Act][Code][Law] knowingly makes any
statement which is knowingly false or misleading in a material way;

(b) in any report or return submitted in pursuance of any provision of this
[Act][Code][Law], knowingly includes or permits to be included any
information which is knowingly false or misleading in a material manner;

(c) places or deposits, or is accessory to the placing or depositing of, any
material in any place with the intention of misleading any other person as to
the nature of development minerals in that place;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         445 | P a g e
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport

(d) mingles or causes to be mingled with any sample of development mineral
any substance which will enhance the value or in any way or change the
nature of the development mineral with the intention to cheat, deceive or
defraud, commits an offence for which the penalty, upon conviction, is –
 (i) in the case of an individual, a fine not exceeding [_] or imprisonment
for not more than [_] year(s); or
 (ii) in the case of a body corporate, to a fine not exceeding [_]

(2) Where an offence which has been committed by a body corporate is
proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be
attributable to any neglect on the part of a director, manager, secretary or
other similar office of the body corporate, or of any person who was
purporting to act in any such capacity, that individual as well as the body
corporate, commits an offence and shall be punished accordingly.

Article [_]
Where any person commits an act in relation to development minerals
which amounts to criminal activity, such person shall be subject to national
laws relating to criminal prosecution.

                                 35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                 35.13 Incentives for Processing, Trade and Transportation of Development Minerals
Incentives for processing, trade and transportation of development minerals are advantages conferred on licensees for purposes which may
include promotion of one or more of the following policy goals:

        (a) formalization of informal economic activities (e.g., declaration and/or reporting of economic activity, business registration and
        payment of taxes);
        (b) local investment in the subsector;
        (c) increasing and/or stabilizing local employment in the subsector;
        (d) improvement of practices in the subsector; or
        (e) other policy goals.

Incentives frequently take the form of tax relief (i.e., tax exemptions or holidays, rate reductions, allowable deductions, etc.). However, they

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                           446 | P a g e
                                                       AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
may take other forms such as :

        (i)      priority for the award of certain government contracts;
        (ii)     protection from competition;
        (iii)    preferential access to credit, or preferential terms for credit;
        (iv)     government subsidies; or
        (v)      the provision of services or material and equipment to licensees for free or at discounted prices.

The important thing about incentives is that they should be carefully designed so that they are only provided to the target population or
activity. They should be easy to administer and not subject the beneficiaries to onerous paperwork or procedures in order to benefit from
them. They should be part of a comprehensive policy with clear objectives and a realistic timeline. And they should be evaluated as to their
effectiveness and modified or eliminated if they are not effective in achieving the motivating policy goals or if they produce significant
unintended negative consequences. Moreover, enforcement and policing of incentives should be implemented in such a way so as to prevent
abuse.

                                 35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                 35.13 Incentives for Processing, Trade and Transportation of Development Minerals
                                                 35.13(a) Tax Holiday
A tax holiday is an incentive in the form of a temporary exemption from the obligation to pay a certain tax. Tax holidays are viewed
unfavourably by tax economists when they (a) are unnecessary or (b) result in a taxpayer paying taxes on certain economic activity in a
jurisdiction other than the jurisdiction in which the economic activity took place and which granted the tax holiday.

On the other hand, a tax holiday may be justifiable when it avoids the imposition of a tax that renders certain desirable economic activity
uneconomical by its effect on marginal cost. For example, if VAT at a high rate (e.g. 15% or more) applies to all imports, in addition to
customs duties, and the import of certain equipment is necessary to a certain desirable economic activity but the VAT renders that activity
uneconomical, that would be a case where a tax holiday may be justified.

35.13(a) Example                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   The example provides certain tax exemptions to the holders of Exploration
(1) The holder of an Exploration licence for development minerals issued by   licences for development minerals during the term of their licences, which is
the national [Regulating Authority] shall be entitled to the following tax    short.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     447 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
exemptions during the terms of its licence, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:                     It also provides certain tax exemptions to the holders of Exploitation
                                                                                 licences for development minerals, Authorised Processing Facility licences,
    (a) [tax exemption];                                                         Authorised Trader/Dealer licences, and Authorised Transport licences. The
    (b) [tax exemption];                                                         exemptions are for their start-up period: the fiscal year in which the licence
    (c) [tax exemption].                                                         is issued and the two fiscal years after that.

(2) The holder of an Exploration licence for development minerals issued by      The example does not propose any particular tax exemptions. The
a provincial/state regulating entity shall be entitled to the following tax      appropriate tax exemptions, if any, will depend on the tax structure and the
exemptions during the terms of its licence, provided that it files tax returns   economic conditions of each jurisdiction, and an analysis of whether certain
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:                     taxes constitute a barrier to development of the subsector from which relief
                                                                                 should be granted. The gains from the favoured economic activity should
    (a) [tax exemption];                                                         be greater than the estimate of foregone tax revenue in order to justify the
    (b) [tax exemption];                                                         tax exemptions.
    (c) [tax exemption].
                                                                                 The tax exemptions will also depend on whether the licence was issued by
Article [_]                                                                      the national or the provincial/state licensing entity. In the latter case, some
(1) The holder of an Exploitation licence for development minerals issued        provincial/state tax exemptions may be granted. Thus, each section in the
by the national [Regulating Authority] shall be entitled to the following tax    example contains a paragraph on the tax exemptions available to the
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and   nationally licenced operator and a separate paragraph on the tax exemptions
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns   available to the operator licenced by the provincial/state authority.
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:
                                                                                 For the Authorised Processing Facility that produces fertilizer products for
    (a) [tax exemption];                                                         sale in the domestic market, the possibility of additional tax exemptions
    (b) [tax exemption];                                                         (notably, VAT on inputs and outputs) is contemplated, because that activity
    (c) [tax exemption].                                                         enables stimulation of the growth of local agricultural production.

(2) The holder of an Exploitation licence for development minerals issued        These provisions should be properly situated in the tax law to better ensure
by a provincial/state regulating entity shall be entitled to the following tax   uniform application, but could also be lodged in the mining law, if that is the
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and   proper compilation for sectoral fiscal policy in the particular jurisdiction.
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (a) [tax exemption];
    (b) [tax exemption];
    (c) [tax exemption].



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         448 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
Article [_]
(1) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence issued by the
national [Regulating Authority] shall be entitled to the following tax
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (d) [tax exemption];
    (e) [tax exemption];
    (f) [tax exemption].

(2) The holder of an Authorised Processing Facility licence issued by a
provincial/state regulating entity shall be entitled to the following tax
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (a) [tax exemption];
    (b) [tax exemption];
    (c) [tax exemption].

(3) If the Authorised Processing Facility produces fertilizer products that
are sold domestically, the holder of the licence shall be entitled to the
following additional tax exemptions during the term of the licence:

    (a) [e.g., VAT exemption on inputs];
    (b) [e.g., VAT exemption on sales of products];
    (c) [other tax exemption].

Article [_]
(1) The holder of an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence issued by the
national [Regulating Authority] shall be entitled to the following tax
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (a) [tax exemption];


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                      449 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
    (b) [tax exemption];
    (c) [tax exemption].

(2) The holder of an Authorised Trader/Dealer licence issued by a
provincial/state regulating entity shall be entitled to the following tax
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (a) [tax exemption];
    (b) [tax exemption];
    (c) [tax exemption].

Article [_]
(1) The holder of an Authorised Transporter licence issued by the national
[Regulating Authority] shall be entitled to the following tax exemptions for
the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and the
immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns that
comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (a) [tax exemption];
    (b) [tax exemption];
    (c) [tax exemption].

(2) The holder of an Authorised Transporter licence issued by the
provincial/state regulating entity shall be entitled to the following tax
exemptions for the fiscal year in which the issuance of its licence occurs and
the immediately following two fiscal years, provided that it files tax returns
that comply with the applicable reporting rules for the tax:

    (a) [tax exemption];
    (b) [tax exemption];
    (c) [tax exemption].

                                  35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                  35.13 Incentives for Processing, Trade and Transportation of Development Minerals

NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                               450 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
                                                          35.13(b) Reduced Income Tax
This section outlines measures designed to apply a reduced income tax with respect to holders of licences as Authorised Processing Facilities,
Authorised Trader/Dealers and Authorised Transporters of development minerals. It is intended that the reduced income tax should apply
only to citizens of the country where the development minerals are being mined in order to grow the local entrepreneurial class.

Reduced income tax may or may not be appropriate in a given jurisdiction. In jurisdictions where the tax rates are progressive and increase as
income levels increase, the tax rate may already be sufficiently modest to permit the development of a low-margin development minerals
beneficiation subsector of the minerals sector by local entrepreneurs. On the other hand, if the country’s tax rates are uniform across income
levels.

A reduction in the income tax rates may be appropriate in order to stimulate investment in the development minerals beneficiation subsector.

35.13(b) Example                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       The example provides for a percentage reduction in the otherwise applicable
(1) Individuals who are holders of Authorised Processing Facility licences        income tax rate for the holders of Authorised Processing Facility,
and are citizens of [Country] shall be entitled to a [ %] reduction in the rate   Authorised Trader/Dealer and Authorised Transporter licences. The actual
of income tax payable on their net income from activities under their             percentage reduction is not specified. It will depend on the tax structure of
licence, in accordance with the applicable tax law.                               each jurisdiction and the extent to which an income tax reduction is
                                                                                  necessary in order to spur development of the subsector.
(2) Entities formed under the laws of [Country] who are holders of
Authorised Processing Facility licences shall be entitled to a [ %] reduction     The example assumes that Authorised Processing Facility licence holders
in the rate of income tax payable on their net income from activities under       will be treated differently than the holders of Authorised Trader/Dealer and
their licence, in accordance with the applicable tax law.                         Authorised Transporter licences. The former will probably be granted a
                                                                                  greater reduction than the latter because of the relative capital intensity of
Article [_]                                                                       minerals processing.
(1) Individuals who are holders of Authorised Trader/Dealer or Transporter
licences and are citizens of [Country] shall be entitled to a [ %] reduction      The example also recognizes that individual licence holders and corporate
in the rate of income tax payable on their net income from activities under       licence holders will be subject to different tax structures. Consequently,
their licence, in accordance with the applicable tax law.                         there may be a justification for granting them separate reductions,
                                                                                  respectively.
(2) Entities formed under the laws of [Country] who are holders of
Authorised Trader/Dealer or Transporter licences shall be entitled to a [ %]
reduction in the rate of income tax payable on their net income from


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         451 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
activities under their licence, in accordance with the applicable tax law.

                                  35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                  35.13 Incentives for Processing, Trade and Transportation of Development Minerals
                              35.13(c) Exoneration of Customs Duties on Regional Inputs
Customs duties on imported inputs that are necessary for the development of economic activity often have a negative effect on investment
decisions because they must be paid when a plant is being built and before it is generating revenue. For this reason, it is not uncommon for
countries to exonerate investors in certain targeted sectors of economic activity from the payment of customs duties on the imports that are
essential to the development of their economic activity.

Exonerations from the payment of customs duties on regional inputs (i.e., development minerals imported from other member states of the
AU) would be available only to the holders of Authorised Processing Facility licences and Authorised Trader/Dealer licences issued by the
national Regulating Authority because they are the only licensees who would be authorised to purchase development minerals regionally
under the licensing scheme envisaged by this Guiding Template.

35.13(c) Example                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   The example establishes the straightforward principle that the licensees who
(1) Subject to the provisions of any binding international treaties or        are authorised to import development minerals under the licensing scheme
agreements on customs duties to which [Country]is a party, the holder of an   set forth above (nationally licenced processing facilities and trader/dealers)
Authorised Processing Facility licence or an Authorised Trader/Dealer         would be exonerated from the payment of customs duties on their inputs of
licence issued by the national [Regulating Authority] shall be exonerated     development minerals, in order to assure an adequate supply of such
from the payment of customs duties on development minerals imported from      minerals for the domestic market. Likewise, they would be exonerated from
other member states of the African Union unless the [Regulating Authority]    any customs duties on exports of development minerals.
certifies to the Customs Service that an adequate supply of development
minerals for the domestic market exists nationally.                           Because the customs exoneration on imports can be a double edged sword
                                                                              that can either shore up domestic supply or undercut domestic production on
(2) Subject to the provisions of any binding international treaties or        price, the example allows for the possibility that the exoneration can be
agreements on customs duties to which [Country]is a party, the holder of an   lifted if the national Regulating Authority certifies to the customs authority
Authorised Processing Facility licence or an Authorised Trader/Dealer         that the exoneration is no longer necessary because domestic supply is
licence issued by the national [Regulating Authority] shall be exonerated     adequate. Similarly, the example provides that the exoneration on exports
from the payment of customs duties on development minerals exported to        can also be lifted if the Regulating Authority certifies that there is a shortage
other member states of the African Union unless the [Regulating Authority]    of supply for the domestic market.


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        452 | P a g e
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
certifies to the Customs Service that there is a shortage of supply of
development minerals for the domestic market.                                     The ability of the national administration to implement the exoneration of
                                                                                  customs duties on regional inputs and exports may be limited by binding
                                                                                  international treaties or agreements on trade that set the customs duties on
                                                                                  development minerals within the customs union or trading block such that
                                                                                  the individual member country cannot change them unilaterally. Hence the
                                                                                  introductory language in the example provides that the exoneration
                                                                                  provision is subject to any such treaties or agreements.

                                  35. Beneficiation – Processing, Trade and Transport
                  35.13 Incentives for Processing, Trade and Transportation of Development Minerals
                                               35.13(d) Royalty Exemption
Holders of licences for the exploitation of development minerals generally pay royalties in an amount of local currency per unit volume of the
minerals extracted or sold. In some cases, the royalty could be paid by an Authorised Processing Facility or an Authorised Trader/Dealer.

The royalty paid to the government for minerals extracted is intended to compensate the nation for the appropriation of an asset that belongs
to the nation. Importantly, part of the royalty payment should be paid or allocated to the local community situated closest to the mineral
deposit and/or related processing plant, because it is the group most directly impacted by the activity of extracting and/or processing the
minerals. These considerations should be kept in mind when designing any exemption from the obligation to pay royalties on development
minerals, which should always be a partial exemption at most.

35.13(d) Example                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       The example in this case sets out three different levels of partial exemption
(1) For development minerals that are exported for sale, royalties shall be       from the royalty payment obligation. It is expected that all of these would
payable on the terms set forth in the section of this law on fiscal terms.        apply to the holders off exploitation licences for development minerals.

(2) For development minerals that are sold in the domestic market                 The first level of exemption is zero for exported development minerals. If
([Country]) by the holders of exploitation licences for such minerals issued      you exploit the nation’s mineral resources in order to ship them abroad for
by the [Regulating Authority], the holder of the exploitation licence shall be    payment, you have to compensate the nation for the permanent loss of its
exempted from one half of the national share of the applicable royalty            non-renewable resources.
calculated as set forth in the section of this law on fiscal terms. There shall
be no exemption from the provincial/state or local community share(s) of          The second level of exemption is 50% of the national share of the royalty


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         453 | P a g e
                                                       AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                             PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
the royalty payment obligation.                                               payment when the exploitation licence holder is licenced at the national
                                                                              level and sells into the domestic market. This assumes that the mining law
(3) For development minerals that are sold in the domestic market (within     distinguishes between that part of the royalty payment that is allocated to the
[Country]) by the holders of exploitation licences for such minerals issued   central administration and that part that is allocated to the province/state or
by the [provincial/state regulating entity], the holder of the exploitation   community where the exploitation takes place. Because the nation’s non -
licence shall be exempted from all of the national share of the applicable    renewable resources are not permanently exiting the national territory, but
royalty calculated as set forth in the section of this law on fiscal terms.   are simply being transformed from a latent asset to a useful tangible asset
There shall be no exemption from the provincial/state or local community      with current economic value to the nation, the nation is benefiting from the
share(s) of the royalty payment obligation.                                   exploitation and the nation’s share can be foregone in part.

(4) In the event that the exploitation licence holders referenced in          The third level of exemption is 100% of the national share of the royalty
paragraphs 2 and 3 above sell their mineral output to Authorised              payment, when the exploitation licence holder is licenced by the
Trader/Dealers licenced by the national Regulatory Authority who export       province/state and sells into the domestic market (as the holder is required to
the development minerals, such Authorised Trader/Dealer licence holders       do). In this case, the development minerals are being exploited under
shall pay the amount of the national share of the royalty payment that was    provincial/state authority and are being sold for utilization locally. In this
not paid by the exploitation licence holder.                                  case, the nation essentially has no interest other than the well-being of the
                                                                              province/state as a part of the nation, so a total exoneration from the
                                                                              obligation to pay the national share of the royalty seems appropriate.

                                                                              In all three cases, there is no exemption from the obligation to pay the local
                                                                              community’s share of the royalty.

                                                                              Finally, if an exploitation licence holder sells to a nationally licenced
                                                                              Authorised Trader/Dealer in an ostensibly domestic sale, and therefore is
                                                                              exonerated from half or all of the national share of the royalty payment
                                                                              obligation, the Authorised Trader/Dealer must pay the amount of the
                                                                              national share of the royalty that was not paid by the exploitation licence
                                                                              holder if the Trader/Dealer exports the minerals.

                                  35.13(e) Allocation of Royalty Payments to Local Community
This section relates to payment of royalty to the local communities where the development mineral is mined. It is the expectation that local
communities should benefit directly from development minerals mined within their areas. However, even in countries that provide for a
share of royalty payments to be distributed to the local communities directly impacted by a minerals exploitation project, the distribution
mechanism is often slow and unreliable.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                      454 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
An allocation of royalty payments to the local community can be handled in different ways. One way is for the community’s sh are of the
royalty to be paid directly to it by the exploitation licence holder. This, however, requires that the local community have a bank account and
the ability to account for and manage the royalty payments which may or may not be the case.

Another way to allocate royalty payments to the local community is to have them paid in the first instance to a central clearing-house which
accounts for the payments and distributes their respective shares to the local community, the national government and any other beneficiaries.

A third way to allocate royalty payments to the local community is to have them paid to a special account of the national treasury where they
will be accounted for and immediately segregated into an account of, or for the benefit of, the local community.

Each of the aforementioned allocation methods has pros and cons. The choice of the best approach depends on the capabilities and
administrative structure and culture of each country.

It is preferable to have regulations with respect to the allocation of royalty payment towards development projects in the respective areas.
However, these will need to be covered in national laws on development projects.

35.13(e) Example                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This example first establishes the principle that a percentage of each royalty
(1) A percentage of each royalty payment due on development minerals             payment should be allocated to the community or communities directly
exploited under a licence issued under this [Act][Code][Law]shall be             affected by a development minerals exploitation project. The percentage is
allocated to the local community or communities directly affected by the         to be set elsewhere in the Act.
development minerals exploitation project, as set forth in the section of this
[Act][Code][Law] on fiscal terms.                                                Next, it provides for the regulations to set forth a procedure for certifying
                                                                                 which communities qualify to receive the percentage of royalty payments
(2) The regulations adopted by the [Regulatory Authority] shall set forth the    from particular development minerals exploitation projects.
procedure for certifying the local community or communities that are
directly affected by each development minerals exploitation project.             It then provides for nationally licenced exploitation projects to pay their
                                                                                 royalties to the Regulating Authority on behalf of the National Treasury,
(3) Subject to paragraph (5) below, each royalty payment by the holder of a      which is to determine the amount allocated to the local communities and to
mining right licence issued by the [Regulating Authority] for the                allocate it to an account in their name which shall be available to them on
exploitation of development minerals shall be made to the [Regulating            terms to be agreed among the National Treasury, the provincial authority
Authority] on behalf of the national Treasury. The national Treasury shall,      and the representatives of the local community.
within two weeks of the royalty payment made by the mining right licence
holder, determine the share of such royalty payment that is allocated to the     A parallel procedure applies at the provincial/state level for the holders of


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        455 | P a g e
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                              PART B6: Beneficiation – Processing, Trade & Transport
certified local communities directly affected by the development minerals        exploitation licences issued by the province/state.
exploitation activities and shall allocate that amount in an account of the
local communities to be made available to them pursuant to procedures to         The example further provides for the certification by the Regulating
be agreed upon among the national Treasury Department, the                       Authority or the provincial/state regulating entity, respectively, that the local
provincial/state authority and the duly constituted representatives of the       communities have the means and the capability to manage their own
local communities.                                                               finances – at which point the National or Provincial/state Treasury is to
                                                                                 instruct the licence holder to thereafter make payments directly to the entity
(4) Subject to paragraph (5) below, each royalty payment by the holder of a      or account designated to receive the community’s share of the royalty
mining right licence issued by the provincial/state regulating entity for the    directly.
exploitation of development minerals shall be made to the regulating entity
on behalf of the provincial/state Treasury. The provincial/state Treasury        Payment of royalties and related payments should be published by the
shall, within two weeks of the royalty payment made by the mining right          licenced authority or certified local community which will be receiving such
licence holder, determine the share of such royalty payment that is allocated    payments. This will help in encouraging transparency that can be measured
to the certified local communities directly affected by the development          against concrete developments within the local communities.
minerals exploitation activities and shall allocate that amount in an account
of the local communities to be made available to them pursuant to                It should be kept in mind that the royalty payments on development
procedures to be agreed upon between the provincial/state authority and          minerals will tend to be modest – except in the case of very large quarries.
the duly constituted representatives of the local communities.

(5) Upon the certification to the National Treasury or the provincial/state
Treasury by the [Regulating Authority] or by the provincial/state regulating
entity, respectively, that the certified local communities have the means and
the capability to manage their own finances, the National Treasury or the
provincial/state Treasury, as the case may be, shall instruct the mining right
licence holder to henceforth pay the local community’s allocation of each
royalty payment directly to the account or entity designated to receive such
payments.

(6) Each licensing authority and local community certified as provided in
this section shall publish a quarterly report of royalty payments made to it.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                           456 | P a g e
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
                                                                 36. Fiscal Terms


The fiscal terms, or fiscal regime, refer to the set of instruments or tools that determine how the revenues from mining projects are shared between
the state and companies and may include royalties, bonuses, state equity participation, resource rent taxes, surface area fees, income taxes,
withholding taxes and other types of duties or fees.
Often, fiscal tools specific to the mining sector, such as royalties, bonuses, state equity participation and surface area fees are included in the
mining law. These payments may be collected by the mining ministry or state-owned mining company or other entity which holds equity in a
mining project on behalf of the state.
On the other hand, income taxes, withholding taxes, and provisions to address tax loopholes, which may be standard across all sectors, are often
included in the tax laws and administered and collected by the tax authority. Tax laws may also include provisions specific to the mining sector,
such as depreciation rules, loss carry-forward rules, and the separate taxing of individual projects, known as ring fencing.
It may be advantageous to keep all tax provisions within the tax law, while non-tax provisions that do not fall under the purview of the tax
authority may be included in the mining law. The mining law may make reference to the tax law and explicitly provide that, in addition to the non-
tax provisions included in the mining law, companies must pay income taxes, customs duties and other fees in accordance with generally
applicable tax laws. This may help avoid incoherence and inconsistencies between the tax law and the mining law and avoid confusion over which
parts of the tax laws are applicable to mining companies.
It may also be advantageous to set the fiscal regime in legislation and regulations, with limited allowance for variation from project to project,
rather than setting the fiscal regime entirely in contracts with bespoke arrangements for each project. Given that contracts may not always be
disclosed, setting the regime in law provides certainty and transparency for investors and other stakeholders alike, including the authorities who
must administer the regime. Setting the fiscal regime in law also limits the scope for negotiation, where governments may be at a disadvantage vis-
à-vis companies who may have a better understanding of the mineral resource, and can help limit the possibility of corruption. A fairly standard
fiscal regime across mining projects is also easier to administer than multiple fiscal regimes with wide variation across them.
In choosing the mix of fiscal tools to be used in the sector, a government should consider:
    -   Timing- tools such as bonuses and royalties are paid early in the life cycle of a mining project, either at signing of a mining contract (in the
        case of a signature bonus) or once production begins (in the case of royalties or bonuses related to the attainment of certain production


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                      457 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART C: Fiscal Terms
        milestones), while profit-based taxes are only paid once the project makes a profit, which may take several years;
    -   Progressivity-progressive fiscal regimes give the government a larger share of the profit when profits increase, neutral regimes give the
        state the same share regardless of changes in profitability and regressive tools give the government a lesser share as profits increase.
        Neutral and regressive regimes can ensure a steady flow of income to the state but are less attractive to investors as they require payment
        even if costs exceed revenues and may be politically unpopular at times of soaring prices if the country loses out on capturing the resulting
        super profits;
    -   Risk- tools that are based on profits, such as income taxes, or tools such as state equity participation that may require the state to contribute
        to costs of the project while receiving a share of dividends only if there are dividends to be paid carry more risk for the state in the event
        that the project is not profitable.


                                                                 36. Fiscal Terms
                                                       36.1 State Equity Participation


State equity participation refers to provisions that mandate or allow the State to hold a percentage of equity or ownership in corporate entities
engaged in mining activities. State equity participation can take many forms including:
    -   Fully paid interest meaning the State fully pays for its share of expenses in proportion to its percentage ownership in the mining company.
        The State may also make a non-cash contribution for its equity share, for example, through provision of infrastructure.
    -   Carried interest in which the investor pays the State’s share of project costs until the production phase and then the State forgoes dividend
        payments until those costs plus interest are paid off.
    -   Free interest in which the State pays nothing for its share.

It should be noted that mandatory “free? state participation in the equity of mining licence holders is a policy in the members o f the WAEMU
(UEMOA in French), but this is generally not the case among SADC members.
The State’s equity may be held through a state-owned company, the ministry responsible for mining or through other government institutions.
State equity may be seen as another tool via which the State can share in the revenues from a mining project (through receipt of dividends as a
shareholder). Particularly when equity is held through a state-owned company, state equity participation can be seen as a means to transfer
knowledge and technology and develop the capacity of the state-owned company to eventually carry out mining operations. The goal might be to


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                      458 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
indigenize the sector and reduce reliance on foreign partners as part of a broader industrial development plan. State equity may also be seen as a
means to ensure greater state participation in decision-making around the project and enhance the government’s ability to monitor the activities of
private mining companies. Countries such as Botswana have had some success in the use state participation in the joint venture company
Debswana (formerly De Beers Botswana Mining Company). The government was initially a minority holder but now holds a 50% share of the
company. Debswana has become a major private sector employer, has contributed significantly to Botswana’s economy, and employ s an almost
entirely local staff. In a similar manner, Chile’s CODELCO and Morocco’s OCP have also become world leaders in copper and phosphate
production respectively.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that state equity participation may present some disadvantages. To begin with, the State is acquiring a stake in
an undiversified local subsidiary of an international firm whose holdings are limited to the mining project. This means the investment poses a
substantial risk that a country with budget constraints might be ill-equipped to bear. For fully paid equity, the State would be contributing to
exploration and development costs before being sure how profitable the mine will be. For a country with pressing infrastructural and other
development needs, the State would need to consider whether this is the best use of state funds given the needs of the country. For carried interest,
there is still the issue of use of funds to cover project costs (through forgoing dividends until costs plus interest are paid back) that could be used
for other potentially more pressing needs of the country. Free interest may still require the State to contribute if cash calls to equity holders are
made to cover costs during the production phase (e.g. for mine upgrades). Free interest would also need to be considered in light of the other
components of the overall fiscal regime. From a purely fiscal perspective, the State may be able to get as much of a share via use of other fiscal
tools and free interest may serve as a disincentive to marginal investment or the government may have to sacrifice other negotiable terms in return
for the free equity. Further, dividends may not always be distributed, as, depending on the strength of minority shareholder protections, the
majority holders can make decisions concerning use of income (for example, reinvesting the funds in upgrades to the mine infrastructure) that
result in limited or no dividends being distributed. From a fiscal perspective, royalties may be used to achieve the same result.
Concerning knowledge transfer and development of local capacity to manage the mineral sector, the State may use other strategies including
requiring or incentivizing companies to provide company internships, scholarships or trainings for government officials, to hire and train locals for
skilled and managerial positions, to carry out research and development locally, and more. The State might also require observer status on the
board of the company with full access to all papers and documents provided to the board.
State equity also may not yield the expected benefits in decision-making power if the State is a minority shareholder. In this case, the State may
need to negotiate a shareholder agreement with strong minority rights to protect against the majority owner making most of the decisions without
minority consent. Shareholder agreements could provide for a minimum list of critical decisions that require the consent of all owners, for the right
to access company books and records and dividend policy. The government may also choose to have a special share (Ghana’s Mini ng Act provides



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     459 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
an example) to which no dividend rights are attached but which provide government veto rights over certain key decisions.
In countries where it is the policy of the State to participate in the equity of each mining project, the following factors should be considered for
inclusion in law or regulations (the latter of which may provide better flexibility to governments):
1) At what stage the State will become a participant in the equity of the project company (exploration or production?) Most countries that require
   State equity participation impose the requirement at the production stage.
   2) How and when the State will acquire its equity participation in the company that holds the mining licence.
3) Whether the State’s participation will be “free equity?, “carried equity? or fully paid. If further optional State participation on a paid basis is
   contemplated, how the price of the additional shares will be determined.
4) Whether the State’s equity will be entitled to representation on the company’s board of directors, or to any preferred distribution of dividends
   or other economic or voting rights. Most State equity provisions stipulate that the State’s equity shall not be subject to d ilution in the event of
   issuance of additional shares of the company.
5) Which institution will hold and manage the State’s equity participation in the project company.

36.1. Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) Common
                                                                                Mining Code, this provision imposes the following rules of State equity
(1) Each time a mining title holder decides to mine a deposit, on the basis     participation:
of a feasibility study, they are to start procedures for the creation of an
operating company, to which the mining title relating to the operations         (1) Each time the holder of a mineral licence decides to develop a deposit, the
shall be issued. The granting of said mining title by a member State gives      holder must create a new mining company to which the mining license will be
the State the right to a 10% stake the share capital of the Operating           given.
Company for the entire period during which the mine operates. This
shareholding, which shall have no charge attached to it, may not be       (1)   (2) The issuance of the mining licence by the State entitles the State to 10% of the
                                                                                equity of the mining company for the entire life of the mine.
diluted in the event of a capital increase.

(2) For a member State to hold any addition share of an Operating   (2) (3) The State’s equity share is free of charge and not subject to dilution when
Company's share capital, this is to be done through contributions and additional share capital is raised.
shall be negotiated.
                                                                    (3) (4) Any additional state equity participation will be purchased pursuant to
                                                                        negotiation.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 460 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                 PART C: Fiscal Terms
36.1. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Guinea’s mining code (2011 – as amended in 2013), this provision
                                                                                  grants the State free equity and the provision includes a requirement for the
(1) From the effective date of this [Code][Act][Law], the grant by the            shareholders to sign an agreement that defines decisions which are not to be made
State of an exploitation licence immediately gives the State an ownership         without the prior consent of the State. This provision seeks to both provide the
interest, at no cost, of up to a maximum of fifteen per cent (15%), in the        State a means to participate in the dividends and a means to participate in key
capital of the company holding the licence.                                       decision-making (depending on how the shareholders’ agreement is drafted). The
(2) This provision does not automatically apply to mining concessions             effectiveness of the latter goal would depend on the strength of the shareholders’
signed and ratified before the effective date of this [Code][Act][Law]. Its       agreement.
implementation in relation to the said mining concessions (signed and             It is worth noting that Guinea’s Code also reflects the idea that from a purely fiscal
ratified) is subject to the conditions provided in Article [_] (addressing the    perspective, state equity participation may be interchangeable with other tools. The
specifics of pre-existing mining concession agreements) of this                   Code allows for a mining company to opt for a reduction in the additional equity
[Code][Act][Law].                                                                 the State is entitled to purchase, in exchange for an increase in the tax on the
(3) This interest cannot be diluted by eventual increases in capital. This        extraction of mine substances (a royalty) of equal value. However, it should be
participation is also free from all charges and this interest is free carry.      noted that apart from adding some degree of perhaps unwarranted complexity, this
This interest is obtained upon the signature of the exploitation licence.         creates a consistency problem, with royalty rates potentially varying across projects.
                                                                                  In practice, the government could decide to simplify its fiscal regime by getting rid
(4) This interest, which is at no charge to the State, can neither be sold,       of state equity altogether and opting for a higher royalty rate. If such an either
nor become the subject of a pledge or mortgage. It confers on the State all       equity/or higher royalty or tax rate feature were to be included in law, it would be
the rights conferred on to shareholders by the OHADA Uniform Act                  advisable to include requirements for transparency on the use of this feature to
relating to commercial companies and economic interest group.                     avoid abuse.
(5) The State has the right to acquire a supplementary participation, in
cash, according to the terms agreed with each relevant mining company
within the scope of the mining agreement. This acquisition option may be
scheduled over time, but may be exercised only once. The total
participation held by the State under this article may not exceed thirty-five
per cent (35%).

(6) The table below defines, per mineral substance and with the basic limit
of thirty-five per cent (35%), the levels of State participation in the capital
of companies holding a mining operation licence.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                    461 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
(7) Levels of State participation in companies holding a mining operation
licence:

 Mineral      products   Non-dilutive            Supplementary
 and derivatives         Shareholders’           Cash    Interest
                         Rights%                 (%)

 Bauxite                 15                      20

 Bauxite-alumina         5                       30
 (integrated project*)

 Alumina                 7.5                     27.5

 Aluminium               2.5                     32.5

 Iron ore                15                      20

 Steel                   5                       30

 Gold and diamond        15                      20

 Radioactive ore         15                      20

 Other mineral           15                      20
 substances
*financing of a bauxite mine and alumina refinery.

(8) At the request of a holder of an exploitation licence, the right of the
State to acquire an additional interest in cash in the capital of a company
holding a mining operation licence can be reduced in exchange for an
increase of equal value, determined by an independent expert selected by
mutual agreement, and according to the mineral substance concerned, of



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   462 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                PART C: Fiscal Terms
the tax rate on the extraction of mine substances other than the precious
metals indicated in article [_] (addressing the type and scope of minerals
classified as precious metals) or of the tax on the industrial or semi-
industrial production of precious metals indicated in article [_]
(classifying semi-industrial precious metals) of this [Code][Act][Law], for
which such company is liable.

(9) The interest of the State that is payable in cash is assignable and may
be sub-leased. The State reserves the right to auction, in an open and
transparent process, all or part of its interest that is payable in cash, with
no right of pre-emption for the other shareholders of the company holding
the exploitation licence.

(10) The decision relating to the assignment of all or part of the State’s
interest that is payable in cash, and the terms thereof, must comply with
the provisions of the act relating to withdrawal by the State.

(11) The shareholders of the company holding the exploitation licence
must sign a shareholders’ agreement that defines, inter alia, decisions
which are not to be made without the prior agreement of the State.

(12) A public limited company, with the State as the sole shareholder, is
hereby established to direct the management of mineral resources.

(13) This company is mandated to diligently manage the State’s ownership
interests in companies holding an exploitation licence. In so doing, this
company acts in the name of and on behalf of its sole shareholder, the
State.

(14) This public limited company in charge of mineral resource
management is obligated to pay out in the form of dividends to its sole
shareholder, the State, the products and dividends received.

(15) The powers and functioning of this public limited company in charge
of the management of mineral resources are determined by regulation.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                      463 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
                                                                36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                  36.2 Royalties


Royalties refer to payments made by mining license holders to the government for the privilege of extracting minerals from the area defined under
the mining license. Sometimes royalties are referred to as “mineral tax?, “extraction tax? or “export tax?. However, the y are not a tax in the strict
sense of the term; their purpose is to compensate the owner of the mineral resource for the loss of a non-renewable asset regardless of the
profitability of the project. Therefore, it is critical to price royalties at the right level.
There are three main types of royalties:
  - Fixed-rate (ad-valorem) royalties charge a fixed percentage of the value of extracted resource, or the value less some allowable costs.
  - Variable-rate (ad-valorem) royalties charge a rate that varies according to some defined factor, usually the market price of the commodity.
    This rate is applied to the value of extracted resource, or the value less some allowable costs.
  - Per-unit royalties charge a fixed fee for each unit of production (for instance, five dollars per ton). This type of royalty is less common than
    ad-valorem royalties, except for low value commodities, such as gravel.
Beyond setting the royalty rate, defining the base (how the value of the extracted resource is calculated) rigorously is critical for mining
legislation. In some countries the sales price is used, however, the sales price may not always reflect the market value of the minerals. A mining
company may sell its minerals to an affiliated company (generally, another company that is part of the same group of companies as the license
holder) at an artificially low sales price in order to reduce its declared revenues and thus the size of its royalty or income tax obligations.
Governments may get around this by specifying in law that the value of minerals will be calculated using international index prices. The law
should then further specify that minerals sold to an affiliated company for which there is no international reference price will be on the basis of the
“arm’s length principle?, that is, the price at which the transaction would take place if the buying and selling entities wer e not related. The OECD
Transfer Pricing Guidelines propose five major transfer pricing methods to apply the arm’s length principle and are regarded as the international
authority on common practices and methods in the area of transfer pricing with more than 100 countries referring to these guidelines in their
domestic legislation. In 2013 the United Nations released its own transfer pricing manual that attempts to adapt transfer pricing guidance to the
circumstances, priorities, and administrative capacity of non-OECD countries. Another practical option for valuation of minerals where an
international reference price does not exist is a provision in law requiring independent third-party valuation at the company’s expense. This issue


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     464 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
of abusive transfer pricing (buying or selling from related parties at an artificially high or low price to shift taxable income out of the country
where mining is taking place) is discussed further in the transfer pricing section in this Guiding Template.
It should be noted that law or regulations should also spell out further details on the implementation of the royalty provisions, such as point of
valuation (e.g. whether at the mouth of the mine or at the point of sale) and any allowable deductions or “netbacks? for cost s incurred between the
point of extraction and the point of sale (such as transportation costs or processing costs). Disallowing any netbacks is the simplest
administratively but may result in royalties imposed on a higher value than what the license holder actually received for the minerals, even in an
arm’s length transaction, and may make the overall fiscal regime less attractive for investors. Note that deductions for costs may also be
susceptible to transfer pricing abuses. See section on transfer pricing in the Guiding Template. The law or regulations should also specify which
entity is responsible for collection of royalties.
Thorough financial modelling and market and legal analysis, along with industry consultations, will be necessary to find the right level of royalty
obligation, in order to provide a stable revenue stream for both the state and the investor and compensate the state for the costs of extraction in a
manner that takes into consideration the cyclical fluctuations in commodity prices.
Specific royalty rates are sometimes provided in contracts or in regulations with the law broadly providing that mining companies will be required
to pay royalties. Another option is to set the required range within which royalties must fall in law, for example, 3-5% for a particular metal.
Providing a band sets a floor and a ceiling, but still allows for some flexibility for variation based on the nature of the market and the project. As
stated before, setting as much of the fiscal regime in law or regulation as possible facilitates a transparent and predictable regime that is easier to
administer and monitor and provides potential investors with clarity.
36.2. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from the Zambia’s mining code (2015), this is a good example of a
                                                                                   fixed-rate ad-valorem royalty provision.
(1) A holder of a mining licence shall pay a mineral royalty at the rate of nine
percent for open cast mining operations and six percent for underground            The code uses both sale value of minerals and international index prices for
mining operations of—                                                              valuation of the minerals (note that international index prices for gemstones
                                                                                   and energy minerals like uranium may not always be available, whereas index
(a) the norm value of the base metals or precious metals produced or               prices are available for most base and precious metals). But where the sale
recoverable under the licence; and                                                 value is used to calculate royalties, the code also provides for a mechanism of
(b) the gross value of the gemstones or energy minerals produced or                correction if the tax regulating entity determines that minerals were sold for
recoverable under the licence.                                                     less than market (“arm’s length?) prices, which may indicate abusive transfe r
                                                                                   pricing (see discussion on transfer pricing above and in the section of the


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               465 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
(2) The mineral royalty payable on industrial minerals shall be at six percent      Guiding Template on transfer pricing). Such a provision can be quite robust, if
of the gross value of the minerals produced or recoverable under the licence.       a country has the means to assess whether companies are engaged in unfair
                                                                                    pricing of their commodity exports.
(3) A person who is not a holder of a mining licence and who is in possession
of minerals extracted in [Country] for which mineral royalty has not been paid      If international index prices are used, valuation should be based on the actual
is liable to pay mineral royalty at the rate of                                     mineral content. If not, then a lower rate of royalty can compensate for a cruder
                                                                                    measure of the base, as has been used for bauxite in Guinea. However, this is
(a) nine percent of the norm value for base metals or precious metals;
                                                                                    not necessarily considered best practice.
(b) nine percent of the gross value for gemstones or energy minerals; and
                                                                                    In addition, article 138 of the Zambian mining code leaves the actual
(c) six percent of the gross value for industrial minerals.                         implementation of the royalty provisions to be specified in the Income Tax
                                                                                    Act. This leaves the finance and tax regulating entities authority with more
(4) Where the [Tax Regulating Authority] determines that the realised price         authority to administer the royalty in the most efficient way possible.
does not correspond to the price that would have been paid for the minerals if
they had been sold on similar terms in a transaction at arm’s length, between a
willing seller and a willing buyer, the [Tax Regulating Authority] may give a
notice to that effect to the licensee and the amount of the gross value shall be
determined in accordance with the mechanism contained in sections [_] of the
[Income Tax Code].

(5) In this section—

“ gross value ? means the realised price for a sale free on board at the point of
export from [Country] or point of delivery within [Country];

“ norm value ? means—

(a) the monthly average London Metal Exchange cash price per tonne
multiplied by the quantity of the metal or recoverable metal sold;

(b) the monthly average Metal Bulletin cash price per tonne multiplied by the
quantity of metal sold or recoverable metal sold to the extent that the metal
price is not quoted on the London Metal Exchange; or

(c) the monthly average cash price per tonne, at any other exchange market
approved by the [Commissioner-General], multiplied by the quantity of the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 466 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
metal or recoverable metal sold to the extent that the metal price is not quoted
on the London Metal Exchange or Metal Bulletin; and

“Open cast mining operations? includes winnings from tailing dumps or
similar dumps and leaching.

36.2. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] Royalty payable for minerals                                           Drawn from Queensland Australia’s Mineral Resources Regulation (2013), this
                                                                                   provision offers an example of a variable rate ad-valorem royalty. The rate
(1) Definitions                                                                    varies between 2.5% and 5% of the value of the ore, depending on market
In this part, average market price, for a prescribed mineral, means the average    prices. Having variable rates can make royalties more palatable to investors, as
for a return period of the following price, converted to [Australian dollars] at   they are more progressive than fixed rate royalties: that is, in theory they
the hedge settlement rate for each day of the return period—                       require the mining company to pay more when their capacity to pay increases
                                                                                   with the price of commodities and less when prices are low (though an increase
(a) for cobalt, copper, lead, nickel or zinc—the spot price quoted on the          in prices alone may not reflect increased profits for companies). However, it
London Metal Exchange;                                                             requires additional efforts from the regulating entity to monitor and publish
                                                                                   Quarterly and annual metal prices and variable rates, so that companies know
(b) for gold—the p.m. fix price quoted on the London Bullion Market;
                                                                                   what they have to pay. This approach may not be practical for countries that
(c) for silver—the fix price quoted on the London Bullion Market.                  have limited administrative capacity.

reference price 1, for a prescribed mineral, means—                                The reference prices (here in Australian dollars) are used as a threshold to
                                                                                   determine whether the average market prices are “high? or low?. The reference
(a) for cobalt—$55,115 for each tonne; or                                          prices a country uses could be based on moving historical averages. In this
                                                                                   case, the establishment of these reference prices in regulation allows for them
(b) for copper—$3600 for each tonne; or
                                                                                   to be adjusted by the regulating ministry more regularly than legislation to
(c) for gold—$600 for each troy ounce; or                                          reflect changes in market price trends over time and inflation or changes in
                                                                                   exchange rate.
(d) for lead—$1100 for each tonne; or
                                                                                   Queensland’s regulations allow for deductions of some expenses from gross
(e) for nickel—$12,500 for each tonne; or                                          revenues for calculation of royalties, including late dispatch costs (for coal
                                                                                   only), ocean freight and insurance costs, loss of metal content in processing
(f) for silver—$9 for each troy ounce; or
                                                                                   (for certain minerals) and other approved deductions. As noted, it is
(g) for zinc—$1900 for each tonne.                                                 administratively simplest to disallow any deductions as their allowance creates
                                                                                   the potential for companies to inflate these costs and thereby reduce their


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               467 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
reference price 2, for a prescribed mineral, means—                                royalty obligations (see section in the Guiding Template on transfer pricing). If
                                                                                   deductions are allowed to better reflect the actual price received by license
(a) for cobalt—$83,775 for each tonne; or                                          holders for sale of the minerals, a government should consider including
(b) for copper—$9200 for each tonne; or                                            reference prices for such costs, where available. Guinea’s 2011 mining code, as
                                                                                   amended, provides such an example: an international index for transportation
(c) for gold—$890 for each troy ounce; or                                          costs is included.
(d) for lead—$2500 for each tonne; or

(e) for nickel—$38,100 for each tonne; or

(f) for silver—$16.50 for each troy ounce; or

(g) for zinc—$4400 for each tonne.

Article [_] Royalty rate for prescribed mineral

(1) The royalty rate for a prescribed mineral is—

(a) if the average market price for the mineral is equal to or lower than
reference price 1 for the mineral—2.5% of the value of the prescribed mineral;
or

(b) if the average market price for the mineral is higher than reference price 1
for the mineral but lower than reference price 2 for the mineral —the
prescribed percentage of the value of the prescribed mineral; or

(c) if the average market price for the mineral is equal to or higher than
reference price 2 for the mineral—5% of the value of the prescribed mineral.

(2) In this section—

prescribed percentage means the amount, expressed as a percentage, rounded
down to the nearest increment of 0.02%, worked out by using the following
formula—

PP = 2.5 + (PD/RFD*2.5)



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                468 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
where—

PP is the prescribed percentage.

PD is the difference between the average market price and reference price 1
for the prescribed mineral.

RFD is the difference between reference price 2 and reference price 1 for the
prescribed mineral.

Example— If, for a return period, the average market price for copper is $8300
for each tonne of copper, the royalty rate for copper for the return period must
be worked out under subsection (1)(b), given the average market price is
higher than reference price 1 for copper ($3600) but lower than reference
price 2 for copper ($9200). The royalty rate would be 4.58%, being the amount
(4.598214%) worked out by using the formula in subsection (2), definition
prescribed percentage, rounded down to the nearest increment=t of 0.02%.


                                                                     36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                         36.3 Taxes
                                                                     36.3(a). Income


Corporate Income Tax, or Profit tax, is a percentage of a business’s profits due to the tax regulating entity, where profits are generally calculated
as gross revenues minus allowable deductions for expenses and minus any unrecovered losses from previous periods that may be carried forward.
Generally, the corporate income tax rate is standard across all sectors to avoid distortion in investment decisions (however, the possibility of
including exemptions to encourage investment as part of a strategy to develop the mining sector is discussed further under the sections on
exemptions (section 25.4) and tax holidays (section 25.5)). As discussed in the overview on fiscal terms it may be advantageous to keep all tax
provisions within the tax law, to avoid inconsistencies and incoherence in the legal framework. Non-tax provisions that do not fall under the
purview of the tax authority may be included in the mining law. The mining law may make reference to the tax law and explicitly provide that, in



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                   469 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
addition to the non-tax provisions included in the mining law, companies must pay income taxes, customs duties and other fees in accordance with
generally applicable tax laws.
A government might also consider including a “ring fencing? provision in the tax law. This is the separation of mining projec ts (by, for example,
requiring separate mining companies to be established for each project) for the purposes of calculating income tax instead of the consolidation of
income and losses across projects for calculating taxes. Without such a requirement, profits in a producing project can be offset by losses from a
project in the exploration or development phase thereby delaying or reducing taxes paid to the government. The legislation would also need to
define “project? for the purposes of ring fencing; for example, the area defined in the license.
However, note that the ability to apply losses from projects in the exploration or development phase against the taxable income of a profitable
project can make investing in new projects less risky for an investor. For this reason, some countries may choose not to use ring fencing in order to
encourage investment in new mines. That said, it should also be noted that the companies that might be incentivized to invest in new mines by a
“no ring fencing? policy would be those companies already operating mines within the country. A country may seek to attract i nvestment from
various companies and avoid heavy reliance on a small number of companies for developing the mining sector. Ring-fencing also does pose some
administrative challenges, particularly on allocation of shared costs across several projects held by the same investor. The pros and cons of a ring-
fencing policy should therefore be carefully considered.
Though not specific to mining, it is also important for governments to address tax loopholes and combat abusive tax planning and tax avoidance,
which can negatively impact revenues to governments. These issues are dealt with further under the sections in the Guiding Template on royalties,
deductions and transfer pricing. Governments might further consider the necessity of including a strong general anti-avoidance rule in the tax law,
which enables revenue authorities, subject to judicial review, to deny companies the benefit of arrangements that have been entered into for
impermissible tax avoidance purposes. Governments, however, should be aware that such provisions can create uncertainty for companies, given
their inherent generality. Extensive guidance to companies on the application of the rule, including examples of taxpayer behaviour of interest to
the authorities, could help limit uncertainty. South Africa’s general anti -avoidance provisions in sections 80A to 80L of its Income Tax Act may
serve as a starting point for government consideration.
As a general matter, it is also very important to carefully consider tax treaty policy and its impact on tax revenues. Tax treaties may create
exemptions or reductions in tax rates and can have the effect of reducing revenues to a host country without an equivalent offsetting benefit.
Governments may consider limiting such treaties to provision for information exchange and dispute resolution. In any event, governments should
consider:
    -   explicitly limiting benefits from such treaties to inhibit treaty shopping, through, for example, restricting benefits to particular taxpayers,


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     470 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
         disallowing the benefits of the treaty if the principal purpose of the transaction is to obtain a tax benefit, or disallowing the benefit if the
         beneficial owner of the company is not a resident of the treaty partner
    -    ensuring that the right of taxation is preserved over income generated in the country, including through withholding tax and capital gains
         tax

The African Tax Administration Forum’s model double taxation agreement may provide guidance on good practice for tax treaty design.
36.3(a). Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Guinea’s mining code (2011), this provision follows the model of
                                                                                  including all tax obligations in the general tax laws, while explicitly stating in
In addition to taxes, royalties and duties provided in the Tax                    the mining law that, in addition to royalties and other non-tax payments
[Code][Act][Law], the holder of a mining right or authorisation is subject, for   required under the mining law, tax obligations under the general tax laws will
its activities in [Country], to the payment of duties and royalties provided in   apply to mining companies.
[relevant articles] of this mining code. Except as otherwise provided, the
procedure to be applied for the collection and control of these duties and        However, in other articles, Guinea’s mining code does break the general rule of
royalties is that of common law. In particular, the principles and concepts set   a standard tax rate for all sectors by granting a preferential rate of corporate
out in the [Tax Code] or in the [Customs Code] automatically apply for the        income tax and withholding tax for mining companies.
purposes of this [Code][Act][Law].

36.3(a). Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision provides an
                                                                                  example of the principle of ring-fencing assets that prohibits the profits of one
(1) The chargeable income for any year of assessment of a holder of a large-      license being offset by the losses of another license held by the same company
scale mining licence shall be calculated separately for each large-scale mining   in order to reduce that company’s taxable income.
licence under which licence such holder shall maintain separate balance
sheets, statements and books of accounts for each large-scale mining licence
under which mining operations are carried on.

(2) A holder of a mining right, other than a large-scale mining licence may
elect, by informing the [Tax Regulating Authority] in writing, to have the
provisions of the subsection (1) apply to him in respect of his mining right.

(3) A holder of a mining right to whom this Act applies may, on application for
the relevant mining licence, elect to maintain his accounts and be assessed for


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                471 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
taxation and other Government impositions in United States Dollars and such
holder shall, for the duration of the licence, account in, and make all payments
to the Government in that currency.

                                                                     36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                         36.3 Taxes
                                36.3(b). Withholding Taxes on Payments to Non-Resident Persons


Withholding taxes are a share of payments made to non-residents of the country (for example, payments for services, interest, dividends, private
sector royalties, etc.) which are “withheld? and transferred to the government. Withholding taxes makes it poss ible for the government to tax
income generated within the country by those who are not based in the country.
As with income tax, withholding taxes (on dividends, interest, royalties, fees and various types of income) should generally be provided in the tax
law and should be standard across all sectors.
36.3(b). Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from the Guinean mining code (2011), this provision has the advantage
                                                                                   of referring withholding taxes on dividends to the general tax code. However,
(1) Subject to the satisfaction of their obligations set forth in this             Article 176 of the Code provides for a reduced rate of 10% of withholding tax
[Code][Act][Law], all holders of mining rights are guaranteed free                 on dividends for non-resident investors in mining ventures. This may make it
repatriation abroad of dividends and income from invested capital, as well as      more difficult for the tax regulating entity to enforce the tax, especially if some
the proceeds of liquidation or sale of their assets.                               foreign investors receive dividends from both mining and non-mining entities
(2) However, profits distributed by a [Country national] company to non-           in Guinea.
residents are subject to withholding and at the rate set forth in [Tax Code],
subject to the preferential rates for income derived from investments for the
mining sector, set forth in this [Code][Act][Law], or tax treaties which offer a   In addition, this example highlights a potential loophole in the tax regime:
more favourable rate. This withholding is to be liquidated by the [Country         bilateral investment treaties may result in exemption from, or a reduced rate
national] company making the distribution.                                         for, withholding tax on dividends and interest.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  472 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
(3) Foreign workers residing in [Country] and employed by holders of a               Countries may want to consider in negotiating such treaties a provision that
mining right or authorisation, are guaranteed the free conversion and                allows income generated in the country to be taxed before it is repatriated to
repatriation to their home country of all or part of their salaries or other forms   the investors’ home country.
of remuneration due to them, subject to their income and other taxes having
been paid in accordance with the provisions of this [Code][Act][Law] and the
[Tax Code].

36.3(b). Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Drawn from Ghana’s Internal Revenue Act (2000), this provision follows good
                                                                                     practice by including withholding taxes on payments to non-residents in the
(1) The rate of tax applicable to a payment to a non-resident person or              general tax legislations. These provisions apply to companies both in the
partnership and the rate of withholding tax applicable to such a payment is:         mining and non-mining sectors.
(a) in the case of dividends and interest, 10%;

(b) in the case of royalties, natural resource payments, and rents, 15%; and

(c) in the case of endorsement fees or management and technical service fees,
20%.

                                                                       36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                           36.3 Taxes
                                                                 36.3(c). Customs Duties


Customs duties are a tax or levy imposed on imported (and sometimes exported) goods, usually calculated as a percentage of the value of the
goods. These duties enable a country to protect its domestic industries, and economy, by controlling the flow of goods into and out of the country.
Rules and procedures for custom duties on imports of mining companies should follow the general customs legislation. However, given the capital
intensive nature of mining activities, and the very specialized equipment that is needed and often not available within the host country, most
countries grant some form of exemptions on certain imports, during the exploration and construction phase, and sometimes during the exploitation


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                473 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART C: Fiscal Terms
phase. Countries should ensure that such duties exemptions only apply to goods that are not available in country and apply without discrimination
across all mining companies, foreign and local. Countries should be careful of exemptions discriminating against the local companies who may not
benefit from customs exemptions.
An informed discussion between the regulating entity, the customs authority and the mining industry is advisable to design an adequate regime for
imports of mining companies.
As a word of caution, it is advised to record and rigorously audit all imports from mining companies, even if they are exempt from custom duties,
as these imports will constitute deductible costs against future profits.
36.3(c). Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      Drawn from Cote d’Ivoire’s Mining Code (2014), this provision offers one
                                                                                 way to facilitate import of the required sophisticated equipment that is only
All materials, machinery and equipment referred to in the present Act, which     needed during the development phase, allowing for a special “temporary
has been imported by a prospecting or operating licence holder, or their         admission regime.? Such specified equipment that is needed temporarily and
authorised subcontractors, and which may be re-exported or sold after use,       will be exported later can be imported free of duties.
shall benefit from the temporary admission regime, with statistical fees to be
paid (RSTA).                                                                     However, if the company sells the equipment in Cote d’Ivoire rather than
                                                                                 exporting it, it should be subject to customs duties as well as VAT on its
Article [_]                                                                      import value so as not to distort competition among importers.
(1) During the implementation phase for the initial investments and the          It should be noted that the law provides for a pre-approved list of the materials
expansion of the production capacity of an existing mine, an operating licence   and equipment that benefit from the exemption, which shall be attached to the
holder shall be exempt from customs duties, including VAT, collected on          exploitation permit, which can be used as a means to prevent abuse of
imports of materials, components, machinery and equipment as well as spare       exemptions. However, given the long duration of mining projects and the
parts included in the approved programme and intended to be used directly        possibility for changes to inputs needed or changes to availability of inputs in
and definitively for mining operations.                                          country, it may be necessary to review this list periodically (for example, every
(2) For the purposes of the exemption provided for in the present Article, the   [X] years)
value of the parts may not exceed 30% of the overall value of the Cost,          The provision highlights the goal of the application of customs duties:
Insurance and Freight (CIF) for the imported machinery and equipment.            materials and equipment which can be found in Cote d’Ivoire at comparable
(3) A list of materials, components, machinery and equipment, as well as parts   price and quality do not benefit from the duties exemption.
and spare parts, which may benefit from the exemption shall be annexed to the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              474 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
operating licence.

(4) Authorisation for temporary admission shall be given for utility vehicles
which feature on the list mentioned above.

(5) The following components, materials and equipment may not give rise to
the exemption on imports:

(a) vehicles used to transport people and merchandise other than extracted
mining products;

(b) materials, components, machinery and equipment where it is possible to
find an equivalent made in Côte d'Ivoire or which are available under the same
conditions with regard to price, quality and guarantees, amongst others, as
those of the same goods of foreign origin;

(c) household furniture or other household effects;

(d) goods which are not eligible for deductions, in application of the provisions
of [the General Tax Code].

(6) An operating licence holder shall retain the right to sell their imported
materials, components, machinery and equipment in Côte d'Ivoire, provided
that they pay the duties and taxes which are applicable on the date of the
transaction, on the value of the sale, and comply with the formalities
prescribed in the regulations which are in force.

(7) The period during which the holder may benefit from exemptions on
imports may not exceed the deadline provided for in the decree allocating the
operating licence, for carrying out the work relating to the initial investments,
and two (2) years for investments relating to the expansion of production
capacity. These time limits may be extended under the terms laid down by
decree.

36.3(c). Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

                                                                                    Drawn from Burkina Faso’s mining code (2015), these provisions are similar


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            475 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
Article [_]                                                                       to those provided under the law of Cote d’Ivoire. These provisions provide
                                                                                  more detail on the formulation of the duties exempt list, which requires a joint
Any holder of a mining title or permit who has imported equipment exempt          order of the minister of finance and minister of mines.
from customs duties and taxes and who wishes to reassign them to the State or
to a third party shall be required to request authorisation in advance from the   Note that the only period of total exemption of import duties for materials and
Customs Department (Administration des douanes) to put said equipment on          equipment is the development phase, during which a majority of the heavy and
the market, failing which, they shall be penalised for not complying with the     specialized equipment would be imported for construction of the mine. This
regulations which are in force.                                                   period of exemption must end no later than the start of commercial production.
                                                                                  Imports during the exploration and exploitation phase are subject to a single
Article [_]: Customs and tax benefits during the prospecting phase                rate, except that imports of materials and equipment during the exploitation
Materials, raw materials, and materials intended for prospecting activities,      phase that are “temporarily admitted? and will be later exporte d are also
and which must be imported in order to carry out the prospecting programme,       exempt from duties.
shall be subject to the payment of:                                               As under Cote d’Ivoire’s mining code, if such temporarily admitted materials
(a) Category I customs duties under the Customs Tariff, at a rate of 5%;          or equipment are transferred within the country, duties must then be paid.

(b) statistical fees at a rate of 1%;

(c) a community solidarity levy at a rate of 1%;

(d) a community levy at a rate of 0.5%;

(e) any other community levy.

The taxation on imports also extends to parts and spare parts for machinery
and equipment. In any event, the value of the parts and spare parts may not
exceed 30% of the overall value of the Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) for
the imported machinery and equipment.

The taxation on imports extends to lubricants and fuel supplying the fixed
installations, drilling materials, machinery and other equipment intended for
prospecting activities.

Article [_]

A list of items which may benefit from the tax regime indicated above shall be



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              476 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
established by a joint decree from the Ministers for Mining and Finance,
respectively. When a prospecting licence is issued, this list shall be attached
and shall form an integral part thereof. If certain items which must
subsequently be imported do not feature on said list, a list of added items may
be drawn up by the Ministers for Mining and Finance.

Article [_]

(1) Materials used for prospecting, imported professional equipment, special
purpose or work site vehicles, excluding private vehicles, as well as machinery,
shall benefit from the temporary admission regime for the duration of the
prospecting phase.

(2) Prospecting licence holders shall be required to provide the Customs
Department with a statement of materials admitted under the temporary
admission regime, within the first quarter of each year.

Article [_]

Materials, components and equipment, where it is possible to find an
equivalent made in Burkina Faso and which are available under purchasing
conditions which are at least equal to those for goods to be imported, as well
as vehicles used or imported solely for personal or family purposes may not
benefit from the tax regime indicated above.

Article [_]

Geo-services companies offering services related to prospecting and operating
activities, and which work exclusively for mining companies, shall benefit from
the tax regime provided for in Article 149 above, insofar as they act as
subcontractors for a holder.

Article [_]: Customs and tax benefits during the period for preparatory work

(1) During the period of preparatory work for mining operations, which shall
not exceed three years, industrial operating licence holders shall be exempt



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                    477 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART C: Fiscal Terms
from customs duties when importing materials, raw materials, components,
fuel and lubricants intended to produce energy and for the functioning of
special-purpose or work site vehicles, excluding private vehicles, and
equipment relating to said work, and also their related parts and spare parts,
excluding:

(a) statistical fees at a rate of 1%;

(b) ta community solidarity levy at a rate of 1%;

(c) a community levy at a rate of 0.5%;

(d) any other community levy.

(2) They shall also benefit from the temporary admission regime for equipment
and materials imported for the purposes of carrying out said preparatory work.

Article [_]

(1) A list of materials, components, machinery and equipment, as well as parts
and spare parts, which may benefit from the customs exemption shall be
annexed to the operating licence and shall be an integral part thereof.

(2) Materials, components, machinery and equipment which were used in the
prospecting phase and which are to be used in the operations phase, shall be
included in the list of equipment for the operations.

Article [_]

(1) The time period for the exemptions provided for in Articles 154 and 155
above must not exceed two years for mines.

(2) However, a single extension of one year from the date on which the
exemption period expires may be granted by order of the Minister for Mining,
where the level of investment which has been made is at least 50% of the
planned investment. In all circumstances, these exemptions shall end on the
day of the first commercial production. The end of the period for preparatory



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                  478 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
work shall be noted in a joint order from the Ministers for Mining and Finance.

Article [_]

(1) The benefits provided for in Article 155 shall extend to the subcontractors
of an operating company, which work exclusively for mining companies,
provided that they present the Customs Department with a contract which has
been duly registered and concluded as part of the preparatory work.

(2) This contract shall be subject to the formality of registration at the rate
provided for legal instruments not regulated by legislation.

Article [_]

In the event that the goods or equipment which benefited from the customs
exemption regime or the temporary admission regime are assigned or sold,
customs duties and taxes shall be collected in accordance with the regulations
in force at the time of the sale.

Article [_]: Customs and tax benefits during the operations phase

In the operations phase, from the date of the first commercial production, when
any holder of an industrial operating licence imports materials, raw materials,
fuel and lubricants intended to produce energy and for the functioning of
special-purpose or work site vehicles, excluding private vehicles, and
equipment, they are to pay the Category I duties and taxes under the Customs
Tariff, including:

(a) customs duties at a rate of 5%;

(b) statistical fees at a rate of 1%;

(c) a community solidarity levy at a rate of 1%;

(d) a community levy at a rate of 0.5%;

Article [_]



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   479 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
(1) Holders of operating licences for semi-mechanised operations shall benefit
from the tax regime provided for in the above Article for the entire operating
life of the mine.

(2) Companies which hold operating licences relating to quarry materials,
excluding artisanal operators, shall benefit from this tax system solely for the
equipment required for production and for the first batch of spare parts which
comes with said equipment. The list of materials, components and equipment
which may benefit from this tax system shall be annexed to the licence and
shall form and integral part thereof.

Article [_]

(1) Notwithstanding the special arrangements provided for in Article [_] of this
[Code][Act][Law], the holder of an operating licence relating to mining
materials may benefit from the temporary admission regime.

(2) In the event of the assignment or resale of an item under the temporary
admission regime, mining title or permit holders in the operations phase shall
become liable for all duties and taxes as at the date of assignment or resale.

Article [_]

(1) The customs benefits provided for in the operations phase shall extend to
the operating company's subcontractors, working exclusively as part of the
mining of mineral substances and who have contracts duly registered with the
Tax Administration

(2) This contract shall be subject to the formality of registration at the rate
provided for legal instruments not regulated by legislation.

                                                                     36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                         36.3 Taxes



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                       480 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
                                                                 36.3(d). Property Tax


Property taxes are a levy on property that the owner is required to pay, where the property may be land, improvements to land (such as buildings),
personal property (movable man-made objects) or intangible property. It may also include stamp duties or other transfer taxes, which are generally
charges imposed on the legal transfer of property from one person to another. These taxes may be collected at the national or subnational level. It
is also possible for more than one jurisdiction to tax the same property.
In theory, these taxes should also be standard across all sectors of the economy. All references in the mining legislation should reference the
general tax legislation.
In practice, in many countries mining investments are by far the largest capital investments in their regions, and because property taxes tend to be
considered non-tax revenue and collected (or even spent) at a different level than other taxes, they become the focus of attention by those agencies
that directly collect or benefit from them.
A strong, predictable fiscal regime for the mining sector should focus on the major fiscal tools (royalties, income tax, resource rent tax), and try to
minimize special emphasis on other fiscal obligations, aligning them to the general legislation. This will simplify tax administration, avoid
unnecessarily discriminatory treatment of the mining sector, and remove such taxes from the scope of negotiation, during which governments may
be negotiated downward.
36.3(d). Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_] Taxation                                                               Drawn from California’s Constitution (as amended in 1974), this provision
                                                                                   provides the state the right to impose property taxes and also sets a limit on the
(1) Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution or the laws of [Country]:       property tax rate and defines the property tax base.
(a) All property is taxable and shall be assessed at the same percentage of fair   California’s revenue and taxation code then specifically defines “real property?
market value. When a value standard other than fair market value is prescribed     to include “mines, minerals and quarries in the land.?
by this [Code][Act][Law] or by statute authorized by this [Code][Act][Law],
the same percentage shall be applied to determine the assessed value. The          Rule 469 of California’s Board of Equalization Property Tax Rules (not
value to which the percentage is applied, whether it be the fair market value or   reproduced here) then provides detailed instructions to assessors on valuation
not, shall be known for property tax purposes as the full value.                   of mines.

                                                                                   This is an example of taxation on the value of property, where the property is


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 481 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                PART C: Fiscal Terms
(b) All property so assessed shall be taxed in proportion to its full value.       the mine. However, the complications with valuing mines in all phases of
                                                                                   development (as Rule 469 provides for) may make this option impractical for
Article [_] Tax Limitation                                                         low capacity countries.
(1) The maximum amount of any ad valorem tax on real property shall not
exceed One percent (1%) of the full cash value of such property. The one
percent (1%) tax to be collected by the counties and apportioned according to
law to the districts within the counties.

(2) The "full cash value" means the county assessor's valuation of real property
as shown on the 1975-76 tax bill under "full cash value" or, hereafter, the
appraised value of real property when purchased, newly constructed, or a
change in ownership has occurred after the 1975 assessment. All real property
not already assessed up to the 1975-76 full cash value may be reassessed to
reflect that valuation.

(3) “Real estate? or “real property? includes:

(a) The possession of, claim to, ownership of, or right to the possession of
land.

(b) All mines, minerals, and quarries in the land, all standing timber whether
or not belonging to the owner of the land, and all rights and privileges
appertaining thereto.

(c) Improvements.

36.3(d). Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_] Assessment of duty                                                     Drawn from Ghana’s Stamp Duty Act (2005), this provision imposes a tax on
                                                                                   documents created for the purposes of recording a transaction. Stamp duties are
(1) The [Regulating Authority] shall assess the duties payable on an instrument    payable on conveyance or transfer on sale of property or on leases as a
required to be stamped under this [Code][Act][Law].                                percentage of the consideration for the conveyance or lease.
(2) Conveyance or transfer on sale of a property-                                  In addition, stamp duties are also payable in fixed amounts for documents
(a) Where the amount of the value of consideration for the sale does not exceed    granting a concession or mining lease.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               482 | Page
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
~ 100,000,000.                                               0.25%

(b) Where the amount of the value of consideration exceeds

if, 100,000,000 but does not exceed if, 500,000,000.00                   0.5%

(c)

Where the amount of the value of consideration exceeds                   1%

if, 500,000,000

(3) Lease -

(a) For a definite term up to three years:

 (i) Where the rent for such term does not exceed ¢500,000.00           0.5%

 (ii) Where the rent for such term exceeds ¢500,000.00                   1%

(b) For any other definite term: Where the consideration, or a part of the
consideration, moving either to the lessor or to any other person, consists of
money, stock or security:

(c) In respect of such consideration-the same duty as a conveyance on sale for
the same consideration, where the consideration or any part of the
consideration is rent then in respect of such rent:

If the term is definite and does not exceed 5 years                    0.5%

If the term is definite and does not exceed 21 years                   0.5%

If the term exceeds 50 years                                           1%

(d) Lease of any other kind not described in this Schedule              1%

(4) Natural resources leases or licences.

In addition to the duty otherwise payable under this Act on a concession or a



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   483 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
mining lease granted under an enactment:

Mineral lease                                               ¢   250,000.00

Offshore lease                                                  250,000.00

Timber lease                                                    125,000.00

Timber licence                                                  50,000.00

Prospecting licence                                              25,000.00

Exclusive prospecting licence                                   50,000.00

Quarrying licence.                                               25,000.00

Diamond digging licence                                         25,000.00

Leases under section 12(2) (c) of the Administration of Lands Act, 1962 (Act
123)                                                               5,000.00

(5) Power of attorney or other instrument in that nature          20,000.00

                                                                     36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                        36.3 Taxes
                                                                       36.3(e). VAT


Value-added tax (VAT) is a form of consumption tax charged on the amount by which the value of an article has changed as it passes from one
stage of production or distribution to another. In essence, the tax is charged on the difference between an article’s resale price and the price at
which the seller purchased the item. VATs apply to domestic consumption, and thus VAT is generally paid on imports but not on exports.
All corporations in a country that applies VAT are subject to the tax, which they pay on their purchases and collect on their sales. In theory,



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                 484 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
mining companies should simply be subject to the general VAT system in the country.
However, mining companies generally export much of their production and in common with other exporters are not required to charge VAT on
their export sales; there is a reverse charge in the importing country. Since there is no output tax against which to offset VAT, mining companies
will incur a VAT cost on their VATable purchases that will not be offset by their sales. They should therefore be able to reclaim their VAT on
their VATable purchases. However, in practice governments are often late in reimbursing companies, which can create negative cash flows and
lead to lengthy and costly tax disputes.
Some countries have addressed these problems by exonerating mining companies from VAT altogether. If governments want to follow this model,
they should:
    -    Allow a 0% VAT on imports, rather than an exemption. That way, all necessary forms and declarations are filed, which allows the tax
         regulating entity to control against abuse and enforce a country-wide VAT system.
    -    Maintain full VAT obligations on domestic purchases. Otherwise, companies’ domestic contractors will then be the ones having VAT
         claims on the tax regulating entity, which may put their financial situation at risk. It also risks undermining the whole VAT system in the
         country if mining is the dominant sector in the economy.

If companies are exempt from VAT on imports but not on domestic purchases, it could make imports otherwise available locally cheaper and
disincentivize local sourcing of goods and services. Rules on VAT should be designed taking into consideration th e government’s local content
policy, if applicable, and the existence of reliable domestic providers of goods and services needed by the mining industry.
In general, governments’ tax regulating entities should prioritize timely reimbursements of companies’ VAT claims, whether in the mining sector
or other sectors. This will improve the overall business environment. If timely reimbursement proves difficult, an option could be for companies to
pay VAT on imports into an escrow fund ring-fenced from budgetary pressures, or in certain circumstances by allowing companies to deduct their
VAT claims from taxes owed to the tax authority.
36.3(e). Example 1:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Cote d’Ivoire’s mining code (2014), this provision exonerates
                                                                                   companies from payment of VAT on imports that are already exempt from
(1) An operating licence holder shall be exempt from VAT on their foreign          custom duties, such as most capital goods during the exploration and
services and imports, on the purchase of goods and services for use in the Ivory   development phases.
Coast and on sales related to mining operations, until the date of the first



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         485 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
commercial production.                                                            Countries that produce little or no oil sometimes grant VAT and duties
                                                                                  exemptions on fuel imports, so as to reduce the burden on mining companies
(2) During the implementation phase for the initial investment and the            and the total VAT claims on the tax authority. In such cases, custom authorities
expansion of the production capacity of an existing mine, an operating licence    should closely monitor fuel imports, to prevent companies from abusing the
holder shall be exempt from customs duties, including VAT, collected on           system and importing more fuel than is needed for mining operations and
imports of materials, components, machinery and equipment as well as              reselling excess fuel.
detached parts included in the approved programme and intended to be used
directly and definitively for mining operations.

(3) An operating licence holder, their affiliates and authorised subcontractors
shall benefit from:

(a) an exemption from customs duties payable on the gas or liquid fuels,
lubricants, and chemicals or organic materials required for ore processing,
including VAT, for the duration of the mine's operations;

36.3(e). Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Guinea’s mining code (2011), this provision allows for companies
                                                                                  in the exploration phase to be exempt from VAT on their imports in the same
(1) Holders of exploration permits are entitled throughout the period of          way that they are exempt from custom duties. The good practice here is that it
exploration, to an exemption from:                                                provides for the General Tax Code to limit this exemption, if the finance
(2) TVA or Value Added Tax (VAT) on imports of equipment, materials,              regulating entity finds that some imports should not benefit from VAT
machines and consumables indicated in the mining list submitted, before the       exemptions.
beginning of the Exploration Phase, on condition that such mining list has been
approved in compliance with provisions of [relevant article] of this
[Code][Act][Law]. However, imports of goods which are excluded from the
right of deduction pursuant to the provisions of the [Tax [Code] are not exempt
from VAT, even when these goods were included in the duly approved mining
list.

                                                                    36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                        36.3 Taxes


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              486 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
                                                              36.3(f). Deductions


Deductions are costs that may be deducted from gross revenues before corporate income tax is applied to the remaining revenues net of costs.
Which kinds of costs are deductible and which are not should generally be detailed in a law. For example, a government may want to consider
specifying whether costs outside of a company’s normal business, such as community development spending, will be deductible. The law might
also specify how rehabilitation costs will be treated, including whether contributions to rehabilitation funds will be deductible, whether actual
rehabilitation costs will be deductible, and tax treatment of monies withdrawn from the fund for rehabilitation activities or unused monies returned
from the fund to the company (for example, Kenya’s Income Tax Act addresses such issues). Countries can use legislative means to further the
government interest in controlling company cost.
Generally, legislation and rules addressing deductions should include provisions for:
            -   Determining the size of these deductions
            -   Determining the timing of these deductions
            -   Incentivizing desired behaviour by companies.

Concerning size, it is important that laws and regulations address the risk of companies inflating costs in the host country through related party
transactions that reduce taxable income in the host country and shift income to a lower tax jurisdiction, thereby lowering overall tax liability. Costs
may be inflated by overpaying for goods and services purchased from affiliates, which is addressed further under the section on transfer pricing in
the Guiding Template.
Companies may also reduce taxable income via excessive interest payments. This may be done by borrowing at higher than market interest rates.
This may also be done through “thin capitalization?, a practice whereby international investors fu nd projects with a small portion of equity and a
large portion of loans from affiliated companies. By using more loans than equity, investors may reduce their taxable income by deducting the
interest paid on these loans as costs.
Countries may address the issue of excessive interest payments by different means, including:

       Limiting allowable debt to equity ratio for purposes of interest deductions. Rules may provide that interest payments on loans in excess of
        the allowable debt to equity ratio may not be deducted for tax purposes. It may be advisable to specify in law or regulations whether the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     487 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART C: Fiscal Terms
         debt-to-equity ratio restriction only applies to debt from related parties (if only applicable to related-party debt, the law may need to
         address the risk that debt is routed through an unrelated party; see the Ghana example below) and the definition of debt (for example,
         whether average debt over a period of time or debt at any given point in time and whether debt includes other debt instruments apart from
         loans).
        Limiting deductible interest to some percentage of earnings before interest . For example, Action 4 of the OECD final Base Erosion and
         Profit Shifting (BEPS) report recommends that countries adopt the “earnings stripping rule? that restricts interest deduct ibility to between
         10 percent and 30 percent of a company’s earnings (defined as EBITDA – earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization).
        Limiting use of excessive interest rates, by providing that rates may not exceed a certain percentage above a quoted benchmark rate, such
         as London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). Use of interest rates above market rates for loans from affiliates may also be generally
         addressed under transfer pricing rules that require pricing for transactions between affiliates to be based on “arm’s length prices.?

Concerning timing, laws and regulations should address the rules for depreciation and loss carry forward.
Depreciation is an accounting method of allocating the cost of a tangible asset over its useful life. Amortization is the equivalent for intangible
assets. Depreciation/amortization rules determine what portion of the cost of the asset may be deducted as a cost in a given year and is meant to
reflect the loss in value of the asset over its useful life. Accelerated depreciation/amortization allows investors to deduct a larger portion of the cost
of the asset in earlier years, versus straight-line depreciation rules, which spread the cost of the asset evenly over the asset’s useful life.
Accelerated depreciation reduces tax liability in earlier years, deferring tax payments to later years. This is generally preferred by investors as it
allows them to retain more money in the present and, all other things being equal, that money in the present is more valuable than the same amount
in the future due to its potential earning capacity (the concept of the time value of money).
Loss carry forward rules dictate whether or not unused losses from a previous year may be deducted from profits in later years to reduce taxable
income. That is, a company making a loss of $10 million in year 1 and a profit of $5 million in year two, may deduct that loss in year 1 from the
profit in year 2 such that net taxable income is - $5 million. In year three, it may then deduct the unused loss of $5 million in year 2 from the profit
in year three and so on until the loss is fully recovered. The ability to carry losses forward again defers tax liability. Some countries allow
indefinite loss carry forward; that is, losses may be carried forward for an unlimited number of years until fully recovered. Many countries limit
loss carry forward to a certain number of years, usually 5-7 years.
Concerning incentivizing desired behaviour, governments may allow for accelerated depreciation for certain kinds of capital expenditures in order
to incentivize companies to make such investments.
36.3(f). Example 1:                                                           Annotation



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                       488 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
Article [_] Capital allowances                                                       Drawn from Nigeria’s mining code (2007), this provision seeks to incentivize
                                                                                     diligent exploration and development, including development of infrastructure,
(1) Any licence holder eligible under the provisions of this Part of this            by allowing immediate deduction of the cost of exploration, development or
[Code][Act][Law] shall be entitled, in determining its total profits, to deduct      infrastructure in the year in which the cost was incurred. The sooner a
from its assessable profits a capital allowance of ninety-five percent of            company moves from exploration to development and production, the sooner
qualifying capital expenditure incurred in the year in which the investment is       revenues may be generated from the sale of the minerals and the sooner
incurred-                                                                            revenues will begin to flow to the government.
(a) all certified exploration, development and processing expenditure,               Further, the provision allows for losses to be carried forward for up to four
including feasibility study and sample assaying costs; and                           years.
(b) all infrastructure costs incurred regardless of ownership and replacement.

(2) The amount of any loss incurred by any person eligible under the
provisions of this Part of this [Code][Act][Law] shall be deducted as far as it
is possible from the assessable profits of the first year of assessment after that
in which the loss was incurred and in so far as it cannot be so made, then from
such amounts of such assessable profits of the next year of assessment, and so
on up to a limit of four years after which period any unrelieved loss shall lapse.

36.3(f). Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]: Thin Capitalisation                                                     Taken from Ghana’s Internal Revenue Act (2000), this provision is meant to
                                                                                     address thin capitalization by placing a cap of 2:1 on the ratio of debt to equity
(1) Where an exempt-controlled resident entity which is not a financial              with respect to financing of the mining company by a related party. Interest
institution has an exempt debt-to-exempt equity ratio in excess of 2 to 1 at any     payments with respect to related party debt in excess of the ratio may not be
time during a basis period, a deduction is disallowed for any interest paid or       deducted for tax purposes.
foreign currency exchange loss incurred by that entity during that period on
that part of the debt which exceeds the 2 to 1 being a portion of the interest or    The provision goes on to define related party debt and equity (“exempt debt?
loss otherwise deductible but for this subsection.                                   and “exempt equity?).

(2) In this section “exempt-controlled resident entity? means a resident entity      Note that the related party debt also covers debt owed to unrelated parties who
in which fifty per cent or more of the underlying ownership or control of the        have made a loan of a similar amount to a related party of the mining company.
entity is held by an exempt person, in this section referred to as the "exempt       This provision allows the law to capture related party debt that is passed
controller", either alone or together with an associate or associates; "exempt       through an unrelated party before being issued to the mining company.
debt", in relation to an exempt-controlled resident entity, means the greatest



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                   489 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
amount, at any time during a basis period, of the sum of:

(a) the balance outstanding at that time on any debt obligation owed by the
exempt controlled resident entity to an exempt controller or an exempt person
who is an associate of the exempt controller with respect to which i. interest is
paid which is, or ii. in the case of a debt obligation denominated in foreign
currency, any foreign currency exchange loss incurred is, or if incurred would
be, deductible to the exempt-controlled resident entity and the interest or
foreign currency exchange gain is not or would not be included in ascertaining
assessable income of the exempt controller or associate; and

(b) the balance outstanding at that time on a debt obligation owed by the
exempt controlled resident entity to a person other than the exempt controller
or an associate of the exempt controller where that person has a balance
outstanding of a similar amount on a debt obligation owed by that person to
the exempt controller or an exempt person who is an associate of the exempt
controller; “exempt equity?, in relation to an exempt-controlled resident entity
and for a basis period, means the sum of the following amounts:

 (i) so much of any amount standing to the credit of the capital accounts of the
entity at the beginning of the period as the exempt controller or an exempt
person who is an associate of the exempt controller is entitled to or would be
entitled to if the entity were wound up at that time;

  (ii) so much of the accumulated profits and asset revaluation reserves of the
entity at the beginning of the basis period as the exempt controller or an
exempt person who is an associate of the exempt controller is entitled to or
would be entitled to if the entity were wound up at that time; reduced by the
sum of the balance outstanding at the beginning of the period on a debt
obligation owed to the entity by the exempt controller or an exempt person who
is an associate of the exempt controller; and

  (iii) where the entity has accumulated losses at the beginning of the period,
the amount by which the return of capital to the exempt controller or an exempt
person who is an associate of the exempt controller would be reduced by virtue


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                    490 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
of the losses if the entity were wound up at that time; “exempt person? means a
non-resident person; and a resident person for whom interest paid to that
exempt person by the exempt-controlled resident entity or for whom any
foreign currency exchange gain realized with respect to a debt claim against
the exempt controlled- resident entity i. constitutes exempt income; or ii. is not
included in ascertaining the exempt person's assessable income; iii. “Resident
entity? means a resident partnership, resident company, resident body of
persons, or a permanent establishment of a non-resident person in [Country].

                                                                       36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                           36.3 Taxes
                                                                36.3(g). Capital Gains Tax


Capital gains tax is a tax on the gain or profit made on the sale of a non-inventory asset. In the extractive sector, it is a tax on the gain made on the
transfer of a mining license or interest in a mining license.
Countries approach natural resource rights transfers in various ways. A minority of countries choose not to tax the capital gains from such transfers
at all (e.g. Norway), on the rationale that such transfers do not affect overall tax revenues to the state from the project. In such cases, the seller does
not pay a capital gains tax, but the buyer is also not allowed to deduct the cost of the asset from future taxable income. Most countries tax the
capital gain made by the transferor and allow the transferee to deduct the cost of the asset from taxable income by depreciation. Others both
impose a capital gains tax and disallow corresponding depreciation of the costs, which has a strong negative impact on investors’ re turns and can
be seen as deterring investments.
Capital gains taxes are a sensitive issue and there are arguments both for and against imposition of such taxes.
On the one hand, transfers in mining licenses can involve large sums of money and the country may be seen to be missing out on this boon to the
seller of the license if it is not taxed, especially if it is believed that the government got a bad deal in the original terms agreed with the seller. In
reality, if a corresponding tax deduction is allowed from the buyer’s taxable income, the overall tax to the government from the project remains the
same. However, imposing a capital gains tax allows the government to capture a share of the overall taxes earlier, which is advantageous to the


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        491 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
government given the time value of money.
On the other hand, capital gains taxes can be difficult to administer and a country may seek to encourage transfers of licenses to investors best able
to develop them.
If a government chooses to impose a capital gains tax, it should consider:
            -   Treatment of indirect transfers and farm-outs
            -   The impact of tax treaties
            -   Enforcement of capital gains tax provisions against non-residents

If legislation only imposes gains on direct transfers of the asset itself, companies may avoid the taxes by instead transferring the shares in a non-
resident holding company, which owns or controls the resident subsidiary that holds the mining license. Governments may get around this by
providing in law that capital gains tax also applies to gains made by the sale of shares in an entity that indirectly holds an interest in the license.
Governments should consider what kind of information on ownership and ownership changes it should require companies to submit to properly
identify events that trigger capital gains tax. Disclosure of beneficial ownership of license holders, now required under the 2016 Extractive
Industry Transparency Initiative Standard, may be a useful tool for administering capital gains taxes. Governments should also consider the
treatment of farm-out agreements (more common in oil and gas), where a portion of the interest in a mining license is assigned to another entity
who pays a share of the ongoing costs. Often, no cash is transferred for the assignment. In determining how or whether to subject farm-outs to
capital gains taxes, governments must balance the risk of farm-outs being used to avoid capital gains tax against the risk of discouraging investors
from adding partners, which allows investors to spread the risk and increases the chances of the mining project moving forward to development.
Governments should also consider the impact of tax treaties on the ability to impose capital gains taxes on indirect transfers (where both buyer and
seller are non-resident). Tax treaties may restrict the imposition of capital gains taxes on residents of a country with which the government has a
treaty. Governments should consider whether the domestic legal framework allows for the overriding of treaties by legislation and the potential
impacts of such a treaty override.
Enforcing capital gains taxes against non-residents may also be difficult. For this reason, some countries choose to deem the gain and the cost of
the transfer as being incurred by the corporate entity resident in the country.
Capital gains taxes have often led to tax disputes between governments and investors. The best way to avoid such costly conflicts is to have strong
and clear provisions in general legislation and regulations, as investors will factor in payment of capital gains taxes in the pricing of a transfer.
Such provisions should be clear on whether the capital gains taxes extend to indirect transfers and provide exemptions for publicly traded


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     492 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                PART C: Fiscal Terms
companies, where shares are bought and sold on an open market.
36.3(g). Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                           Drawn from Kenya’s Income Tax Act (as amended in 2014 and 2015), these
                                                                                      provisions cover several of the issues surrounding taxation of capital gains.
(1) Subject to this Schedule, income in respect of which tax is chargeable under
section 3(2)(f) is the whole of a gain which accrues to a company or an               The provisions allow for taxation of the gains from both direct and indirect
individual on or after lst January, 2015 on the transfer of property situated in      transfers. The amount of the gain to be taxed is based on the extent to which
[country], whether or not the property was acquired before lst January,2015           the transferred interest derives its value from immovable property in Kenya.

(2) Subject to section 15(5A), the net gain derived on the disposal of an interest    The provision addresses the difficulty of enforcing capital gains taxes against
in a person, if the interest derives twenty per cent or more of its value, directly   non-resident persons, in the case of indirect transfers, by providing that the
or indirectly, from immovable property in [Country].                                  license holder in Kenya shall be liable for payment of such taxes.

(3) “Net gain?, in relation to the disposal of an interest in a person, means the     Finally, an exemption is made for publicly traded securities.
consideration for the disposal reduced by the cost of the interest.

(4) A licensee or a contractor shall immediately notify the [Regulating
Authority], in writing, if there is a ten per cent or more change in the
underlying ownership of a licensee or contractor. If the person disposing of the
interest to which the notice above relates is a non-resident person, the licensee
or contractor shall be liable, as agent of the non-resident person, for any tax
payable under this Act by the non-resident person in respect of the disposal.

(5) For the purpose of section 3(2)(g), the amount of the net gain to be
included in income chargeable to tax is-

(a) if the interest derives more than fifty per cent of its value, directly or
indirectly, from immovable property in [Country], the full amount of the net
gain; or

 (b) for any other case, the amount computed according to the following
formula-

AxB/C



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                     493 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
(1) Where –
A is the amount of the net gain;

B is the value of the interest derived, directly or indirectly, from immovable
property in [country]; and

C is the total value of the interest

(a) A gain on transfer of securities traded on any securities exchange licensed
by the [Regulating Authority] is not chargeable to tax under this section.

36.3(g). Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Tanzania’s Income Tax Act (as amended in 2012), this provision
                                                                                    addresses the difficulty of enforcement of capital gains taxes against non-
(1) At the moment the underlying ownership of an entity changes by more than        residents by deeming an indirect transfer a disposal and reacquisition by the
fifty percent as compared with that ownership at any time during the previous       resident entity of all its assets and liabilities. This results in a domestic capital
three years, the entity shall be treated as realising any assets owned and any      gain and the tax can be enforced against the resident taxpayer (the license
liabilities owed by it immediately before the change.                               holder).
(2) Where there is a change in ownership of the type referred to in subsection      Once the license holder experiences a direct or indirect change of control
(1), after the change the entity shall not be permitted to –                        (more than 50%), the entire gain is taxed. However, note that some countries
(a) interest carried forward that was incurred by the entity prior to the change;   choose to tax only the part of the gain that derives its value from the
                                                                                    immovable property in the taxing country (for example, Kenya).
(b) deduct a loss that was incurred by the entity prior to the change;

(c) in a case where the entity has, prior to the change, included an amount in
calculating income, claim a deduction under those provisions after the change;

(d) carry back a loss that was incurred after the change to a year of income
occurring before the change;

(e) reduce gains from the realisation of investment assets after the change by
losses on the realisation of investment assets before the change; or

(f) carry forward foreign income tax that was originally paid with respect to




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                    494 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
foreign source income derived by the entity prior to the change.

(3) Where there is a change in ownership of the type referred to in subsection
(1) during a year of income of the entity, the parts of the year of income before
and after the change shall be treated as separate years of income.

(4) This section shall not apply where for a period of two years after a change
of the type mentioned in subsection (1), the entity –

(a) conducts the business or, where more than one business was conducted, all
of the businesses that it conducted at any time during the twelve-month period
before the change and conducts them in the same manner as during the twelve-
month period; and

(b) conducts no business or investment other than those conducted at any time
during the twelve-month period before the change.

                                                                      36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                          36.3 Taxes
                                                                36.3(h). Windfall Profits


Resource rent taxes (RRTs) are taxes on the resource rent generated by a project. Resource rent may be defined as the surplus value generated by a
project over all necessary costs including a return on capital sufficient to attract investment. For example, if a return of 15% would be required to
attract investment, rent would be any return beyond 15%.

In principle, RRTs are valuable for governments in two respects. First, RRTs are tax neutral; that is, they allow the government to maximize
revenue collection without deterring investment since in theory they tax returns beyond what would be necessary to attract investment in the first
place. Second, RRTs provide the fiscal regime some flexibility to changing conditions by responding more quickly than legislative or contractual
changes allow and reducing pressure on governments to renegotiate terms when prices soar. The greater flexibility that can be achieved by use of
RRTs can reduce investors’ expectations of political risk and fear that governments will seek to change the terms after costs have been sunk.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                   495 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART C: Fiscal Terms

There is no common design to an RRT, with each country applying their own approach. However, an RRT will typically have three elements:
   1. A specified rate of return on investment that triggers the imposition of the tax
   2. Specified tax rate on net profits once the rate of return has been exceeded; and
   3. The tax base, which is typically an individual mining project (i.e. ring-fenced from other projects within a corporate entity) and allowable
        deductions.

In order to achieve tax neutrality governments should ideally set the rate of return trigger so that the tax is only triggere d once the company’s
investors are making the required return on their capital. In practice, triggers are often set in legislation and thus apply across multiple projects that
are likely to have different risk characteristics and investors with different expectations of return. Further, governments should consider the impact
of other tax instruments on investors’ returns and accommodate these in setting the trigger.

In principle, any return beyond that required by companies to invest could be taxed at 100%. In practice, however, governments choose much
lower rates (10 to 40%) to account for not being able to accurately set triggers and tax bases that define resource rent.

Ideally the tax base to an RRT should be an individual mining project, ring-fenced from other projects, to ensure that the RRT applies to the
specific rent generated by a project. In addition, governments should consider what exploration costs to include in the base.

Depending on what tax base governments set, administration of RRTs need not be any more complicated than corporate income tax. However,
additional difficulties are two-fold. First, RRTs typically require monitoring accumulated profits from the beginning of a project (although a tax
authority should also monitor these profits for corporate income tax). Second, choosing a tax base definition that requires additional measurement
of company activities will create further tasks for the tax authority.

Lastly, some countries have levied taxes that are similar to RRTs but trade off neutrality for simplicity by, for example, using variable rate income
tax (see Ugandan example below). It is also possible to emulate the effect of an RRT using certain designs of a production sharing arrangement
(with the share to the government increasing if some proxy for profitability increases such as mineral price, cumulative production, or revenues
divided by costs), or by acquiring equity via certain carried interest arrangements, which may allow the government to capture rents as dividends.
36.3(h). Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Uganda’s Income Tax Act (2016), these provisions provide an
                                                                                example of taxation of mining profits using a ring-fenced Variable Rate
(1) The income tax rate applicable to companies, other than mining companies,   Income Tax. Under this arrangement, the rate of tax in any accounting period



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         496 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
for the purposes of section 7 is 30 percent.                                        is derived using a formula that measures the ratio of taxable income to gross
                                                                                    revenues. This ratio is typically designed to apply if it does not fall below or
(2) Subject to paragraphs (3) and (4), the income tax rate applicable to mining     above certain fixed low and high limits. The effect of such formulas is
companies is calculated according to the following formula-                         progressive, because they take into consideration the relationship between
                         70 – 1500/X                                                costs and revenues in a similar manner to the rate of return calculations.

Where X is the number of the percentage points represented by the ratio of the
chargeable income of the mining company for the year of income to the gross
revenue of the company for that year.

(3) If the rate of tax calculated under paragraph 2 exceeds 45 percent, then the
rate of tax shall be 45 percent.

(4) If the rate of tax calculated under paragraph 2 is less than 25 percent, then
the rate of tax shall be 25 percent.

(5) In this Part-

(a) “gross revenue?, in relation to a mining company for a year of income,
means-

 (i) the amount shown in the recognised accounts of the company as the gross
proceeds derived in carrying on of mining operations during the year of
income, including the gross proceeds arising from the disposal of trading
stock, without deduction for expenditures or losses incurred in deriving that
amount; and

 (ii) the amount, if any, shown in the recognised accounts of the taxpayer as
the amount by which the sum of the gains derived by the taxpayer during the
year of income from the disposal of business assets used or held ready for use

in mining operations, other than trading stock, exceeds the sum to losses
incurred by the taxpayer during the year in respect of the disposal of such
assets; and

(b) “mining company? means a company carrying on any mining operations in



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                497 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
[Country].

36.3(h). Example 2:                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        This constructed provision recognizes that the main trigger element of a
                                                                                   resource rent tax (i.e. a rate of return on investment) will vary due to factors
A tax, to be called minerals resource rent tax, shall be charged in the            ranging from investor hurdle rates on a project-by-project basis to prevailing
circumstances stated in and in accordance with the provisions of the relevant      commercial and technological conditions during the mine development
mining agreement, and at the rate or rates specified in, or determined in          planning stage. Therefore, the trigger rate of return, specified tax rate (s) and
accordance with, that agreement. The minerals resource rent tax shall be           the tax base are left to be determined by contract while the income tax law,
assessed in respect of a mining area in accordance with the mining agreement.      which typically has provisions specific to mining operations, would require the
Where, for any tax year, there is only one party to the relevant mining            imposition of a resource rent tax. The 2013 Model Petroleum Agreement of
agreement, that party shall be liable to pay any minerals resource rent tax        Seychelles (s. 13 on Petroleum Additional Profits Tax) can provide an example
payable in respect of that tax year. Where, for the whole or any part of any tax   of contractual language for resource rent tax.
year, more than one person is a party to the relevant mining agreement, those
persons are jointly and severally liable to pay any minerals resource rent tax
payable in respect of that tax year; but without prejudice to any claim, or the
enforcement of any claim, which any such person incurring any such liability
may have against another person in respect of that liability.

                                                                     36. Fiscal Terms
                                                       36.4 Exemption from Certain Taxes


There may be cases in which certain exemptions from generally-applicable taxes may help a government provide useful incentives to attract
mining-company investment, particularly during the risky exploration phase. Exemptions from certain taxes may also be appropriate based on the
nature of the activities conducted by mining companies, as discussed in the sections on customs duties and VAT in this Guiding Template.
However, where possible, the government should first seek to strike the proper balance between investor need and national benefit in the
generally-applicable tax rules, before seeking to create specific exemptions for mining or for individual mining projects. See the discussion below
on tax holidays and the caution that should be exercised. The same concerns apply to exemptions.
Where a government deems them necessary, it is advisable for exemptions to be narrowly tailored, and for all of the costs and benefits to be


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                498 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
rigorously analysed before the legislation is finalized. Rules that provide for exemptions that are overly discretionary or too broad should be
avoided. It is also advisable, where exemptions are granted to extend them to the mining sector generally, rather than allowing for exemptions to
be negotiated on a project-by-project basis. A more uniform approach facilitates tax administration, provides transparency and predictability for
prospective investors, provides transparency to the public and oversight bodies and also narrows opportunity for corruption or for bad deals for the
government to be struck during negotiations.
36.4. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Cote d’Ivoire’s mining code (2014), these provisions are designed
                                                                                   to create certain incentives during periods where heavy investment by
The period during which the holder may benefit from exemptions on imports          companies is required, especially before production begins.
may not exceed the deadline provided for in the decree allocating the operating
licence, for carrying out the work relating to the initial investments, and two    Note that the exemptions are generally applicable to the mining sector and the
(2) years for investments relating to the expansion of production capacity.        law generally limits the duration of the exemptions.
These time limits may be extended in accordance with the terms laid down by
decree.

Article [_]

Save in respect of Community levies, the expatriate staff of the operating
licence holder, and direct subcontractors authorised by the [regulating
authority] shall, with regard to personal effects, benefit from an exemption
from duties and taxes for a period of one year from the date on which they first
settle in [Country].

Article [_]

An operating licence holder shall be exempt from VAT on their foreign services
and imports, on the purchase of goods and services in [Country] and on sales
related to mining operations, until the date of the first commercial production.

36.4. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Ghana’s mining act (2006), this provision is an example of a
                                                                                   provision that (without limiting regulations) could allow for discretionary grant
(1) The holder of a mining right may be granted the following:



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                499 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART C: Fiscal Terms
(a) exemption from payment of customs import duty in respect of plant,         of exemptions on a case by case basis within general parameters.
machinery, equipment and accessories imported specifically and exclusively
for the mineral operations;

(b) exemption of staff from the payment of income tax on furnished             The customs exemption is drafted particularly broadly as it does not include
accommodation at the mine site;                                                limitations for which imports will be granted a customs exemption (based on
                                                                               an agreed mining list), does not exclude imports of machinery and equipment
(c) immigration quota in respect of the approval number of expatriate          that are available in Ghana and does not set a timeframe during which the
personnel; and                                                                 customs duties exemption applies. See the discussion on customs duties in this
                                                                               Guiding Template, which provides examples of more limiting language on
(d) personal remittance quota for expatriate personnel free from tax imposed   grants of customs duties exemptions.
by an enactment regulating the transfer of money out of the country.


                                                                  36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                 36.5 Tax Holiday


Tax holidays are one of several tax incentives that may be granted to investors to attract investment. Tax holidays refer to exemptions a mining
law may grant to a license holder from payment of some or all taxes for a defined period of time.
In general, tax holidays, like tax incentives generally, should be used with caution. Use of tax holidays can significantly reduce or delay revenues
to governments. Moreover, tax holidays are open to abuse. For example, depending on the length of the tax holiday and other conditions, mines
can go into full production while a tax holiday is still in effect and investors might be incentivized to maximize production while the holiday is in
effect and reduce production once the holiday comes to an end. Tax holidays may also encourage abusive transfer pricing and other practices
aimed at reducing tax liability by shifting profits to jurisdictions benefiting from low or no taxes. The transition to regular taxation may be
administratively difficult, especially if records were not adequately kept during the holiday and the treatment of depreciating assets may not be
clear.
Further, tax holidays and other incentives are used on the premise that they are necessary to attract foreign direct investment. However, research
indicates that tax holidays can be ineffective in promoting the desirable activities linked to the incentive and investment decisions for foreign
investors are informed by a broader set of considerations beyond tax incentives (for example, infrastructure, low administrative costs of setting up


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          500 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
and running businesses, political stability and predictable macro-economic policy). Research also indicates that other tax incentives such as
investment credits, investment allowances and accelerated depreciation may be more cost-effective for countries seeking to promote investment
than tax holidays.
Competition for foreign investment can lead to a “race to the bottom.? Therefore, it is advised that tax holidays and other i ncentives, if used at all,
should be used only after a careful cost-benefit analysis and coordination among regional economic communities to develop common standards
and prevent a race to the bottom. The use of tax holidays should also be transparent, to avoid their use by officials unilaterally on a per-contract
basis in exchange for personal benefit.
It is recommended that, to the extent used, tax holidays be structured as follows:
i. Limit the duration to the minimum time period possible but no longer than the earlier of five years or recoupment of initial capital costs.
ii. Begin at the latest at the date of first commercial production.
iii. The tax holiday should provide for a 0% tax rate during the holiday. The taxpayer should be required to file audited returns each year, taking all
deductions required or allowed for that fiscal year, but paying tax at a zero rate. This will limit the administrative difficulties of transitioning to
regular taxation after the holiday.
36.5. Example 1:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          This constructed provision prevents the investor from carrying forward losses
                                                                                     almost indefinitely by applying unused deductions after the holiday, which, in
(1) Profits of companies shall be taxed at 0% for mining projects in Zone I          addition to carrying loss forward could result in the non-payment of taxes for
areas for a period of the earlier of five years starting from the beginning of the   several years.
first fiscal year following the commencement of commercial production or the
recoupment of initial capital costs. During the duration of the tax holiday a        The provision is constructed as a tax incentive for investment in areas of
company must file a tax return for each fiscal year, taking all deductions           “strategic importance.? These may be remote areas, for example, where the
required by law, including, but not limited to, exploration expenses. If the         government wants to promote investment and associated infrastructural
result of the computation results in a tax loss in that fiscal year, the company     development.
will be allowed to carry forward the tax loss to subsequent periods subject to
applicable rules on loss carry forward.                                              Despite the inclusion of the alternate five-year limitation, note that the term
                                                                                     “capital costs? should also be defined for clarity. Investors might want to add
(2) Zone I areas are defined as areas of strategic importance for foreign            financing costs, for example, or higher measures of the cost of capital, which
investment included on a list published in regulations issued by the [Regulating



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 501 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
Authority].                                                                          could make what constitutes “capital costs? very broad.

36.5. Example 2:                                                                     Annotation

Article [_]                                                                          Taken from Nigeria’s mining code (2007), this provision does not provide
                                                                                     blanket tax relief for all mining companies, but sets some parameters for the
(1) The tax relief period of a company granted mining rights under this              grant of tax relief, including that it must begin on the “date of operation? and
[Act][Code][Law] shall commence on the date of operation and subject-to the          may be granted for up to five years.
provisions of this Act or any other relevant financial enactment, the relief shall
continue for three years.                                                            Since the provision does not apply to all companies, some transparency in the
                                                                                     grant of tax relief (for example, disclosure of contracts) and extension of tax
(2) The tax relief period of a company granted a mining right under this             relief may be warranted.
[Act][Code][Law] may, by the end of the three years, be extended by the
Minister for one further period of two years.                                        If such a general provision were used in law, regulations would need to spell
                                                                                     out more details of the nature of the tax relief (whether just corporate income
(3) The [Regulating Authority] shall not extend the tax relief period of a           tax or other taxes and whether the rate is 0% or simply a rate below the
company in exercise of the power conferred under subsection (2) of this section      generally applicable rate), the basis upon which it may be granted (for
unless the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied as to-                                example, to promote investment in certain high risk areas), on meaning of
(a) the rate of expansion, standard of efficiency and level of development of the    “date of operation? and on the administrative obligations of the company
company in mineral operations for which the mining right was granted;                during the period of tax relief with respect to filing tax returns. As in the
                                                                                     example above, regulations should also provide clarity on application of
(b) the implementation of any conditions upon, which lease was granted; and          deductions and use of loss carry forward during the tax holiday period.
(c) the training and development of [Country’s] personnel in the opera tion of
the mineral concerned.

                                                                       36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                     36.6 Fiscal Stability


Fiscal stability refers to the fixing of all or some of the fiscal terms that were in place when the mining agreement was signed between the investor
and government or the date that the license was granted, for the duration of the mining project or for a set number of years.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 502 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART C: Fiscal Terms
Investors make calculations as to the likely profitability of a mining project and, therefore, whether or not to invest, based in part on the fiscal
terms being offered for a project. A mining project can require significant investment of up to billions of dollars and can last several decades. An
investor has a strong interest in ensuring that fiscal terms will n ot be later changed to reduce the investor’s share of the revenues from a mining
project after investment decisions have already been made and billions of dollars expended.
A government seeking to attract foreign investors, especially one with weak institutions or with a history of political instability, might seek to
reassure investors that the rules will not be suddenly changed.
One means to reassure investors is by the use of stabilization clauses, in mining agreements or in law, which broadly provide that certain changes
to the law will not apply to agreements signed before the change in the law.
Stabilization clauses may be very broad and provide that no changes in the law will apply. Such clauses are increasingly out of favour as they
prevent the application of advances in health and safety, environmental or labour laws to a mining project which may last several decades. For
example, significant advances on global practice in mine safety, which may be incorporated into law or regulation in a country, would not apply in
the event of a broad stabilization law.
More favoured are stabilization provisions that fix specific key fiscal terms (not all terms) for a specific period of time (not indefinitely).
“Economic equilibrium? terms are also more widely used today. Such terms do not provide that changes in the law will not apply. Instead, they
provide that changes in law that change the economic equilibrium between the parties will require negotiations between the state and the investor
to restore that balance or will require the state to compensate the investor to restore the investor to the same economic position the investor would
have been in had the change to the fiscal regime not occurred.
The law may also require that contracts include a provision requiring the parties to periodically (for example, every certain number of years) re-
examine the financial terms and conditions to ensure economic equilibrium. “Economic equilibrium? should be defined but shoul d generally make
reference to fundamental changes in conditions and assumptions existing at the time the parties entered into the agreement.
Some countries have provided for stability only if the investor agrees to higher base rates at the outset.
It should be noted that use of stabilization clauses can pose serious challenges to tax regulating entities. Their use multiplies the number of fiscal
regimes that a government must keep track of. An agreement entered into in 2005 may have a separate fiscal regime from one entered into in 2010
if the law changed. If the law changes again, by 2015 the government would have three separate fiscal regimes to administer.
Ultimately, stabilization is an incentive to an investor. It would be best for a country to avoid stabilization clauses, if it could still attract the


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        503 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                 PART C: Fiscal Terms
required investment. To the extent used, a stabilization term in the law should generally seek to define and limit the scope of stabilization
provisions that may be used in contracts and should ensure that such terms do not broadly freeze the law (extend to health, safety, labour,
environmental, local content and other terms) but are tailored specifically to stability of fiscal terms. Further, since fiscal stability is meant to
honour the assumptions upon which the deal was based, fiscal stability provisions should not allow investors to automatically benefit from
generally applicable reductions in fiscal obligations while exempting them from generally applicable increases. Finally, a stability provision
should allow for the use of stabilization clauses in contracts, but should not set in law that certain terms will be stabilized for all agreements
entered into under the current law. In this way, stabilization clauses would only be used if and as necessary.
A time frame of 10-15 years is generally sufficient to allow investors to recoup initial capital investment.
36.6. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Liberia’s revenue code (2010), this provision allows for the use of
                                                                                  stabilization clauses but does not itself provide for automatic stability of the
(1) When entering into an agreement with a Chapter 6 contractor, or a             fiscal regime for all contracts entered into under that law. The provision also
Chapter 7 producer, the [State] is permitted to accept a clause stabilizing the   limits the scope of such clauses both as to time and to fiscal terms that it may
following aspects of taxation to the terms under Code provisions for a period     cover.
not to exceed 15 years from the effective date of the agreement:

(a) The income tax rate;

(b) The rate of royalty;

(c) The special rule for extended net operating loss carry forward;

(d) The special rule for depreciation and other cost recovery;

(e) The rate for withholding of tax on payments;

(f) The exemption provided in [relevant sections];

36.6. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Guinea’s mining code (2011), this provision is specific as to the
                                                                                  scope of stabilization in terms of time and which fiscal terms are included in
(1) The stabilization of the fiscal and customs regime is guaranteed to holders   and excluded from the scope.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              504 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                PART C: Fiscal Terms
of an exploitation licence who have signed a Mining Agreement.                        It is important to note that the law provides that increases in the rates of
                                                                                      specific fiscal terms will not apply. At the same time, it also specifically
(2) The maximum duration of a period of stabilization of the fiscal and customs       prevents investors from benefiting from reductions in the rates of such terms.
regime is 15 years. This period of stabilization runs from the date on which the      This could in theory protect the state from pressure from investors to benefit
exploitation licence is granted.                                                      from reductions while at the same time being protected from increases. It is
(3) During this period of stabilization, the rates of levies, duties and taxes will   also in keeping with the general reasoning for stabilization, which is, in
neither be increased nor reduced. These rates will remain as they were on the         essence, to keep to the terms agreed to between the parties. This means that
date the exploitation licence was granted. In addition, no new tax or levy of         while fairness may dictate that the investor should not be made worse off by
any kind whatsoever is applicable to the holder of the exploitation licence           changes to the fiscal regime, the investor also should not be made better off by
during this period.                                                                   changes.

(4) Specifically referred to, on a limited basis, in the stabilization clause are     The disadvantage of this provision is that it provides for automatic stability
the rates:                                                                            rather than simply permitting use of stabilization clauses within prescribed
                                                                                      limits. At the same time, an automatic stability provision does provide for a
(a) of the Commercial and Industrial Profit and Corporate Tax;                        transparent and standardized use of stabilization across all agreements.
(b) of the Contributions to Local Development, set out in [relevant article] of
this [Code][Act][Law];
(c) of the flat rate entry fee defined in this [Code][Act][Law].

(5) Also specifically referred to, on a limited basis, by the stabilization clause,
are the base rates, subject to the provisions relating to the changes in indices:

(a) of tax on the extraction of Mineral Substances other than the Precious
Metals indicated in [relevant article] of this [Code][Act][Law];

(b) of tax on industrial or semi-industrial production of Precious Metals set out
in [relevant article] of this [Code][Act][Law];

(c) of export tax on mineral substances other than on the precious substances
set out in [relevant article] of this [Code][Act][Law]

(d) of export tax on Precious Stones and Gemstones set out in [relevant article]
of this [Code][Act][Law].



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  505 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
(6) Specifically expressly excluded from stabilization are the rates for fixed
fees, annual royalties and surface royalties indicated in [relevant articles] of
this [Code][Act][Law] as well as excise duties and environmental taxes.

(7) With the exception of the tax on extraction or production and export tax,
stabilization does not cover the bases for contributions, fees and taxes.

(8) However, any change in tax base during the period of stabilization, which
does not apply to all taxpayers subject to the same contribution, fee or tax, but
which will affect holders of exploitation licences exclusively, will be deemed
discriminatory and will not be binding on them.

                                                                      36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                          36.7 Rents


Surface rents or surface area fees are generally payments per unit area of land for use of the land for the mining project. Provisions on surface area
fees may provide for automatic adjustment for inflation. Generally surface rents are not very high and should not be seen as a significant revenue
source to the government, but they do provide a consistent stream of payment to the government for the duration of the project and discourage
speculative or excessive land holding.
The actual amount of the surface rent will often be left to regulations, which may be preferable as it better allows for changes to the surface rent
based on inflation or land values.
Laws may also provide for surface rents specifically to private owners on which mining takes place. In such cases, these payments are not a part of
the state’s fiscal regime and may not be aimed at discouraging excessive land holding. They may simply be a compensation to o wners, depending
on how land rights are allocated under the laws of a country.
36.7. Example 1:                                                                    Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Guinea’s mining code (2011), this provision fixes the actual
                                                                                    amounts for the surface rent in legislation with respect to mining (not
(1) Any holder of a mining right or permit for quarry substances which gives it     quarrying). The increases from award to first renewal and second renewal


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                          506 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
the right to engage in mining or quarry activities, is subject to the annual     could incentive relinquishing land that is not being used at each point of
payment of surface royalties, in accordance with the table below for mine        renewal of a permit.
substances, and a joint order from the [Regulating Authorities].

(2) This surface royalty is in proportion to the surface area described in the
mining right or authorisation.

(3) The terms for declaring and paying this surface royalty are determined by
joint order of the [Regulating Authorities].

(4) The rates are updated by joint order of the [Regulating Authorities].

Surface royalties by mining right:

 Name of the Title     Surface Royalties USD/km2

                       Award         1st Renewal      2nd Renewal

 Exploration           10            15               20
 Permit

 Industrial Mining     75            100              200
 Operation Title

 Semi-Industrial       20            50               100
 Mining Operation
 Title

 Mining                150           200              300
 Concession

 Dredging              150*          200*             250*
 Operation Permit

* Per km

36.7. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                         507 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART C: Fiscal Terms
Article [_]                                                                       Taken from Ghana’s mining act (2006), this is an example of a rent provision
                                                                                  that is aimed at compensating the owner for use of the land. It is one tool that
(1) A holder of a mining right, shall pay an annual ground rent as may be         may be considered for addressing loss of use of land due to mining, but does
prescribed.                                                                       not replace the need to address loss of livelihood and resettlement issues in the
(2) Payment of annual ground rent shall be made to the owner of the land or       legal framework, including who bears the costs and how compensation is
successors and assigns of the owner except in the case of annual ground rent      determined, in a comprehensive manner.
in respect of mining rights over stool lands, which shall be paid to the
[Regulating Authority], for application in accordance with the [relevant law].


                                                                    36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                      36.8 Bonuses


Bonuses are lump sum payments made to the government at certain milestones in the project life cycle; for example, at signing of the mining
agreement (signature bonus) or at attaining certain production levels (production bonuses).
Bonuses provide large upfront payments, whether or not the project proves profitable.
Bonus payments are more common in the oil and gas sector than in the hard minerals sector, but some governments do seek bonus payments for
awards of mining sector contracts or licenses. Where a country does include bonus payments as part of its licensing procedures, the specific
amount of the bonus is rarely laid out in legislation; rather it is typically the subject of bidding processes and can vary from one project to another.
36.8. Example 1:                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]: Mining and quarry rights subject to tender                          Drawn from DRC’s mining code (2002), this provision allows for the amount of
                                                                                 signature bonus offered to be one of the factors considered in determining the
(1) If the public interest so requires, the [Regulating Authority] submits to    best bid.
tender, in exceptional cases, open or by invitation, mining and quarry rights
relating to a deposit which has been studied, documented or possibly worked      More detailed procedures, terms and conditions, including any minimum
on by the State or its entities and which is considered as an asset with         requirements for the bid, are normally spelled out in more detail in regulations




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               508 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
considerable known value.                                                          and the advertisement for the bid.

(2) In this case, the [Regulating Authority] reserves the mining rights relating   It is possible to have a bid in which the only determining factor is the amount of
to the deposit to be submitted to tender.                                          signature bonus offered, while all other terms are fixed in law or regulation, or
                                                                                   to include the amount of signature bonus offered as one of several factors to be
(3) The invitation to tender, indicating the terms and conditions for the bids     considered in deciding on the best offer.
as well as the date on which and the address to which the tenders must be
submitted, is published in the Official Gazette. It can also be published in the
specialized local and international newspapers.

(4) The bids submitted in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
invitation to tender are examined promptly by an Inter-ministerial
Commission whose members are appointed and convened by the [Regulating
Authority] in order to select the best bid, on the basis of:

a) Plan of work proposed and financial costs relating thereto;

b) Available financial and technical capacity of the bidder;

c) Previous experience of the bidder in carrying out the operations proposed;

d) Various other socio-economic advantages for the State, the province and
the surrounding community, including the signature bonus offered.

36.8. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                        Drawn from Angola’s oil and gas code (2004), this provision shows another
                                                                                   aspect of bonus payments that may be included in legislation: rules on which
(1) Bonuses paid to the [State mining company] resulting from agreements           public body should collect the bonus and how they should be used.
entered into with its associates shall fully revert to the State by way of the
[finance mechanism].

(2) A portion of the bonuses referred to in the previous paragraph shall be
spent in projects of regional and local development and promotion of
[Country]’s private business community, under terms to be regulated by the
[State].




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 509 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
                                                                      36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                      36.9 Other Fees


“Other fees? cover a range of other payments a mining company may be required to make, depending on the laws within a particular country,
including fees for registering the company locally, processing of mining license applications, stamp duties, and so on. These fees tend to be
relatively small but can serve to augment budgets of administrative agencies and defray their costs. They should not be seen as a main fiscal tool
and, where possible, should be minimized in favour of emphasis on main tools like royalties and corporate income tax.
36.9. Example 1:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Adapted from Guinea’s mining code (2011) and Sierra Leone’s mining code
                                                                                  (2009), these provisions together highlight a type of fee commonly included in
(1) The issuance of mining rights and authorisations as well as, where            mining laws: administrative fees associated with certain acts of processing
applicable, their renewal, extension, continuation, transfer, assignment, and     necessary for the progression of a project. These fees provide small revenues to
lease, are subject, upon the granting of the deed conferring the rights, to the   the state, which can be useful during the stages before production begins.
payment of a fixed fee, the amount and terms of which are determined by
regulations.                                                                      See discussion of property tax, above.

(2) Collection agents, trading douses, and accredited trading agencies for the
trading of diamonds, gold and other precious substances are subject to the
payment of a fixed annual royalty, the amount of which is determined by
regulation.

(3) No licence granting a mining right shall be issued by the [Regulating
Authority] until all prescribed fees payable in relation to the grant and
registration of that licence have been paid.

36.9. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_]                                                                       Drawn from Cote d’Ivoire’s mining code (2014), this provision details a
                                                                                  payment that companies are required to make in order to reinforce the capacity
An operating licence holder shall be required to contribute to the financing of   of the regulating entity. Such a fee can be a meaningful contribution, but also
capacity building and skills transfer for officials with [the regulating


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               510 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                           PART C: Fiscal Terms
authority] and to the training of mining engineers and geologists from        carries with it the risk of conflict of interest. Countries considering this kind of
[Country]. The terms for this contribution shall be determined by decree.     approach should consider whether there are other modalities for promoting
                                                                              capacity development in the regulating entity with fewer risks. When this kind
                                                                              of approach is selected, a country should seek strong rules guarding against the
                                                                              conflict of interest risk.

                                                                  36. Fiscal Terms
                                                      36.10 Exemption from Other Fees


Countries may choose to exempt mining companies from certain fees, for various reasons (see discussion on customs duties, VAT). One basis for
exemption may be to avoid undue burden to companies during the exploration phase and facilitate movement to discovery (see the example below
on exemption from payment of fees related to export of samples for testing).
As with cautions under the discussion on tax holidays, exemptions from these fees should be used transparently, in accordance with provisions in
law and are best standardized across the mining industry to facilitate administration.
36.10. Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Guinea’s mining code (2011), this provision provides exemption
                                                                              from several payments during the exploration phase only. The exemptions are
(1) Holders of exploration permits are entitled throughout the period of      meant to relieve some of the fiscal burden on companies during a period of high
exploration, to an exemption from:                                            upfront expenditure and no revenues. Nevertheless, companies are still required
(a) TVA or Value Added Tax (VAT) on imports of equipment, materials,          to pay the administrative taxes listed.
machines and consumables indicated in the mining list submitted, before the
beginning of the Exploration Phase, on condition that such mining list has
been approved in compliance with provisions of [relevant article] of this
[Code][Act][Law]. However, imports of goods which are excluded from the
right of deduction pursuant to the provisions of the [General Tax Code] are
not exempt from VAT, even when these goods were included in the duly
approved mining list.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              511 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
(b)Annual Minimum Tax (IMF);
(c) business license fee;
(d) Contribution to vocational training;
(e) Single Land Tax (CFU);
(f) Apprenticeship tax.

(2) The advantage bestowed by the regime for exemption is subject to the
filing, before the start of the exploration phase, of a mining list for the
Exploration Phase, in compliance with the provisions of [relevant article] of
this [Code][Act][Law].

(3) All other provisions of the General Tax Code apply with full effect.

(4) Petrol, lubricants and other imported petroleum products are entitled to a
VAT reimbursement, within the limits of annual quotas fixed by the [Budget
Regulating Authority].

(5) The duration of these exemptions is limited to the duration of the
exploration phase.

Article [_] Customs duties

(1) Holders of an exploration permit are eligible for the temporary admission
regime for the importation of equipment, material, machines, raw materials
and consumables indicated in the mining list relating to the exploration
phase.

(2) The temporary admission of these goods is only permitted if the said
mining list has been filed, before the start of the exploration phase, and has
been duly approved in accordance with the provisions of [relevant article] of
this [Code][Act][Law].

(3) However, materials and spare parts for utility vehicles, necessary for the
functioning of professional materials and equipment included in the mining
list are not eligible for the exemption:




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                     512 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                            PART C: Fiscal Terms
(a) from the [Regulating Authority] Processing Fee;
(b) from the Registration Tax;
(c) from the Community Tax (PC);
(d) from the Additional Surcharges

36.10. Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from DRC’s mining code (2002), this provision provides an exemption
                                                                                from fees for exports under certain circumstances – in this case fees and duties
As part of the project, where the holder exports samples for industrial tests   associated with the export of minerals extracted for testing/analysis. Again, this
and analyses, this shall be exempt from all customs duties or any other         exemption is aimed at minimizing additional financial burden during the
contribution, of any kind whatsoever, when it leaves the national territory.    exploration phase.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article [_] of the present
[Code][Act][Law] (on exceptions for exporting samples), samples exported in
violation of this Article in the present [Code][Act][Law] shall be subject to
all relevant standard taxation.

                                                                    36. Fiscal Terms
                                                              36.11 Foreign Exchange


A mining code may regulate how, when, and at what cost license holders can remove mining profits in a foreign currency, in order to manage the
value of the country’s currency. Foreign Exchange provisions may require license holders to set up local bank accounts through which they must
channel their profits before they are permitted to repatriate their profits abroad.
However, as a general matter, foreign exchange rules should be governed by generally applicable law.
36.11. Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                     Drawn from Ghana’s mining code (2006), this provision authorizes the license
(1) A holder of a mining lease who earns foreign exchange from mining           holder to hold a foreign exchange account in Ghana with the guarantee of the
operations may be permitted by the [central bank], to retain in an account,     Bank of Ghana. The clause also stipulates the free transferability of foreign
portion of the foreign exchange earned, for use in acquiring spare parts and


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              513 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                               PART C: Fiscal Terms
other inputs required for the mining operations, which would otherwise not be       exchange, which is required by WTO.
readily available without the use of the earnings.

(2) The [Regulating Authority], in consultation with the [other relevant
Regulating Authorities] may, where the net earnings of a holder of a mining
lease from the holder’s mining operations are in foreign exchange, permit the
holder of the lease to open and retain in an account, an amount not less than
twenty-five percent of the foreign exchange for

(a) the acquisition of spare parts, raw materials, and machinery and
equipment, (b) debt servicing and dividend payment, (c) remittance in
respect of quotas for expatriate personnel, and (d) the transfer of capital in
the event of a sale or liquidation of the mining operations

(3) An account opened and operated under subsection (2) shall, with the
consent of the [financial entity], be held in trust by a trustee appointed by the
holder of the lease.

(4) Subject to this [Code][Act][Law], a holder of a mining lease shall be
guaranteed free transferability of convertible currency

(a) through the [central bank], or

(b) in the case of a net foreign exchange holder, through the account opened
under subsection (2).

36.11. Example 2:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                         Drawn from Peru’s mining law (2012), this provision provides for the complete
(1) No discrimination on foreign exchange in relation to regulation, exchange       freedom of movement of capital, but, in addition, provides assurance that the
rate, or other economic policy measures;                                            financial regulating entity will provide foreign exchange required for mining
                                                                                    activities.
(2) Freedom on remittance of profits, dividends, financial resources and free




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              514 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
availability of foreign currency in general;

(3) Free disposal of currency generated by exports in the country or abroad.

(4) If the holder of the mining activity sold its production locally, the
[Financial Regulating Authority] will provide the foreign currency required
for payment of goods and services, procurement of equipment, debt service,
commissions, profits, dividends, royalties, capital repatriation, fees and, in
general, any other disbursement required or entitled to turn in foreign
currency;

(5) No discrimination in regard to the exchange rate, based on which
currency is converted to the FOB value of exports and/or local sales, meaning
that the best exchange rate for foreign trade transactions should be given; if
there is any type of control or differential exchange system. This non?
discrimination guarantees everything with regard to exchange rate matters in
general;

(6) Free commercialization of mineral products;

(7) Special Regimes stability, when they are granted, for tax refund,
temporary admission, and the like;

(8) No unilateral change of the guarantees included in the contract.

                                                                       36. Fiscal Terms
                                                                 36. 12 Transfer Pricing


Transfer pricing is a business practice that consists of setting a price for the purchase of a good or service between two “related parties? (e.g.,
subsidiary companies that are owned or controlled by the same parent company). There are various kinds of transactions that may take place


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                 515 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                          PART C: Fiscal Terms
between related parties, including procurement of goods, financing (see the discussion on thin capitalization under the section on deductions),
support services (administrative, technical, advisory), mineral sales (see section on royalties).
Transfer pricing becomes abusive, however, if companies buy from related parties at inflated prices or sell to related parties at below-market prices
in order to reduce their taxable income in the host country and shift taxable income to a lower tax jurisdiction, thereby reducing their overall tax
liability. African countries depend three times as much on tax income receipts (in terms of percentage of overall tax revenue to the government) as
developed economies, making abusive transfer pricing, or, transfer mispricing, a particularly serious issue for African governments.
In order to address abuses, the tax laws will often require companies to price transactions with related parties based on the “arm’s length
principle?, that is, the price at which the transaction would take place if the buying and selling entities were not related. If the relevant transaction
does not conform to the arm’s length principle, transfer pricing rules give governments the legal right to adjust the price in the reported pr ofits of
the company. Countries should make sure that the mining sector falls under the generally applicable legislation on transfer pricing.
The OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines propose five major transfer pricing methods to apply the arm’s length principle and are regarded as the
international authority on common practices and methods in the area of transfer pricing with more than 100 countries referring to these guidelines
in their domestic legislation. Some of the five methods are based on comparing similar transactions between non-affiliated companies. Others
compare the profit margins made by each subsidiary on a transaction. In 2013 the United Nations released its own transfer pricing manual that
attempts to adapt transfer pricing guidance to the circumstances, priorities, and administrative capacity of non-OECD countries.
To effectively implement transfer pricing rules, regulations should provide guidance on application of the arm’s length principle, including:

       transfer pricing methodologies
       guidance on comparability analysis (i.e., use of local and/or foreign comparable data)
       transfer pricing documentation requirements and filing deadlines
       how and when transfer pricing adjustments will be made by the revenue authority
       how taxpayer disputes will be resolved
       fines and penalties
       (optionally) specific guidance on particular related party transactions

Further, it is important for governments to invest in improved capacity in regulating authorities to address transfer pricing issues, particularly
through equipping revenue authorities with both transfer pricing expertise and technical knowledge of the mining sector and through improving
inter-agency coordination and sharing of information.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                      516 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                         PART C: Fiscal Terms
It should be noted that to properly implement OECD transfer pricing methods, governments need access to data on comparable transactions, which
can be challenging for African governments. In the absence of comparable data, data from very different contexts may be used and adjusted to the
African context. However, this may be time-consuming, complicated and produce results that do not reflect the realities companies operating in
Africa. Tax administrators may also lack the capacity to adapt the data effectively.
For this reason, governments may consider adopting alternative tax policy rules, which reduce reliance on comparable data or the arm’s length
principle. Many of these methods are innovative and not widely tested. Further research on their practicality is required. They include:

       Adopting the “sixth method? with respect to pricing of minerals; that is, using international reference prices to va lue the minerals.
        However, note that for minerals without an international reference price, independent third-party valuation of the minerals could be
        considered (see discussion on royalties above).
       Separating tax treatment of hedging income. Hedging consists of locking in a future-selling price in order for both parties to the
        transaction to plan their commercial operations with predictability. For example, a company might agree to sell copper to a buyer at $3 per
        ton at some point in the future. Abuse may take place if companies set artificially low prices in their hedging contracts. Governments may
        combat this abuse by separating the gains and losses associated with hedging contracts and taxing that income separately from operating
        income so that hedging losses may not be used to offset profits made from unhedged sales. This strategy has been adopted in Zambia (see
        Zambia Revenue Authority Practice Note 1/2012).
       Capping management fees between related parties. For example, in Guinea, management fees, royalties, and similar payments to parent
        companies are deductible if they are reasonable and, in total, do not exceed five percent of annual turnover, or 20 percent of general
        expenses.
       Capping interest deductions on foreign related party loans (see discussion on thin capitalization under the section on deductions)
       Capping the value of total related party transactions as a percentage of EBITDA (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and
        amortization). For example, Ecuador has recently passed a similar rule, limiting total expenses for royalties, technical, administrative,
        consulting and similar services paid by Ecuadorian taxpayers to related parties to 20 percent of taxable income plus the amount of the
        expenses.
       Use of advance pricing agreements (APAs) and “safe harbours.? An APA is a contract, usually for multiple years, between a taxpayer and
        at least one revenue authority, which agrees in advance how the transfer price will be set for a number of transactions between related
        parties. The revenue authority will not make any transfer pricing adjustments during the period of the agreement. A safe harbour is an
        administrative tool that applies to a defined category of transactions. It protects taxpayers from transfer pricing audits as long as the price
        of their related party transactions follows the pricing formula defined in the safe harbour rules by the tax authority (see, for example,
        article 12 of Tanzania’s 2014 Income Tax (Transfer Pricing) Regulations).
       Use of global formulary apportionment. Formulary apportionment attributes a multinational corporation’s total worldwide profit (or loss)


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     517 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
         to each tax jurisdiction where it has subsidiaries, based on factors such as the proportion of sales, assets or payroll in that jurisdiction. Such
         a method, however, would require international consensus and cooperation and therefore may be unachievable. However, regions or sub-
         regions in Africa might consider the practicality of such an approach, especially for transnational mining projects (e.g. Liberia/Guinea,
         Mozambique/Malawi, etc.).

In addition to the shorter examples given below, Tanzania’s 2014 Income Tax (Transfer Pricing) Regulations can provide detail ed guidance for
drafting of transfer pricing rules.
36.12. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_] —Transfer Pricing                                                       Drawn from Ghana’s Internal Revenue Act (2000), this provision establishes
                                                                                    use of the arm’s length principle for pricing related party transactions and also
(1) In a transaction between persons who are associates, the [Regulating            provides details on how adjustments will be made if the regulating entity
Authority] may distribute, apportion, or allocate inclusions in income,             deems it necessary. In this case, the regulating entity may make use of the total
deductions, credits, or personal reliefs between those persons as is necessary      consolidated income of the multi-national group that a license holder is a part
to reflect the chargeable income or tax payable which would have arisen for         of and attribute a portion of that total income to the license holder.
these persons if the transaction had been conducted at arm's length.

(2) Where, in the case of an associated resident entity of a non-resident person,
the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that some adjustment is warranted under
[relevant subsection], or in the case of a permanent establishment of a non-
resident person in [Country], the [Regulating Authority] is not satisfied with a
return of income of that person made under [relevant section], the [Regulating
Authority] may adjust the income of the permanent establishment or entity for
a basis period so that it reflects an amount calculated:

(a) by reference to the total consolidated income of the non-resident person
and all associates of that non-resident person, other than individuals but
irrespective of residence;

(b) by taking into account the proportion which the turnover of the permanent
establishment or entity bears to the total consolidated turnover of the non-
resident person and those associates; and

(c) by taking into account any other relevant considerations in determining the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 518 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
proportion of the total consolidated income which should be attributed to the
permanent establishment or entity.

(3) In making an adjustment under subsections (1) or (2), the [Regulating
Authority] may recharacterise the source of income and the nature of any
payment or loss as revenue, capital, or otherwise.

36.12. Example 2:                                                                  Annotation

Article [_] Interpretation                                                         Drawn from Kenya’s Income Tax (Transfer Pricing) Rules (2006), these
                                                                                   provisions provide an example of the kinds of issues that should be included in
(1) In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires—                         regulations in order to properly implement the arm’s length principle, including
“arm’s length price? means the price payable in a transaction between
                                                                                   definitions of “arm’s length? and “related enterprises?, the scope of the rules
independent enterprises;
                                                                                   (the types of transactions covered), methods for calculating the arm’s length
“comparable transactions? means transactions between which there are no            price, documentation and recordkeeping.
material differences, or in which reasonably accurate adjustments can be made
                                                                                   The rules use the OECD transfer pricing methods, which do rely upon
to eliminate material differences;
                                                                                   availability of comparable data.
“controlled transaction? means a transaction which is monitored to ensure
payment of an arm’s length price for goods or services;

“related enterprises? means one or more enterprises whereby—

(a)one of the enterprises participates directly or indirectly in the management,
control or capital of the other; or

(b) a third person participates directly or indirectly in the management,
control or, capital or both.

Art [_] Purpose of Rules

(1) The purposes of these Rules are—

(a) to provide guidelines to be applied by related enterprises, in determining
the arm’s length prices of goods and services in transactions involving them;
and



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               519 | Page
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
(b) to provide administrative regulations, including the types of records and
documentation to be submitted to the [Regulating Authority] by a person
involved in transfer pricing arrangements.

Article [_] Person to choose method

The taxpayer may choose a method to employ in determining the arm’s length
price from among the methods set out in rule 7.

Article [_] Scope of guidelines

(1) The guidelines referred to in rule 3 shall apply to—

(a) transactions between related enterprises within a multinational company,
where one enterprise is located in, and is subject to tax in, [Country], and the
other is located outside [Country];

(b) transactions between a permanent establishment and its head office or
other related branches, in which case the permanent establishment shall be
treated as a distinct and separate enterprise from its head office and related
branches.

Article [_] Transactions subject to Rules

The transactions subject to adjustment of prices under these Rules shall
include—

(a) the sale or purchase of goods;

(b) the sale, purchase or lease of tangible assets;

(c) the transfer, purchase or use of intangible assets;

(d) the provision of services;

(e) the lending or borrowing of money; and

(f) any other transactions which may affect the profit or loss of the enterprise



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                    520 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
involved.

Article [_] Methods

(1) The methods referred to in rule 4 are the following—

(a) the comparable uncontrolled price (CUP) method, in which the transfer
price in a controlled transaction is compared with the prices in an
uncontrolled transaction and accurate adjustments made to eliminate material
price differences;

(b) the resale price method, in which the transfer price of the produce is
compared with the resale price at which the product is sold to an independent
enterprise: Provided that in the application of this method the resale price
shall be reduced by the resale price margin (the profit margin indicated by the
reseller);

(c) the cost plus method, in which costs are assessed using the costs incurred
by the supplier of a product in a controlled transaction, with a mark-up added
to make an appropriate profit in light of the functions performed, and the
assets used and risks assumed by the supplier;

(d) the profit split method, in which the profits earned in very closely
interrelated controlled transactions are split among the related enterprises
depending on the functions performed by each enterprise in relation to the
transaction, and compared with a profit split among independent enterprises in
a joint venture;

(e) the transactional net margin method, in which the net profit margin
attained by a multinational enterprise in a controlled transaction is compared
to the net profit margin that would have been earned in comparable
transactions by an independent enterprise; and

(f) such other method as may be prescribed by the [regulating entity] from time
to time, where in his opinion and in view of the nature of the transactions, the
arm’s length price cannot be determined using any of the methods contained in



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                    521 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
these guidelines.

Article [_] Application of methods

(1) The methods set out in rule 7 shall be applied in determining the price
payable for goods and services in transactions between related enterprises for
the purposes of [relevant article] of the [Code][Act][Law].

(2) A person shall apply the method most appropriate for his enterprise, having
regard to the nature of the transaction, or class of transaction, or class of
related persons or function performed by such persons in relation to the
transaction.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] may issue guidelines specifying conditions and
procedures to guide the application of the methods set out above.

Article [_] Power of [Regulating Authority] to request for information

(1) The [Regulating Authority] may, where necessary, request a person to
whom these Rules apply for information, including books of accounts and other
documents relating to transactions where the transfer pricing is applied.

(2) The documents referred to in paragraph (1) shall include documents
relating to—

(a) the selection of the transfer pricing method and the reasons for the
selection;

(b) the application of the method, including the calculations made and price
adjustment factors considered;

(c) the global organization structure of the enterprise;

(d) the details of the transaction under consideration;

(e) the assumptions, strategies, and policies applied in selecting the method;
and



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                   522 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                              PART C: Fiscal Terms
(f) such other background information as may be necessary regarding the
transaction.

(3) The books of accounts and other documents shall be prepared in, or be
translated into, the English language, at the time the transfer price is arrived
at.

Article [_] Application of arm’s length pricing

(1) Where a person avers the application of arm’s len gth pricing, such person
shall—

(a) develop an appropriate transfer pricing policy;

(b) determine the arm’s length price as prescribed under the guidelines
provided under these Rules; and

(c) avail documentation to evidence their analysis upon request by the
[Regulating Authority].

Article [_] Certain provisions of the [Code][Act][Law] to apply

The provisions of the [Code][Act][Law] relating to fraud, failure to furnish
returns and underpayment of tax shall apply with respect to transfer pricing.

Article [_] Unpaid tax to be deemed additional tax

Any tax due and unpaid in a transfer pricing arrangement shall be deemed to
be additional tax for purposes of [relevant sections] of the [Code][Act][Law].

                                                               37. Non-Fiscal Incentives


Non-fiscal incentives typically refer to provisions that use non-monetary and/or in-kind benefits to encourage investment in specific sectors of a
country’s economy. These benefits may be issued at the national level as well as at the local level, such a s by state, province or other regional



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                523 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                             PART C: Fiscal Terms
entities. For the mining sector, these incentives may include, but are not limited to, the following:
    -    Administrative assistance such as “one stop shop? resources to support investors in the set up and running of busi nesses
    -    Simplified licensing procedures (e.g. ability to submit forms online; fast track approvals process)
    -    Technical assistance in the form of guidance on national regulatory frameworks
    -    Subsidized training programs that improve human capacity, particularly where there is a shortage of qualified employees


As with fiscal incentives, the use of non-fiscal incentives must carefully consider the opportunities, costs and challenges that arise from offering
these types of incentives to investors. Up front financial investment may be lower where incentives are derived from pre-existing programs or
structures, but alternate costs also exist, such as higher administrative costs where dedicated resources have to be assigned to meet investor needs.
Particularly, it is essential that incentives do not provide such an advantage to global investors that it creates a significant disadvantage to local
investors.
When non-fiscal incentives are offered, they should aim to be (1) affordable, not significantly undermining a gov ernment’s revenue via direct
and/or indirect cost; (2) transparently presented to investors; (3) simple, making it easy on both the investor and the government to access and
determine eligibility for the incentive and (4) non-discretionary, to ensure a consistent regime that limits the possibility of bribery and corruption
that can become intertwined with discretionary measures. Incentives should also be consistent with international best practice and should not
contradict any other incentives a country offers to investors.
Ultimately, many non-fiscal incentives provide services that, when functional, serve to strengthen the overall investment climate of a country.
These incentives, therefore, can offer a critical starting point in linking investor needs with a country’s long term strategic goals to promote
business, allowing for a positive impact that extends beyond the mining sector.
37. Example 1:                                                                   Annotation

Article [_]                                                                      This suggested provision references the relevant investment legislation of a
                                                                                 country that may already provide for general non-fiscal incentives that apply
(1) General non-fiscal incentives as provided for in [relevant investment        generally to investors and creates the framework for tailoring such incentives to
legislation] shall apply to a mining right holder. The details of any such       the mining industry investors. Importantly, the provision restricts incentives to
incentives if deemed applicable to the mining sector shall be addressed in the   those that have been made available through the country’s legislative process,
accompanying mining regulations.                                                 supporting a transparent and consistent regime around incentives.
(2) Incentives shall not be granted to a mining right holder where they have



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              524 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                                                  PART C: Fiscal Terms
not previously been published in approved legislation.

37. Example 2:                                                                 Annotation

Art. [_] Non- Fiscal incentives                                                Inspired by the Investment Incentives Code of the City of Naga, Philippines
                                                                               (1997), this example goes into more detail than the previous, outlining specific
A license holder shall be entitled to the following non- fiscal incentives:    assistance and resources for license holders. This provision importantly gives
(a) Assistance in securing local permits and licenses;                         room for additional incentives to be provided, but requires that these be subject
                                                                               to the approval of the country’s legislative body.
(b) Assistance in identifying office location and mining sites;

(c) Joint ventures and downstream service provider match-making

(d) Facilitated access to financial and technical assistance programs of the

[Country];

(e) Facilitated service connections with local utilities; or

(f) Any additional incentives made available must be published and approved
by the [Legislative Body].




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            525 | Page
                                                AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                  PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

                                                                   38. Environment
In the context of mineral extraction, environmental statutes and regulations address the impact of a mining operation on the environment and human health
and safety. In general, environmental statutes and regulations should address potential pollution of the environment (including air, soil, surface water or
groundwater or subsurface strata), protection of natural resources or endangered or threatened species, human health and safety, including occupational
safety, the investigation and remediation of pollutants and hazardous materials, and the protection of cultural heritage. More specifically, environmental
laws should address the following:
    ?   Establishment of environmental management tools and standards such as pre-project environmental impact assessments and management plans to
        inform policy makers of the potential environmental impacts of the mining operation and establish a framework for managing those concerns
        during and after the project.
    ?   Preservation of archaeological objects and cultural heritage.
    ?   Identification, management and disposal of hazardous waste and materials extracted or produced by the mining operation.
    ?   Conservation and protection of flora and fauna impacted by the mining operation, including habitats and ecosystems.
    ?   Requirements and standards for mining operations to protect human health and safety.
    ?   Provisions covering the investigation and remediation of pollutants discharged into air, soil and groundwater to expedite clean-up and minimize
        adverse impacts to the environment.
    ?   Standards establishing reclamation obligations for land disturbed by mining operations.
    ?   Mechanisms for the enforcement of, and addressing non-compliance with, environmental standards for mining operations.


                                                             38. Environment
                                         38.1 Application of Environmental Laws and Regulations
The statutory language in this section should generally establish the applicability of the environmental requirements to all mining activities and operations
in the country. The provisions should incorporate any distinct environmental law of the country or principles that should be set out in the mining law in the
absence of or in addition to the environmental laws, as well as any relevant international and regional treaties and directives.

In addition, provisions should consider the applicability of the Equator Principles and other international environmental standards in the field. In addition,


 NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                     526 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

it could authorize the relevant government agency or agencies to promulgate regulations enacting and enforcing the environmental requirements.
Empowering a regulatory agency will delegate rulemaking authority to the relevant agency.

38.1. Example 1:                                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this language establishes the
(1) Before undertaking an activity or operation under a mineral right, the holder of the   applicability of the environmental and cultural requirements in the Act to all
mineral right shall obtain the necessary approvals and permits required from the           mining operations in the country. It also grants the applicable government
[relevant government Agency] for the protection of natural resources, public health        agency the authority to promulgate regulations to enact and enforce the
and the environment.                                                                       statutory requirements set out herein.

(2) Without limiting subsection (1), a holder of a mineral right shall comply with all
requirements of this [Act][Code][Law] and any applicable Regulations promulgated
under this [Act][Code][Law] and any other enactment for the protection of the
environment, health or cultural resources in so far as relates to exploitation of
minerals.


38.1. Example 2:                                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                Drawn from Botswana’s mining law (1999), this provision establishes the
The holder of a mineral right shall, in accordance with the requirements of this Act and   applicability of the Act’s environmental requirements to mining operations and
any applicable law, and in accordance with good mining industry practice, conduct          activities but does not specifically authorize rulemaking by a government
operations in such manner as to preserve in as far as is possible the natural              agency.
environment, minimize and control waste or undue loss of or damage to natural and
biological resources, to prevent and where unavoidable, promptly treat pollution and
contamination of the environment and shall take no steps which may unnecessarily or
unreasonably restrict or limit further development of the natural resources of the
concession area or adjacent areas.


                                                                 38. Environment
                                                 38.2 Impact Assessments and Management Plans
Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and environmental management plans (EMP) are tools widely used by numerous governments


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                             527 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                    PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

when assessing the approval and implementation of mining proposals. These documents are also typically evaluated by lenders when making financing
decisions. The government should consider that there are at least two approaches to the use of ESIA: first, as a step to obtain an environmental license
prior to the mining activities; secondly, as part of the application process for the mining license. It is essential that mining and environmental laws, as well
as related regulations and contracts, never create an expectation that the applicant has a right to have the ESIAs approved or the environmental or mining
license granted. It is therefore crucial that the ESIA be part of the permitting process and that the granting of the mining license be conditioned on the
approval of the ESIA. Lack of clarity in the mining and environmental laws, regulations and contracts with respect to the role of the ESIA and on the need
for it to be approved by the government increases the risk of conflicts and legal disputes. A country should consider completing a Strategic Environmental
Assessment (SEA). One benefit for a government to conduct an SEA is to identify sensible zones where mining activities are not desirable and exploration
licenses should therefore not be allowed. Conducting an SEA will thus reduce the risk for mining companies to invest on ESIAs for projects with little
chances of approval because of unacceptable environmental or social impacts.

Most countries require an ESIA to be prepared (either by the mining proponent or by the government) before issuing government approvals for any and all
mining activities, including but not limited to reconnaissance, exploration and mining operation activities. However, if SEAs are the responsibility of the
government, conducting an ESIA for a specific project should remain the responsibility of the mining proponent. In the latter case, the government’s role
is to provide guidelines for the process, assess the quality of the ESIA report, and accept or reject the project based on ESIA findings. ESIAs are of
particular importance in resource rich countries that are environmentally fragile and at risk for social and environmental impacts once large-scale mining
operations are underway. EIAs are typically associated with the exploration and feasibility stages of the mining project cycle.

In addition to requiring environmental impact analysis, most countries also require the development and submission of EMPs. Unlike EIAs, EMPs outline
mining operations and provide a framework for identifying, managing and mitigating environmental impacts as they arise (both those identified in the EIA
and those identified during the course of construction/operations). EMPs are essential for monitoring the obligations of mining companies by the
government and should be part integral part of the ESIA process. A key factor for ensuring success in implementing EMPs is to require periodic
implementation reports and periodic reviews to adjust to new circumstances during the life of the mine.

Finally, ESIAs and EMPs are closely linked to mine closure and rehabilitation plan, and theses linkages should be properly reflected in mining laws and
regulations, in terms of drafting process, approval and periodic reviews.

38.2. Example 1:                                                                        Annotation

Article [_]                                                                             Inspired by language from Uganda’s mining law (2003), this provision provides
(1) Every holder of an exploration license or a mining/exploitation lease shall carry   the general requirements for the submission to the government and its review of
out an environmental impact assessment of his or her proposed operations in             an EIA and an EMP.
accordance with the provisions of [Related Legislation].



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                           528 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(2) The holder of a license referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall commence   The language, as phrased, does not condition the issuance of an exploration
his or her operations under this [Act][Code][Law]only after securing a certificate of      license or a mining lease on the submission of an ESIA or an EMP. Instead, the
approval of his or her proposed operations and environmental impact assessment from        holder of the license or mineral right is restricted from commencing operations
the [the Environment Regulating Authority].                                                until an ESIA and EMP has been prepared, reviewed and approved by the
                                                                                           relevant authority. This may raise conflicts if, based on EDIA findings, the
(3) The holder of an exploration license or a mining/exploitation lease shall submit to    project is not approved.
the [Environment Regulating Authority] an environmental management plan indicating
the type and quality of wastes to be generated from any exploration or                     This proposal, unlike Option 3 below, is general and does not detail the
mining/exploitation operations under this Act and the method of its final disposal.        information that must be contained in the ESIAs or EMPs or provide a timeline
                                                                                           for government review and approval.
(4) The environmental management plan may be revised from time to time either by the
holder of the exploration license or mining/exploitation lease, or if required by the
[Environment Regulating Authority]. Any revised management plan must be approved
by [Environment Regulating Authority] before it is implemented by the holder of the
exploration license or mining/exploitation lease.
(5) Upon approval of a license and/or lease holder’s Environmental Impact Assessment
and Environmental Management Plan, the license and/or lease holder shall carry out
an annual environmental audit, and shall keep records describing how the operations
conform to the approved Environmental Impact Assessment.
38.2. Example 2:                                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                Inspired by South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision also includes
No person may prospect for or remove, mine, conduct technical co-operation                 specific language regarding ESIA requirements as outlined in the United States
operations, conduct reconnaissance operations, explore for and produce any mineral         National Environmental Protection Act, Section 102(2)(c).
or petroleum or commence with any work incidental thereto on any area without an
approved environmental impact assessment and environmental management plan.                This proposed legislative language outlines in more detail the content
(1) Any person who applies for a mineral right must submit an environmental impact         requirements for ESIA and EMP submissions, and it conditions the issuance of
                                                                                           any permits or licenses or the commencement of any operations related to any
assessment and environmental management plan as prescribed.
                                                                                           mining activities on the submission and approval of both an ESIA and an EMP.
(2) An environmental impact assessment must consider, investigate, assess, and
evaluate:                                                                                  Option 2 offers a more comprehensive statute regarding ESIA/EMP
                                                                                           requirements, the timeline for their review and approval by relevant
(a) The impact of a person’s proposed prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or
                                                                                           government agencies. Governments may instead choose to implement such
mining on the environment;                                                                 detailed requirements in regulations versus in the statutory text.
(b) Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the proposal be


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              529 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

implemented;
(c) Alternatives to the proposed action;
(d)The relationship between local short-term uses of the environment and the
maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity;
(e) Any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be
involved in the proposed action should it be implemented; and
(f) The socio-economic conditions of any person who might be directly affected by a
prospecting or mining operation.
(3) An environmental management plan must:
(a) Establish baseline information concerning the affected environment to determine
protection, remedial measures and environmental management objectives;
(b) Develop an environmental awareness plan describing the manner in which the
applicant intends to inform his or her employees of any environmental risks which may
result from their work and the manner in which the risks must be dealt with in order to
avoid pollution or the degradation of the environment; and
(c) Describe the manner in which the applicant intends to:
 (i) Modify, remedy, control or stop any action, activity or process which causes
pollution or environmental degradation;
 (ii) Contain or remedy the cause of pollution or degradation and migration of
pollutants;
 (iii) Comply with any prescribed waste standard or management standards or
practices; and
 (iv) Rehabilitate the environment affected by the prospecting/reconnaissance,
exploration or mining operations to its natural or predetermined state or to a land use
which conforms to the generally accepted principle of sustainable development.
(4) Subject to paragraphs (3-4), the [Regulating Authority] must, within 120 days from
the submission of the environmental impact assessment and environmental



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                       530 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

management plan, approve the same, if:
(a) It complies with the requirements of subsection (3) and (4); and
(b) The applicant has the capacity, or has provided for the capacity, to rehabilitate and
manage the negative impacts on the environment.
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may not approve the environmental management plan
    unless he or she has considered:
(a) Any recommendation by the [Relevant Mining Development and Environmental
Committee]; and

(b) The comments of any [Admin Reviewer] charged with the administration of any law
which relates to matters affecting the environment.
(5) The [Regulating Authority] may call for additional information from the person
contemplated in subsection (1) or (2) and may direct that the environmental impact
assessment and/or environmental management plan in question be amended and/or
adjusted in such a way as the [Regulating Authority] may require.
(6) The [Regulating Authority] may at any time after he or she has approved an
environmental impact assessment and environmental management plan, and after
consultation with the holder of the reconnaissance permission, prospecting right,
mining right or mining permit concerned, approve an amended environmental impact
assessment and/or environmental management plan.

                                                                   38. Environment
                                                        38.3 Discovery of Archaeological Objects
This language is often used to ensure that any archaeological objects that are discovered during the course of mining activities are reported, catalogued,
and protected and preserved.

Some nations have separate laws protecting cultural, historic, and/or archaeological objects. For these countries, a provision referencing the appropriate
law or code and confirming its applicability to mining activities may be appropriate. If no such law exists, a more robust provision should be included in
the Mining Code to define what constitutes an archaeological object and the steps that must be taken by the operator if such an object is discovered during


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                 531 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

mining activities.
38.3. Example 1:                                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                Drawn from DRC’s mining law (2002), this provision requires notification of
(1) Declaration of Archaeological Indications: The holder of a mineral right must          the appropriate local agency regarding the discovery of cultural resources, and
inform the local administrative authority and the [Regulating Authority in charge of       requires that the objects be kept safe for preservation. This obligation should
Culture, Arts and Museums], of the discovery of archaeological indications if the          apply to all types of licenses.
exploration or mining/exploitation works reveal the existence thereof.

(2) Discovery of Elements of the National Cultural Heritage: The holder is prohibited
from moving the objects which are contained in the national cultural heritage list, be
they movables or other items. In this case, the license holder must inform the local
administrative authority and [Regulating Authority in charge of Culture, Arts and
Museums] of this fact in writing, and without delay. The holder must remove, secure
and keep these elements of [national cultural heritage] safe, as applicable, at the cost
and on behalf of [Country] if the local administrative authority and [Regulating
Authority in charge of Culture, Arts and Museums] concerned do not remove them
within a period of sixty days following notification of the discovery.

38.3. Example 2:                                                                           Annotation

Article [_]
                                                                                           Drawn from Mozambique’s mining law (2014), this provision requires
(1) The holder of mineral rights should, if it is the case, adopt the necessary measures
                                                                                           authorization to remove any objects discovered during the course of mining
     in order to preserve geosites, geologic heritage and archaeological finds.
                                                                                           activities. This language could be strengthened and clarified to state the
                                                                                           processes and measures that should be adopted to preserve archaeological finds;
(2) The mineral rights holder must request an authorization from the competent             for example, maintaining a certain distance between mining activities and
    [Regulating Authority] for the removal of geosites, geologic heritage and              archaeological or historic objects.
    archaeological finds.
                                                                                            This language could also be linked to any other applicable cultural heritage
                                                                                           laws to assist in determining whether a found object is in fact an archaeological
                                                                                           find, and to clarify who makes that determination. This obligation should apply
                                                                                           to all types of licenses.

                                                              38. Environment
                                                 38.4 Management of Waste/Hazardous Materials

  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               532 | Page
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

This language should make provision to: (a) ensure operators have procedures in place to identify and account for waste/hazardous material, and (b) rectify
any problems associated with waste management. Legislation should make reference to the type of license that the specific obligations are attached to and
consider legacy issues or the potential environmental consequences after the company ceases operations.

Legislation should also outline the information that must be provided on this issue in an application to receive a mining license (for an example, see
Example 1 from Zambia).

A number of countries impose an overriding duty in relation to waste, including requiring a “chain of custody? to follow from the generation of waste to its
ultimate disposal. For example, the US under its Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) provides a number of detailed “cradle to grave?
requirements for the disposal of solid and hazardous waste, primarily through its waste management regulations codified in Title 40 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
38.4. Example 1:                                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                     Adapted from an exploration agreement with a private company from
(1) The mineral rights holder shall take preventive, corrective and/or restorative              Liberia, these provisions are designed to address the various means by which
measures to ensure that all streams and water bodies, all dry land surfaces, and the            hazardous/waste material can impact the environment.
atmosphere be protected from pollution, contamination or damage resulting from
operations hereunder […]; and that any existing pollution, contamination and damage of          Other provisions offered here are also inspired by Zambia’s mining
or to such water bodies, land surfaces, and atmosphere resulting from operations                legislation, providing detail concerning the information regarding the
hereunder be rectified; and that the terrain, in general, be restored to and left in a usable   treatment of waste/hazardous materials that must accompany any license
state for purposes which are economically or socially desirable.                                application.

(2) Every application for a mineral right shall include or be accompanied by:
(a) The applicant's environmental plan, including his proposals for the prevention of
pollution, the treatment of wastes, the protection and reclamation of land and water
resources, and for eliminating or minimizing the adverse effects on the environment of
mining operations.
(b) In the case of large scale mining licenses, the developer shall attach to the
environmental impact statement a map showing the location of the tailings, waste and
overburden dumps.
38.4. Example 2:                                                                                Annotation


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                533 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

Article [_] Hazardous/waste material and the land owner.                                       Adapted from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision are designed
No holder of a mineral right shall create unprotected pits, hazardous waste dumps or           to address the various means by which hazardous/waste material can impact
other hazards such as to be likely to endanger the stock, crops or any lawful activity of      the environment.
the owner or lawful occupier of the land covered by such mineral right.
                                                                                               These provisions acknowledge the importance of protecting the land owners’
Article [_] Hazardous/waste material and mineral rights                                        rights and the communities most likely to be affected by any operations.
Permission is granted only to stack or dump any mineral or waste product in a manner
approved by the [Regulating Authority] in consultation with the health and environmental       They also acknowledge the importance of having an evaluator of the mining
authorities.                                                                                   activities and prior approval of a remediation and implementation plan to
                                                                                               ensure that the operator will employ best management practices and comply
Article [_] The Mining Development and Remediation Plan                                        with applicable environmental standards. As in the U.S., the regulator would
The holder of mineral rights shall not commence mining activity prior to approval of a         then be afforded the right to review and approve of the plan to confirm that
Mining Development and Remediation Plan by the [Regulating Authority]. The Mining              the operator is following the applicable environmental standards.
Development and Remediation Plan must identify (a) the lands and minerals impacted by
the mining operation, (b) any waters, flora or fauna, habitats, communities or other           Consideration could be given to providing more guidance as to what
natural resource impacted by the proposed mining operation, (c) describe the practices,        constitutes “waste product? for example, in implementing regulations.
including system design and construction plans, and operation and maintenance plans,
proposed to reduce, control, mitigate, or eliminate the adverse environmental or human         (Note: this language is used in a number of the region’s countries’
impacts, (d) a remediation plan that includes a budget and funding for implementation,         legislation, including Uganda and Botswana).
and (e) any other requirement as specified by the [Regulating Authority].

Article [_] Community development agreement
(1) The holder of a mineral right is required to have and implement a community
development agreement with the primary host community if its approved mining
operation will or does exceed any of the following limits:
(a) In the case of underground mining operations, where annual combined run-of-mine
ore and waste production is more than one hundred thousand tons per year (waste
material not exiting mine mouth to be excluded);
(b) In the case of open-cast mining operations extracting minerals from primarily non-
alluvial deposits, where annual combined run-of-mine ore, rock, waste and overburden
production is more than two hundred and fifty thousand tons per year. (2) Any approvals
in this context shall be given by the [Regulating Authority] who will be responsible for the
implementation of this [Act][Code][Law] and shall be appointed by the [Administrative
Reviewer] responsible for natural resources. The [Administrative Reviewer] is the



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               534 | Page
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

[Secretary of the Minerals Advisory Board)].

                                                                         38. Environment
                                                                        38.5 Conservation

This topic typically addresses general provisions regarding the protection of biodiversity, including animals, plants, and their habitat(s), through general
prohibitions and/or regulation and permitting of any action that affects biodiversity. These provisions are particularly important when the activity at issue –
like mining – has the potential to directly and indirectly make significant short- and long-term changes to the physical environment.
The government should consider specific national laws, as well as obligations under international and regional legal instruments, with respect to this topic.
38.5. Example 1:                                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                   Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision demonstrates a
(1)    Despite   other   legislation,   no    person      may      conduct     commercial     relatively straightforward way to draft a biodiversity conservation provision
prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or mining activities:                                 within a mining law. There are two general components: (1) a general
                                                                                              prohibition of an activity within a specified area (designated as a nature
(a) In a special nature reserve or nature reserve;
                                                                                              reserve, for example); and (2) an exception from the prohibition provided
(b) In a protected environment without the written permission of the [Regulating              that specific regulations, procedures, etc. are followed. The first component
Authority] and [the Cabinet member responsible for minerals and energy affairs]; or           ensures that unregulated destruction or harm to biodiversity is generally
                                                                                              illegal, thereby providing presumptive protection for the environment, and
(c) In a protected area referred to in [relevant section].                                    the second component allows for active government oversight over mining
(2) The [Regulating Authority], after consultation with the [Cabinet member responsible       activities. This type of provision also requires the government to evaluate
                                                                                              what areas require protection, to what degree, and what factors must be
for mineral and energy affairs], must review all mining activities which were lawfully
                                                                                              considered.
conducted in areas indicated in subsection (1)(a), (b) and (c) immediately before this
section took effect.
                                                                                              It is also important to specify and enforce penalties for violations of these
(3) The [Regulating Authority], after consultation with the [Cabinet member responsible       provisions.
for mineral and energy affairs], may, in relation to the activities contemplated in
subsection (2), as well as in relation to mining activities conducted in areas contemplated
in that subsection which were declared as such after the commencement of this section,
prescribe conditions under which those activities may continue in order to reduce or
eliminate the impact of those activities on the environment or for the environmental
protection of the area concerned.




  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               535 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(4) When applying this section, the [Regulating Authority] must take into account the
interests of local communities and the environmental principles.
38.5. Example 2:                                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                 Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this provision is another r elatively
(1) No person shall at any time hunt, capture or destroy any of the species legally         straightforward way to protect biodiversity and wildlife, either within a
protected by the government.                                                                mining law or as a separate law or regulation. This approach focuses on a
                                                                                            blanket prohibition of specific species or specified subgroups within species,
(2) No person shall at any time, hunt or destroy:                                           as opposed to specifying protection of all species within a geographical area.
                                                                                            This approach can be used either in combination with or in lieu of Option 2
         (a) Young animals;                                                                 above.
         (b) Animals accompanied by their young;
                                                                                            Similarly, language providing for non-prohibited harm or destruction of
         (c) Any of the species protected by the government.                                specific wildlife in Option 2 above could be incorporated with this Option 3.
                                                                                            For example, the regulating authority could provide for some level of non-
(3) Any person who contravenes any provision of the aforementioned regulation] shall be     prohibited harm or destruction of specific wildlife or habitat to occur
guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding [amount] or   provided that the mining proponent obtains a permit and provides
to imprisonment not exceeding [time period] or both.                                        compensatory mitigation after review of the activity’s potential impact on
                                                                                            such wildlife.

                                                                     38. Environment
                                                               38.6 Environmental Accidents

General operational safety requirements, training, labour standards, and geographic limits on where mining (and other industrial activities) may be
conducted can be included in a mining code, or be addressed in separate laws or regulations and then referenced in the mining code as a source of
additional requirements.
Further, measures can and should be developed that seek to address environmental accidents once they have occurred. This would include not only
remediation activities (discussed further as part of Section 7 of this document), but also the conduct of root cause analyses to evaluate what went wrong so
that steps can be taken to minimize the risk of a similar environmental accident happening again.
38.6. Example 1:                                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                 Drawn from Nigeria’s mining law (2007), this provision imposes general


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              536 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(1) The holder of a mining right shall:                                                       safety requirements upon mine operations, which, as discussed above, help to
                                                                                              reduce the risk of environmental accidents. These types of requirements can
(a) Conduct prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration, or mining/exploitation activities in
                                                                                              be imposed on different types of mineral rights holders.
a safe, skilful, efficient and workmanlike manner; and

(b) Conduct prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration, or mining/exploitation activities in     Provisions like those in paragraph (2) impose obligations on license holders
an environmentally and socially responsible manner.                                           to ensure that qualified persons are overseeing mine operations.
                                                                                               Because environmental accidents are unfortunately inevitable given the
Article [_] Technical supervision of mining under a Mining Lease
                                                                                              nature of the operations and human error, it is important to consider and
(1) A mineral right shall not be granted by the [Regulating Authority] to any company
                                                                                              evaluate the amount of risk assumed by governments and the communities in
unless the company has employed a person who possesses adequate professional
                                                                                              close proximity to the operations. The risk of harm to the environment and
qualification and experience in mining and the [Regulating Authority] is satisfied that the
                                                                                              human health are reduced when operations are located away from sensitive
company shall, during the currency of the lease, have such qualified person in its
                                                                                              locations (e.g. lands of cultural significance, population centres, and
employment.
                                                                                              environmentally-sensitive areas). Therefore, provisions that explicitly
(2) Where a mineral right has been granted, the lease shall remain in force during such       exclude mining operations from certain “closed? areas that, if involved in an
time only as the lessee employs a person who possesses adequate mining experience and         accident, would experience significant impacts (i.e., oil pipelines, public
qualification in mining, to supervise personally the mining operations being undertaken       buildings, reservoirs, etc.) may be warranted.
by the company during the period of the lease.                                                The remaining provisions pertain to what happens once an environmental
(3) Where a person with adequate mining qualification and experience in mining is not         accident occurs. As a general matter, accidents should first be reported to the
                                                                                              relevant officials and then investigated. The nature of the accident, based on
available to supervise the mining operations being undertaken under a lease, the
                                                                                              the potential environmental impact, generally dictates what type of reporting
company shall cease operations until a suitably qualified person is available.
                                                                                              and investigations are conducted. The larger the accident, the more
Article [_] Lands excluded from minerals exploration and exploitation                         significant a role the government should play. For smaller accidents, the
(1) No mining right granted under this [Act][Code][Law] shall authorize                       responsibility for investigating the root cause of an accident could rest with
prospecting/reconnaissance, exploration or mining/exploitation of mineral resources on,       the mineral right holder as maintaining a large governmental role in
or in, or the erection of beacons on or the occupation of any land:                           investigating the cause of all accidents could be an administrative burden.
                                                                                              Note, however, that small accidents, if not addressed, could lead to larger
(a) Within [X] meters of an oil pipeline license area; and                                    accidents in the future. Therefore, in cases where smaller accidents are
(b) Occupied by any town, village, market, burial ground or cemetery, ancestral, sacred       investigated by the mineral right holder, the reports should still be filed with
or archaeological site, appropriated for a railway or situated within fifty meters of a       the regulating entity. It is important that these matters are also addressed,
railway, or which is the site of, or within fifty meters of, any Government or public         even if in a manner different than larger environmental accidents.
building, reservoir, dam or connection with the mining operations conducted under its         To the extent that the government is involved in investigating an accident, it
lease, temporary title or license granted under this [Act][Code][Law] involving loss of       is not necessary for that investigative body to have powers similar to that of
life or serious injury to a person or significant impacts to the public road.                 judges. However, the investigative body should (1) be neutral and
                                                                                              independent, and (2) have the authority to make recommendations either to
(2) No reconnaissance/prospecting activity shall be carried out and no mining right shall     the government or to the mineral right holder directly. These provisions


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 537 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

be granted under this [Act][Code][Law] over any area that is designated as closed to         should be used in conjunction with any established enforcement provisions.
mining operations.
                                                                                             Officials should ensure that the scope of accidents that are addressed include
                                                                                             not only human health injuries, but also environmental impacts (e.g. soil and
Article [_] Report of accident                                                               groundwater contamination).
(1) The mining right holder shall, if an accident occurs in any mine or in environment,
report the accident immediately, with full particulars of the accident;
(a)To the nearest police station; or
(b) To the office of the [State Regulating Authority] in which the accident occurred.
(2) The place where the accident occurred shall be left undisturbed, and no person shall
interfere with the surface working or any part in which or on which the accident has
occurred until the place or anything at the place, has been visited or examined by an
[Inspector or quarry officer].
Article [_] Panel of inquiry
(1) If an accident occurs in a mine, the [Regulating Authority] shall set up an
independent panel consisting of not less than [X] members to inquire into the cause of the
accident.
(2) The panel of inquiry shall determine the cause of the accident including:
(a) Whether the holder or its agent is guilty of negligence or took all reasonable and
proper precautions to prevent the accident;
(b) Whether any person was killed or injured as a result of the accident or whether any
significant environmental impacts were caused by the accident; and
(c)How future accidents might be prevented.
 (3) For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law], the
panel appointed by the [Regulating Authority] to conduct the inquiry shall have the
power to:
(a) Authorize any person, where necessary, to have access to the mining operation or any
surface area and remove anything from the place where the accident occurred and take
such other measures as may be necessary for the conduct of the inquiry;



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               538 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(b) Summon witnesses, require witnesses to give evidence on oath or produce any report,
book or other document for the purpose of any examination and payment of expenses of
witnesses; and
(c) Do or direct to be done such other things as the panel may deem necessary in order to
investigate the accident.
(4) The panel holding an inquiry under this [section] shall have the powers of a judge
under the [relevant judicial review Act].
(5) A person summoned to attend or to produce any report, book or document under
subsection (1) of this section who refuses or neglects to do so, or refuses to answer any
question put to him by or with the concurrence of the panel holding the inquiry, commits
an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine.
Article [_] Inquiry by court

(1) Where in the opinion of a panel conducting an inquiry, the accident was not due to
any of the causes mentioned in that section he may recommend that the report be referred
to a [Judicial Reviewer] who shall hold an inquiry into the cause of the accident.
(2) The [Judicial Reviewer] shall within fourteen days of the determination of the inquiry,
send a copy of his findings to the [Regulating Authority] and, if so requested, a copy of
the record of the proceedings.
38.6. Example 2:                                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                   Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this provision imposes general
(1) A mineral right holder shall:                                                             safety requirements for mine operations, which, as discussed above, helps
(a) Backfill or otherwise make safe any excavation made during the course of the              reduce the risk of environmental accidents.
exploration operations; and                                                                   Zambia’s legislation provides an alternative approach for how governments
(b)Make safe any borehole in the manner directed.                                             can impose requirements on license holders to ensure safe operations to
                                                                                              minimize the risk of environmental accidents. Whereas Nigeria’s legislation
(2) A mineral right holder shall:                                                             requires the employment of a person with sufficient technical expertise to
                                                                                              oversee operations, Zambia’s legislation requires mineral right holders to
(a) Develop the mining area, and carry on mining operations, with due diligence and in
                                                                                              reach out to nearby communities to ensure that they understand the risks of
compliance with the program of mining operations and the environmental management             mining activities and to develop mechanisms to prepare for and to limit the



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              539 | Page
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

plan; and                                                                                       adverse impacts of accidents.
(b) Take all reasonable measures on or under the surface to mine the mineral to which           Often mineral right holders must develop the mineral assets within a certain
the license relates.                                                                            time period. This ensures that governments and landowners ultimately are
                                                                                                paid any royalty payments that might be due to them. However, it is prudent
(3) Application for a mineral right shall include:                                              to include provisions to allow mineral right holders to legally stop production
(a) In respect of radioactive minerals, the application shall contain the following             in certain instances to minimize the risk of a significant environmental
                                                                                                accident.
additional information:
 (i) A program to educate persons living in the vicinity of the mine or processing facilities
of the general nature and characteristics of anticipated effects on the environment, health
and safety of persons;
  (ii) Programs to assist authorities outside the mining area in planning and preparing to
limit the adverse effects of an accidental release of radioactive substances; and
 (iii) In relation to security, the proposed measures during storage and transportation of
any radioactive mineral products and measures to alert the holder to acts of sabotage at
the mine or processing facility.
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this section, a mineral right holder may suspend or
curtail production for any of the following reasons:
(a) An unsafe working environment;
(b) Uncontrolled pollution of the area resulting from the mining operations.
(4) The [Regulating Authority] shall, where the [Minster] receives notice under
subsection (3) or becomes aware of any suspension or curtailment of production, cause
the matter to be investigated.

                                                                  38. Environment
                                                      38.7 Remediation of Environmental Damage

These types of provisions seek to address the clean-up of pollutants discharged into various media (notably, groundwater and soil) to prevent or otherwise
minimize adverse impacts to the environment. Similar to reclamation provisions (provided below), remediation provisions often set up liability regimes,
establish clean-up standards, and impose financial assurance obligations on the mining/exploitation license holder.


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  540 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

The details of such a framework do not have to be contained within a mining code, but such a framework should be established.
38.7. Example 1:                                                                             Annotation

Article [_]
                                                                                             Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision, similar to
(1) The mining/exploitation right holder is responsible for any environmental damage,
                                                                                             what has been done, for example, in the U.S., sets up a mechanism for the
pollution or ecological degradation as a result of his or her reconnaissance/prospecting,
                                                                                             government to conduct the remediation activities and then recover its costs
exploration or mining operations and which may occur inside and outside the boundaries
                                                                                             related to such activities. In conjunction with this, some countries have also
of the area to which such right, permit or permission relates.
                                                                                             established a clean-up fund, whereby license holders contribute some amount
                                                                                             each year to a fund that can then be used to clean-up e.g. abandoned sites or
(2) An applicant who prepares an environmental management program or an                      sites contaminated by a license holder who is unable to pay for the clean-up.
environmental management plan must describe the manner in which he or she intends to:        This allows governments to address contamination right away, rather than
(a) Modify, remedy, control or stop any action, activity or process which causes pollution   wait for a legal process to conclude.
or environmental degradation; and

(b) Contain or remedy the cause of pollution or degradation and migration of pollutants.

(3) Power to recover costs in event of urgent remedial measures.

(a) If any prospecting, reconnaissance, exploration or production operations cause or
results in ecological degradation, pollution or environmental damage which may be
harmful to the health or well-being of anyone and requires urgent remedial measures, the
[Regulating Authority] may direct the holder of the relevant right, permit or permission
to:

 (i) Investigate, evaluate, assess and report on the impact of any pollution or ecological
degradation;

 (ii) Take such measures as may be specified in such directive; and

 (iii) Complete such measures before a date specified in the directive.

(4) If the holder fails to comply with the directive, the [Regulating Authority] may take
such measures as may be necessary to protect the health and well-being of any affected
person or to remedy ecological degradation and to stop pollution of the environment.

(5) Before the [Regulating Authority] implements any measure, he or she must afford the



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               541 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

holder an opportunity to undertake such measures itself.

(6) In order to implement the measures contemplated in paragraph (3)(a), the
[Regulating Authority] may by way of an ex parte application apply to a [Judicial
Reviewer] for an order to seize and sell such property of the holder as may be necessary
to cover the expenses of implementing such measures.

(7) In addition to the application in terms of paragraph (6), the [Regulating Authority]
may use funds appropriated for that purpose by [Parliament] to fully implement such
measures.

(8) The [Regulating Authority] may recover an amount equal to the funds necessary to
fully implement the measures from the holder concerned.
38.7. Example 2:                                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                 Drawn from Zambia’s mining law (2008), this provision lays out a common
(1) An application for a mining activity license made under [relevant section] shall        liability scheme for addressing contamination, liability that is also joint and
include an environmental management plan including the applicant’s proposals for            several. In other words, if multiple parties hold a license (or otherwise own
eliminating or minimizing the adverse effects on the environment of prospecting,            and/or operate a site), all parties, regardless of relative responsibility for the
reconnaissance, exploration or production activities.                                       contamination, are liable for the entire clean-up cost vis-a-vis the government
                                                                                            and third-parties. This helps to ensure that those responsible for the
(2) A mineral rights holder shall be strictly liable for any harm or damage caused by       contamination bear the financial burden of the harm caused.
prospecting, reconnaissance, exploration, production activities or mineral processing       The extent of the liability (see paragraph (6) can be tailored to accommodate
operations and shall compensate any person to whom the harm or damage is caused.            each country’s unique circumstances.
(3) Liability shall attach to the person who directly contributes to the act or omission
which results in the harm or damage.

(4) Where there is more than one person responsible for the harm or damage, the liability
shall be joint and several.

(5) Where any harm or damage is caused to the environment or biological diversity,
compensation shall include the cost of reinstatement, rehabilitation or clean-up measures
which are incurred and where applicable, the costs of preventative measures.

(6) Liability shall also extend to:



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                542 | Page
                                                      AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(a) Any harm or damage caused directly or indirectly by the prospecting, reconnaissance,
exploration, production activities or mineral processing operations to the economy or
social cultural conditions;

(b) Any negative impact on the livelihood or indigenous knowledge systems or
technologies of any community;

(c) Any disruption or damage to any production or agricultural system;

(d) Any reduction in yields of the local community;

(e) Any air, water or soil contamination or damage to biological diversity;

(f) Any damage to the economy of an area or community; or

(g) Any other consequential disorder.

                                                                         38. Environment
                                                                         38.8 Reclamation

As a principle, mine closure and rehabilitation are the responsibility of the mining company, in accordance with the polluter pays principle.
These provisions relate to the reclamation obligations of the mineral rights holder to restore land disturbed by mining operations upon closure or cessation
of mining operations. Generally, the purpose of reclamation is to improve the post-closure site to a certain designated standard in order to prevent or repair
environmental damage at the end of a mine’s life.
A key element of this topic is the planning for closure. A closure plan, with sufficient details, should be part of the permitting process, as with ESIAs.
Indeed, it is much better to plan for closure from the outset. If the closure plan is hastily developed in the last years of a mine’s life, the chances for success
are dramatically reduced. It is also important to ensure progressive rehabilitation during the life of the mine. Mining laws and regulations should therefore
clarify the timing, approval process, and periodic review of closure plans; adapt closure obligations to capacities and of different segments of mining
industry (large scale, small scale, artisanal); establish monitoring, reporting and enforcement mechanisms; and require financial guarantees.
Mining laws may refer to internationally accepted guidelines and principles, such as the International Financial Corporation (IFC) standards. As the
closure of a mine may have huge economic and social impact, closure plans are not only about environment clean-up and rehabilitation. Specifically, on
economic and social impacts, mining laws, together with specifics closure plans, should therefore clearly assign responsibilities to mining companies and



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                        543 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

to the government. Ensuring coherence between closure plans and national or local development plans is one factor for success.
To ensure that costs associated with future reclamation will be guaranteed in the event the mining company is unable to implement the requirements,
government agencies generally require mineral rights holders to provide sufficient financial assurance at the beginning of the mining operation. The need
for financial guarantees for mine closure and rehabilitation is not questionable today. Such assurance is typically evaluated on an annual basis to confirm
the financial adequacy of the instrument compared to the mine plan. It is important to both governments and mining companies that these financial
assurance amounts are realistic and appropriate, with a clear understanding of the process of future adjustment of assurance amounts. The challenge is to
design the best form of guarantee that is efficient from both the government’s and the companies’ perspective, while ensuring the implementation of the
closure plan. In this regard, the form of the guarantee, its management and the condition of access to funds are as important as the amount of the guarantee.
This topic should be addressed to facilitate the potential future re-use of mined lands and to provide governments and communities with certainty that
funds will be available for closure and reclamation in the event the mining operator is unable to perform its reclamation requirements.
38.8. Example 1:                                                                              Annotation

Article [_] Issuing of a Closure Certificate                                                  Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision highlights that
(1) The mineral right holder remains responsible for any environmental liability,             closure standards should be practical for assessing the adequacy of
pollution or ecological degradation, and the management thereof, until the relevant           reclamation efforts. It is often unrealistic or undesirable to return the land to
government agency has issued a closure certificate to the holder.                             its pre-disturbance condition (i.e., backfilling an open mine pit).
(2) Within [180 days] of ceasing the mining operations (including lapsing, abandonment,
cancellation, relinquishment of any portion of the licensed land or completion of a
prescribed closing plan), the mineral right holder must apply for a closure certificate and
file a closure plan for governmental approval. The mineral right holder must comply
with all aspects of environmental authorization issued in relation to closure.

Article [_] Reclamation and Restoration
Pursuant to the license issued with respect to the mineral right, the mineral right holder
shall as far as reasonably practicable reclaim and restore, where applicable, the land
disturbed, excavated, explore, mine or covered with tailings arising from its mining
operations to its natural state or in accordance with best practices.

Article [_] Financial Provision for Reclamation and Remediation of Environmental
Damage
(1) The mineral right holder must furnish during all stages of the project sufficient
financial assurances for reclamation which will be reassessed by [Regulating
Authorities] on an annual basis. The financial provision may be made by bank guarantee,
letter of credit or a trust deed.


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  544 | Page
                                                       AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(2) Once required reclamation and remediation of environmental damage is completed in
accordance with the closure plan and related environmental authorizations, the mineral
right holder’s financial assurance obligations shall be considered terminated.

(3) If, at the time of the cessation of mining operations, the [Regulating Authorities] is not
satisfied with the financial assurance provided by the mineral right holder or the
reclamation work performed in connection with environmental impacts assessed at the
time of closure, it may appoint an independent third party to rehabilitate the closed
mining or prospecting operation to address any latent or residual environmental impacts.
38.8. Example 2:                                                                                 Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                      Inspired by Uganda’s mining law (2003), this provision offers a more
(1) The holder of a mining/exploitation right shall carry out rehabilitation and                 detailed description of the requirements of the environmental restoration plan
reclamation of mined out areas to the satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority].                as provided in the Act (as drafted here based on Uga nda’s Mining Code) or
                                                                                                 any implementing regulations in order to provide certainty to operators on
(2) There shall be included in an exploration license or a mining lease granted under this
                                                                                                 the accepted standards of reclamation and the amount of financial assurance
Act, a condition that the holder shall submit an environmental restoration plan of the           before commitment to a major mining project.
exploration or mining area that may be damaged or adversely affected by his or her
exploration or mining operations.                                                                Financial assurance requirements can vary depending on the specific
                                                                                                 country’s preferences and can be adjusted later as circumstances require.
(3) The environmental restoration plan shall include the following:                              Performance bonds are one common type of financial assurance, as provided
                                                                                                 here. Other types could include self-insurance, letters of credit, a cash trust
(a) An identification of the exploration or mining area concerned, its current uses and          fund, insurance or a trust set up on behalf of the government to which
productivity prior to exploration or mining operations.                                          mining/exploitation holders must contribute on an annual basis (as adopted
                                                                                                 by Nigeria in its 2007 Minerals and Mining Act).
(b) A detailed time table of the accomplishment of each major step to be carried out
under the restoration plan which may include:

 (i) The reinstatement, levelling, re-vegetation, reforesting and contouring of the affected
land;

 (ii) The filling in, sealing, or fencing off of excavations, shafts and tunnels, or

 (iii) Any other method that may be prescribed.

(c)The use to which the land is proposed to be put following restoration, including a
statement of the utility and capacity of the restored land to support a variety of alternative


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                   545 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

uses.

(4) In making a decision whether to accept the environmental restoration plan, the
[Regulating Authority] shall take into account:

(a) The steps taken by the mining/exploitation holder to comply with applicable
environmental protection standards, existing land use policies and plans and any
applicable health and safety standards; and

(b) The consideration that has been given in developing the environmental restoration
plan in a manner consistent with local physical, environmental and climatological
conditions and best practices.

Article [_] Environmental performance bond

(a) The [Regulating Authority] may require the mineral right holder to execute an
environmental performance bond to ensure the fulfilment of all the environmental
requirements under this [Act][Code][Law].

(b) The amount of such bond shall depend on the environmental restoration plan and
shall reflect the probable difficulty of restoration, taking into consideration such factors
as topography, geology of the site, hydrology and re-vegetation potential.

(c) Liability under the bond shall be for the duration of the mining and restoration
operations.

                                                                     38. Environment
                                                          38.9 Enforcement and Non Compliance
In addition to setting out the environmental obligations of mineral rights holders, a mining law should provide for a specific mechanism by which the
government may oversee mining operations and compel mineral rights holders to follow through on those obligations and correct environmental problems
through enforcement actions.

Many countries provide the government with a general authority to enforce the violation of any requirement, which may include environmental protection
requirements. The effect of noncompliance can range from loss of the mineral right to civil liability to imprisonment of the mineral rights holder.



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                             546 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

The penalties should be commensurate with the damage caused by taking into account the various types of applicable sanctions (administrative, criminal,
civil), as well as affirmative environmental obligations. They should also be significantly dissuasive enough to avoid paying penalties being less costly
than remediation of damage.
Companies should be encouraged to establish internal or community-level grievance mechanisms to facilitate the compliance with environmental
regulations.
Existing procedural rules should be applied for discovery of non-compliance or where rules do not exist, government should create general rules for such
cases.
38.9. Example 1:                                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision empowers the
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may cancel or suspend any reconnaissance/prospecting        regulating authority to terminate or suspend the mineral right in the event that
right, exploration right, mining right or retention permit if the holder thereof:          the rights holder fails to comply with any requirement under the mining law,
                                                                                           including environmental obligations. The rights holder may be directed to
(a) Is conducting any reconnaissance/prospecting, exploration, or mining operation in
                                                                                           take certain corrective actions to remedy the environmental issues. The rights
contravention of this [Act][Code][Law];                                                    holder is also afforded the opportunity to present its case to the regulator as
(b) Breaches any material term or condition of such right, permit or permission;           to why the right should not be ended.

(c) Is contravening the approved environmental management program; or                      This language is oriented toward motivating the rights holder to perform the
                                                                                           work itself, rather than having the government assume the responsibility. The
(d) Has submitted inaccurate, incorrect or misleading information in connection with any   threat of rescinding the right is used to encourage the rights holder to comply
matter required to be submitted under this [Act][Code][Law].                               with the government’s directions.
(2) Before acting under subsection (1), the [Regulating Authority] must:

(a) Give written notice to the holder indicating the intention to suspend or cancel the
right;

(b) Set out the reasons why he or she is considering suspending or cancelling the right;

(c) Afford the holder a reasonable opportunity to show why the right, permit or
permission should not be suspended or cancelled; and

(d) Notify the mortgagor, if any, of the reconnaissance/prospecting right, exploration
right or mining right concerned of his or her intention to suspend or cancel the right.




  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                              547 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(3) The [Regulating Authority] must direct the holder to take specified measures to
remedy any contravention, breach or failure.

(4) If the holder does not comply with the direction given under subsection (3), the
[Regulating Authority] may act under subsection (5) against the holder after having:

(a) Given the holder a reasonable opportunity to make representations; and

(b) Considered any such representations.

(5) The [Regulating Authority] may by written notice to the holder lift a suspension if the
holder:

(a) Complies with a directive contemplated in subsection (3); or

(b) Furnishes compelling reasons for the lifting of the suspension.
38.9. Example 2:                                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                   Drawn from Namibia’s mining law (1992), this provision, like South Africa’s
(1) The [Regulating Authority] may, with due regard to good reconnaissance/prospecting        in Example 1 above, permits the government to issue directions to rights
practices, good exploration practices or good mining practices by notice in writing           holders for environmental protection purposes. The government has
addressed and delivered to the holder of a mineral license, give directions to such holder    expansive powers to order corrective action and, if the rights holder fails to
in relation to -                                                                              comply, recover the costs associated with the government performing the
                                                                                              corrective work itself. Noncompliance is subject to civil and criminal
(a) The carrying on of reconnaissance/prospecting operations, exploration operations
                                                                                              penalties.
and mining operations, including the erection or construction of any accessory works;
(b) The protection of the environment;                                                        Whereas the primary threat to the rights holder in Example 1 is the loss of the
                                                                                              mineral right, Example 2 directly raises the prospect of criminal penalties,
(c) The conservation of any natural resources, including mineral resources, and the           including jail time, and the monetary costs of clean-up.
prevention of the waste of such resources;
(d) The construction, erection, maintenance, operation or use of accessory works;
(e) The removal of accessory works or other goods erected, constructed or brought on
land in connection with the prospecting for, the exploration for, or mining or conveyance
of, any mineral or group of minerals which is not used or intended to be used in
connection with such prospecting, mining or conveyance;



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                548 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(f) The discovery of any mineral or group of minerals;
(g) The taking, preservation and furnishing to the [Regulating Authority] of cores,
cuttings or samples of any mineral or group of minerals obtained or which may be
obtained in the course of reconnaissance/prospecting operations, exploration operations
and mining operations;
(h) The submission to the [Regulating Authority] of reports, returns and other
information, and the [Regulating Authority] may, if such holder fails to comply, within
such period as may be specified in such notice or such further period as the [Regulating
Authority] may on good cause shown allow in writing, with such directions to the
satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority], cause such steps to be taken as may be
necessary to comply with such directions, and may recover from such holder in a
competent court the costs incurred in connection with the taking of such steps.
(2) Any holder of a mineral license who contravenes or fails to comply with a notice
issued under subsection (1) shall be guilty of an offence and on conviction be liable to a
fine not exceeding [fine amount] or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding [12
months] or to both such fine and such imprisonment.

                                                               38. Environment
                                        38.10 General Prohibition Against Wasteful Mining/Treatment
A rights holder may choose to employ methods for extracting minerals that could be considered wasteful. For example, certain mining practices involve
the use of enormous amounts of water for excavation, yet yield a relatively small amount of extracted minerals and no reuse of the water.

To protect against these practices, most countries include a general prohibition against wasteful mining or treatment. The regulating authority is permitted
to direct rights holders to refrain from wasteful practices and terminate the mining license for noncompliance. The key distinction among different
countries’ laws tends to be the level of discretion accorded to the government.
38.10. Example 1:                                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                  Inspired by Zambia’s mining law (2008), this provision provides the
(1) Where the [Regulating Authority] considers that a holder of a mineral right is using     government with broad discretion to determine what mining practices are
wasteful mining practices, the [Admin Reviewer] shall:                                       precluded due to wastefulness. The regulator must provide the specific
                                                                                             reasons why the practice is wasteful, but ultimately has a great deal of power


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                               549 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

                                                                                               in setting boundaries for wasteful and useful practices.
(a) Give notice to the holder specifying the particulars of the wasteful mining practices;
(b) Request the holder to cease the wasteful mining practices and remedy any damage            Because of the expansive powers provided to the regulator, as well as
caused by the practices; and                                                                   jeopardy of the entire license if the rights holder fails to comply, this
                                                                                               language may discourage investment in mining projects as too risky. In many
(c)Require the holder to reply in writing showing cause, within a time specified by the        instances, it may not be possible for the rights holder to remedy all damage
notice, why the holder's license should not be revoked.                                        that may have been caused by a practice later deemed wasteful.
(2) The [Regulating Authority] shall, where a holder fails, within the time specified in the
notice, to cease using the wasteful mining practices or to remedy any damage caused by
the wasteful mining practice, cancel the license.
38.10. Example 2:                                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                    Drawn from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision, compared to
(1) Subject to [relevant section]), the [Regulating Authority] may direct the holder of a      Example 1 above, places greater restraint on the regulator’s ability to
mineral right to take corrective measures if it establishes that the minerals are not being    unilaterally determine that a practice is wasteful and must be corrected.
mined optimally in accordance with the mining work program or that a continuation of
such practice will detrimentally affect the promotion of employment and social and             This is because the regulating authority must consider the rights holder’s
economic welfare of all [Country] citizens.                                                    financial conditions and the state of the market, and seek the concurrence of
                                                                                               the regulating authority (or equivalent high-level official).
(2) Before making the recommendation, the [Regulating Authority] must consider
whether the technical and financial resources of the holder of the mineral right in            Rights holders are therefore more insulated from capricious decisions and
question and the prevailing market conditions justify such recommendation.                     accordingly have a greater incentive to commit more resources to the mining
(a) If the [Regulating Authority] agrees with the recommendation, he or she must, within       operation.
[30 days] from date of receipt of the recommendation of the [Regulating Authority], in
writing notify the holder that he or she must take such corrective measures as may be set
out in the notice and must remedy the position within the period mentioned in the notice.
(b) The [Regulating Authority] must afford the holder the opportunity to make
representations in relation to the [Regulating Authority]'s findings within [60 days] from
the date of the notice and must point out that non-compliance with the notice might result
in suspension or cancellation of the mineral right.
(3) The [Regulating Authority] may, on recommendation, suspend or cancel a mineral
right if:



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                  550 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(a) The holder of that mineral right fails to comply with a notice contemplated in
subsection (1); or
(b) Having regard to any representations by the holder, the [Regulating Authority] is
convinced that any act or omission by the holder justifies the suspension or cancellation
of the right.
(4) The [Regulating Authority] may, on recommendation, lift the suspension of a mineral
right if the holder in question:
(a) Complies with the notice contemplated in subsection (1); or
(b) Furnishes compelling reasons for the lifting of the suspension.

                                                                  39. Other Natural Resources
Mining activities typically impact other natural resources both within and around the areas surrounding mining sites. In addition to general environmental
concerns, a mining law may also address resources including (but not limited to): land, water, forestry and timber. These provisions typically will govern
the interaction between mining title holders and land owners (individual and/or communal); when and to what extent both land owners, community
members and mining title holders may use these resources (such as drawing from underground water reserves or logging); and whether the mining title
holder needs additional licensing or approval from the regulating authority or other relevant government bodies in order to use any of these resources that
exist within the boundaries of the license.

                                                                  39. Other Natural Resources
                                                                           39.1 Land
“Land? in the mining law context typically refers to the surface of the land and includes the seabed beneath territorial wate rs, where applicable. While land
is often addressed in a separate act, it is important for a mining law both to reference the relevant legislation and to reiterate relevant rights, procedures and
protections that impact land in and around mining sites. Some considerations that should inform this section are:
     ? How land rights or ownership are organized within the country whether land is privately held, communally owned, publicly owned and managed
         at the central government or subnational government level
     ? How land is acquired for the project whether pursuant to free prior informed consent, consultation with communities or expropriation
     ? Compensation of landowners or users for loss of land or disturbance of use of land
     ? Relocation and resettlement issues and the human rights issues that can be triggered
     ? Coexistence and/or overlapping rights between mining projects and other types of users or uses


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                       551 | Page
                                                         AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                          PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

         ?    Resolution of disputes regarding these issues above.
         ?    The distinction between surface (land) and subsurface (minerals) rights;
         ?    The relationship between the landowner (or lawful occupier) and the mineral right holder (including compensation)
         ?    Procedures for acquisition of land subject to mining
         ?    Relocation and resettlement issues

     39.1. Example 1:                                                                              Annotation

     Article [_] Restrictions of rights of entry by holder of license or permit                    Inspired by Botswana’s mining law (1999), these provisions give preference
     (1) No person shall exercise any right conferred by a mineral license or permit upon any      to the interests of the owner of the land, while still providing some protection
     privately owned land -                                                                        to mineral license holders. The mineral license holder does not acquire
                                                                                                   ownership of the land. He/she has to negotiate entry to the land and agree
a)   (a) unless the person has given at least __ days’ notice of the intention to do so to the     with the landowner on compensation to be paid for disturbing the
     owner or lawful occupier thereof giving in such notice details of the area in which the       landowner’s rights.
     right is to be exercised and the date of expiry of the permit or license.

     (b) until such time as the person has:
       (i) entered into a written agreement with the owner or lawful occupier of such land
     containing terms and conditions relating to the payment of compensation contemplated in
     section 4), or
      (ii) the owner or lawful occupier of such land has in writing waved any right to such
     compensation; and
       (iii) has submitted a copy of such agreement or waiver to the [Regulating Authority].

     Article [_] Rights under license or permit to be exercised reasonably
     (1) Subject to the terms of any agreement with the owner or lawful occupier of the land,
     the rights conferred by a mineral license or permit shall be exercised reasonably and,
     except to the minimum extent necessary for the reasonable and proper conduct of the
     operations, shall not be exercised so as to prejudice the interest of any owner or occupier
     of the land over which those rights extend.

b) (2) No holder of a mineral license or permit shall create unprotected pits, hazardous
   waste dumps or other hazards likely to endanger the stock, crops or other lawful activity
   of the owner or lawful occupier of the land over which those rights extend.




       NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 552 | Page
                                                          AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                          PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(3) (3) A holder of a prospecting license shall, unless the [Regulating Authority] otherwise
     stipulates, within sixty days of the expiry or termination of the mineral license or permit,
     remove any camp, temporary buildings or machinery erected or installed and repair or
     otherwise make good any damage to the surface of the ground occasioned by the removal,
     in the manner specified by the [Regulating Authority].

    Article [_] Right of owner or lawful occupier to use and access land
    (1) The owner or lawful occupier of any land within the area of a mineral license or
    permit shall retain the right to graze stock upon or to cultivate the surface of such land
    insofar as such grazing or cultivation does not interfere with the proper use of such area
    for reconnaissance/prospecting, exploration, retention or mining purposes.

b) (2) In the case of a mining area or a retention area, the owner or lawful occupier of any
    land within such area shall not erect any building or structure thereon without the
    consent of the holder of the mining license or retention license, as the case may be, which
    consent shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided that where such consent is
    unreasonably withheld, the [Regulating Authority] may grant it.

    Article [_] Compensation for disturbance of rights, etc.
    (1) A holder of a mineral license or permit shall, on demand being made by the owner or
    lawful occupier of any land subject to the mineral right, promptly pay the owner, or
    occupier fair and reasonable compensation for any disturbance of the rights of the owner
    or occupier and for any damage done to the surface of the land by the operations and
    shall, on demand being made by the owner of any crops, trees, buildings or works
    damaged during the course of the operations, pay compensation for the damage.

b) (2) In assessing the compensation payable under subsection (a), account shall be taken of
    any improvement effected by the holder of the mineral right or by the holder's
    predecessor in title, the benefit of which has or will endure to the owner or lawful
    occupier thereof.

c) (3) The compensation payable for damage to the surface of any land shall be the extent to
    which the market value of the land (for which purpose it shall be deemed saleable) upon
    which the damage has occurred has been reduced by reason of such damage, but without
    taking into account any enhanced value due to the presence of minerals .




      NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                             553 | Page
                                                        AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                         PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

d) (4) No demand made in terms of this section shall entitle the owner or lawful occupier to
    prevent or hinder the exercise by the holder of rights under the mineral right pending the
    determination of compensation to be paid.

e) (5) Where a holder of a mineral right fails to pay compensation when demanded under the
    provisions of this section, or where the owner or lawful occupier of any land is
    dissatisfied with any compensation offered, the dispute shall be determined by
    arbitration.

f)   (6) A claim for compensation under the provisions of subsection (a) shall be made within
     a period of [ ] years from the date when such claim has accrued, failing which,
     notwithstanding the provisions of any other written law, such claim shall not be
     enforceable.

     39.1. Example 2:                                                                            Annotation

     Article [_]                                                                                 Inspired by Zambia’s mining law (2008), these provisions give preference to
     A holder of a prospecting license shall, unless the [Regulating Authority] otherwise        the interests of mineral right holders, while still providing protection to
     stipulates, remove, within sixty days of the expiry or termination of the exploration       landowners.
     license, any camp, temporary buildings or machinery erected or installed and repair or
     otherwise make good any damage to the surface of the ground occasioned by the removal,
     in the manner specified by the [Regulating Authority];

     Article [_]
     A small scale mining license confers on the holder exclusive rights to carry on mining
     operations in the mining area for minerals other than gemstones, and to do all such other
     acts and things as are necessary for or reasonably incidental to the carrying on of those
     operations.
     Article [_]
     (1) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a holder of a small-scale mining
     license may—

     (a) enter into or upon the mining area and take all reasonable measures on or under the
     surface for the purpose of the mining operations;

     (b) erect the necessary equipment, plant and buildings for the purposes of mining,



       NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                            554 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

transporting, dressing or treating the mineral recovered in the course of the mining
operations; and

(c) conduct exploration within the mining area for any mineral.

Article [_]
(1) A holder of a license or permit shall not exercise any right under this
[Act][Code][Law] or the license or permit without the written consent of the owner or
legal occupier thereof or the duly authorized agent—

(a) upon any land which is the site of or which is within one hundred and eighty meters of
any inhabited, occupied or temporarily uninhabited house or building;

(b) within forty-five meters of any land which has been cleared or ploughed or otherwise
prepared in good faith for growing of farm crops or upon which farm crops are growing;

(c) upon any land which is the site of or is within ninety meters of any cattle dip, tank,
dam or any private water as defined in the [Relevant Water Legislation]; or

(d) upon any land forming part of an aerodrome, other than an aerodrome referred to in
sub paragraph (iv) of paragraph (a): Provided that where any consent required under
this subsection is unreasonably withheld, the [Regulating Authority] may arrange for
arbitration of the matter in accordance with section one hundred and thirty-one;

Article [_]
Subject to the terms of any access agreement, the rights conferred by a license or permit
shall be exercised reasonably and, except to the minimum extent necessary for the
reasonable and proper conduct of the operations, shall not be exercised so as to prejudice
the interest of any owner or occupier of the land over which those rights extend.

Article [_]
Subject to the terms of any access agreement, the owner or occupier of any land within
the area of a license or permit shall retain the right to use and access water and to graze
stock upon or to cultivate the surface of the land in so far as such use, grazing or
cultivation does not interfere with the proper working in the area for mining, prospecting



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                           555 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

or other operations to be carried on under the license or permit, but shall not erect any
building or structure thereon without the consent of the holder of the license or permit.
Provided that where such consent is unreasonably withheld, the [Regulating Authority]
may grant it.

Article [_]
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a holder of a license or permit who requires the exclusive or
other use of the whole or any portion of the exploration or mining area for the purpose of
the license or permit may, in accordance with the laws relating to such acquisition,
acquire a lease thereof or other right to use the same upon such terms as may be agreed
between such holder and the owner or occupier of the land.

(2) Except with the consents of the appropriate authorities, the holder of a license or
permit shall not purchase or obtain a lease of or other rights over any land:

(a) dedicated as a place of burial;
(b) containing any ancient monument or national monument;
(c) which is the site of or is within ninety metres of any building or dam owned by the
State; or forming part of a Government aerodrome;
(d) occupied as a village;
(e) reserved for the purposes of any railway track or within one hundred metres of any
railway track;
(f) within the boundaries, or within sixty metres of the boundaries, of any city,
municipality or township;
(g) used as a forest nursery or plantation or as a timber depot, sawmill or other
installation for working a forest;
(h) declared to be a national forest or local forest;
(i) used as a street, road or highway;
(j) comprised in a National Park.

Article [_]
(1) A holder of a mineral right shall, on demand being made by the owner or lawful
occupier of any land subject to the mineral right, promptly pay the owner, or occupier
fair and reasonable compensation for any disturbance of the rights of the owner or
occupier and for any damage done to the surface of the land by the operations and shall,
on demand being made by the owner of any crops, trees, buildings or works damaged



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                            556 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

during the course of the operations, pay compensation for the damage.

(2) In assessing the compensation payable under subsection (1), account shall be taken of
any improvement effected by the holder of the mineral right or by the holder's
predecessor in title, the benefit of which has or will endure to the owner or lawful
occupier thereof.

(3) The compensation payable for damage to the surface of any land shall be the extent to
which the market value of the land (for which purpose it shall be deemed saleable) upon
which the damage has occurred has been reduced by reason of such damage, but without
taking into account any enhanced value due to the presence of minerals.

(4) No demand made in terms of this section shall entitle the owner or lawful occupier to
prevent or hinder the exercise by the holder of rights under the mineral right pending the
determination of compensation to be paid.

(5) Compensation shall not be payable under subsection (1) in respect of any indigenous
wood or timber taken—

(a) upon land that has been declared a local forest or a national forest under the
provisions of the [Relevant Forests Legislation]; or

(b) upon other land that has not been alienated by the [President] in accordance with the
[Relevant Land Legislation].

(6) Where a holder of a mineral right fails to pay compensation when demanded under
the provisions of this section, or where the owner or lawful occupier of any land is
dissatisfied with any compensation offered, the dispute shall be determined by
arbitration.

(7) A claim for compensation under the provisions of subsection (1) shall be made within
a period of three years from the date when such claim has accrued, failing which,
notwithstanding the provisions of any other written law, such claim shall not be
enforceable.




  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                          557 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

                                                                  39. Other Natural Resources
                                                                      39.2 Forestry/Timber
In order to adequately address forestry protection and illegal logging, it is essential for mining codes both to make reference to relevant forestry legislation
and address pertinent rights, protections, and licensing as it pertains to the mining sector. Where addressed in a mining code, the section may want to
highlight different forest authorities (which may be separate from the environmental authority) and the need to specify the applicable agencies for
coordination purposes. It should also ideally specify which timber rights exist as attached to the mining license and which may require further or separate
authorization from the relevant authority. In addition, some key issues that may be addressed under forestry include:
    - the necessary permits required (for clearing or use)
    - timber rights that attach to the mining license
    - use and sale of timber for other landowners/community around the mining site (this should be cross-referenced with the subtopic on land and
        coexistence between the mining project and third parties)

It is also worthwhile to consider, depending on country context, the need for a separate approval/licensing authority before activities related to logging or
clearing to commence. This may encourage transparency and standardization of rights related to forest activities across all mining sites.

39.2. Example 1:                                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                                    Drawn from Quebec’s mining law (2015), this provision provides how and in
(1) The holder of a mining right may, in order to construct buildings or perform any other     what ways a mining license holder may use timber rights. The provision also
operation required for mining activities, cut timber forming part of the domain of the         explicitly lays out the types of cutting that are outside the scope of a mining
[State] on the parcel of land that is subject to the right, in accordance with the rules set   license and require approval from the relevant authority managing forestry
forth in the [Relevant Forestry Legislation] and the regulations. However, the rules           rights. Finally, notwithstanding general timber rights assumed by license
referred to above do not apply to a person who effects line cutting not exceeding [x]          holders, the provision makes an exception where any part of the mining site
metre in width.                                                                                is deemed a protected ecosystem according to the relevant forestry
                                                                                               legislation.
(2) Similarly, except in the case of a strip of woodland established for the protection of
lakes, watercourses, riparian areas and wetlands by government regulation under section
[x] of the [Relevant Forestry Legislation], the rules apply neither to a person cutting
trenches or performing other excavations nor to a person carrying out drilling work,
provided the person has obtained prior authorization from the [Forest Regulating
Authority] and complies with the following conditions:

(a) the total area of the trenches or other excavations, added, as the case may be, to the


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 558 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

total area of excavations already carried out by another holder of a mining right, shall
not exceed [x%] of the wooded area of the parcel of land in question;

 (b) the area affected by the cutting of timber, which is required for drilling work, added,
as the case may be, to the area affected by cutting already carried out by another holder
of a mining right on the same conditions, shall not exceed [x%] of the wooded area of the
parcel of land in question.

(3) The said [Regulating Authority] may give authorization subject to such other
conditions and obligations as he may establish jointly with the [Other Relevant
Authorities] responsible for the administration of this [Act][Code][Law].

(4) Moreover, the rules referred to in the first paragraph do not apply to a person who, in
order to stake a parcel of land in accordance with section [x], must cut timber forming
part of the domain of the [State].

(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in any area classified as an exceptional forest
ecosystem under the [Relevant Forest Legislation], the holder of the mining right must
follow the rules set forth in the [Relevant Forestry Legislation].

                                                                                               Annotation
39.2. Example 2
Article [_]                                                                                    Drawn from 16 U.S. Code § 482a - Mining rights in Prescott National Forest,
(1) Mining locations made under the [Country] mining law upon lands within an area of          this example lays out in a more detailed manner the different types of timber
three thousand six hundred acres, more or less, shall confer on the locator the right to       use that are allowed under a mining license. This use is restricted to what is
occupy and use so much of the surface of the land covered by the location as may be            necessary for mining. Distinct from example 1, this provision does not
reasonably necessary to carry on exploration and mining, including the taking of mineral       require a permit or other authorization in exercising the timber rights allowed
deposits and timber required by or in the mining operations, and no permit shall be            under the mining license
required or charge made for such use or occupancy.
                                                                                               The provision specifies that any timber use beyond that allowed under a
(2) Provided, however that the cutting and removal of timber, except where clearing is         mining license will require a separate permit, and provides for the use of
necessary in connection with mining operations or to provide space for buildings or            timber resources by other users to the extent that such use does not conflict
structures used in connection with mining operations, shall be conducted in accordance         with mineral development.
with the rules for timber cutting on adjoining national-forest land, and no use of the
surface of the claim or the resources therefrom not reasonably required for carrying on
                                                                                               It should also be noted that this example also specifically addresses timber
mining and exploration shall be allowed except under the national forest rules and


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 559 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

regulations, nor shall the locator prevent or obstruct other occupancy of the surface or     use as it pertains to mining locations near to and within a particular protected
use of surface resources under authority of national-forest regulations, or permits issued   area (in this case a national park).
thereunder, if such occupancy or use is not in conflict with mineral development.


                                                                 39. Other Natural Resources
                                                                         39.3 Water
Water is seldom defined in mining laws. From the context it can be deduced that water refers to any water body including rivers, streams, dams,
underground reservoirs or watercourses, and the sea, where applicable. Water use for mining purposes is often dealt with in separate legislation and is not
exclusively contained in mining codes. While addressing relevant rights, procedures and licensing (where applicable), the mining law should also
reference the applicable related legislation. For this topic, it is advisable to balance the water needs of the surrounding community with the needs of the
mining project in accordance and establish priority of use.

Some other key issues include:
   - depletion and/or diversion of water sources (including periodic monitoring of water efficiency in mining operations and ecosystem management)
   - periodic review of allocation of water during the life of the mining project
   - monitoring of and liability for pollution of water sources (including regular testing of water quality)
   - the necessary permits for required use
   - water rights that attach to the mining license
   - any additional permitting required as well as the identification of relevant authorities

                                                                                             Annotation
39.3. Example 1
Article [_] Rights in waters and wetlands                                                    Inspired by Uganda’s mining law (2003) and Namibia’s mining law (1992),
Except as otherwise provided in this [Act][Code][Law], all rights in wetlands and in the     these provisions addresses the following water related issues in the context of
waters of any spring, stream, river, watercourse, pond or lake on or under public land,      mining:
are vested in the [Government]; and no such wetlands or water shall be obstructed,                    - details of water sources to be used for mining purposes
dammed, diverted, polluted or otherwise interfered with, directly or indirectly, except in            - reference to separate water legislation dealing with water rights
accordance with the provisions of the [Relevant Water Act].                                           - liability for water pollution

Article [_] Grant of water rights
(1) Every application for a mineral right shall indicate whether the applicant intends-




  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                560 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

(a) To utilize for reconnaissance/prospecting, exploration and mining operations any
    water existing within the boundaries of his or her mineral rights;

(b) To utilize any natural source of water existing at the site to which mining products are
     conveyed for washing;

(c) To obtain and convey to the area of his or her mineral right from any natural water
     supply outside the boundaries of the mineral right, such specified volume of water as
     may be required for the relevant operations;

(d) To occupy any land that may be required for the construction of a dam, reservoir or
     pumping station and for the conveyance of such water to the area where the water is
     utilized, by means of pipes, duets, flumes, furrows or otherwise, and for such
     conveyance to have a right of passageway;

(e) To construct any works necessary for the collection, storage or conveyance of such
     water.

(2) The [Relevant Water Act] shall apply in relation to and for the purpose of acquiring
the right to use water in any manner or for any purpose or object specified in subsection
(1) of this section.

Article [_] Liability for pollution of water sources or other damages or losses caused
(1) When in the course of any reconnaissance/prospecting operations, exploration
operations or mining operations, any mineral or group of minerals is spilled in the sea or
in any water on or under the surface of any land or the sea or water is otherwise polluted
or any plant or animal life, whether in the sea, other water in, on or under land, is
endangered or destroyed or any damage or loss is caused to any person, including the
State, by such spilling or pollution, the holder of such license or mining claim shall
forthwith –

(a) Report such spilling, pollution, loss or damage to the [Regulating Authority];

(b) Take at his or her own costs all such steps as may be necessary in accordance with
     good reconnaissance practices, good exploration practices or good mining practices



  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                            561 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                     PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

    or otherwise as may be necessary to remedy such spilling, pollution, loss or damage.

(2) If the holder of a license or mining claim referred to in subsection a fails to comply
with the provisions of paragraph a. within such period as the [Regulating Authority] may
deem in the circumstances to be reasonable, the [Regulating Authority] may direct by
written notice addressed and delivered to such holder to take within such period as may
be specified in such notice such steps as may be so specified in order to remedy the
spilling, pollution or damage or loss; and the [Regulating Authority] may, if such holder
fails to comply with such directions to the satisfaction of the [Regulating Authority]
within the period specified in such notice or such further period as the [Regulating
Authority] may on good cause shown allow in writing, cause such steps to be taken as
may be necessary to remedy such spilling, pollution or damage or loss and recover in a
competent court the costs incurred thereby from such holder.

39.3. Example 2                                                                              Annotation

Article [ ]                                                                                  Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), this provision addresses some key
(1) The Operating Permit for underground waters and geothermal deposits is granted by        water rights issues in the context of mining:
joint order of the [mining regulating entity]and the [hydraulics regulating entity] on the       - It ensures that any decisions relating to the allocation of water rights
recommendation of the [mining regulating entity]. Operating Permits for geothermal                    involve relevant regulating authority for water resources
deposits designate the volume which may be operated, by an area and two levels of depth.         - It requires a particular volume of water to be designated to a mine,
They may also limit the calorific content of what is extracted.                                       so that it does not have access to unlimited amounts of water from
                                                                                                      all available sources
(2) Operating Permits for geothermal deposits may impose special conditions on the               - The allocation of water is also limited by the physical availability of
holder for extraction, use and reinsertion of heat-conveying fluid and products contained             water – the amount of flow extracted cannot affect the ability of the
therein so as to preserve the deposits as much as possible. Operating Permits for                     underground water sources to regenerate.
underground waters designate the area of operations. They establish the maximum output           - Operating techniques must be approved by the relevant authority to
which the holder may extract. Unless the Title’s granting i nstrument specifies otherwise,
                                                                                                      limit water pollution. Environmental standards set out in the
no holder of an Operating Permit for underground waters may, in any event, extract a
                                                                                                      country’s environmental and water law are also referenced.
flow that could compromise the regeneration of these waters. Operating Permits for
underground waters may also limit the volume which may be extracted by two levels of
depth.                                                                                       It is also essential that pollution or water standards are referenced at multiple
                                                                                             points throughout a mining law in the reference to the relevant related
Article [_]                                                                                  legislation and as a part of license holder obligations.
The development of underground water and geothermal deposits must be conducted so as
to ensure the rational exploitation of these resources. To this end, the holders of


  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                                                                                 562 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                    PART D: Environment & Other Natural Resources

Exploration Permits and Operating Permits for underground waters and geothermal
deposits must carry out the works using techniques approved by the hydraulic and energy
industry in order to protect the waters from any pollution in accordance with the
provisions of this [Act][Code][Law], the [Water Code] and the [Environmental Code].




  NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A - E                       563 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                   PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health

                                                          40. Local Development


Local development, or local content (a term borrowed from the oil and gas sector) provisions address the combination of international best
practice, national legislation and company policies that collectively support broad-based economic and social development of the country in which
mining operations take place. These policies typically focus on the following areas:

    -   building the capacity and skills of local workers and service providers;
    -   facilitating the development and use of locally produced goods;
    -   transferring knowledge between mining companies and the local population;
    -   leveraging the construction and operation of mining-related transport, power, water and ICT infrastructure for broad based development
        by implementing shared access models for non-mine users; and
    -   other projects that increase access to health, education and/or other necessities that support the communities around the mining sites.
Local development or local content policies are encouraged in the Africa Mining Vision. The latter is one of the critical factors to ensure that the
mining sector contributes to sustainable development and poverty alleviation in developing countries. If well designed technically and legislatively
and conscientiously implemented, local content policies tend to produce an employment multiplier effect, particularly because the most
substantive expenditures of a mining companies relate to purchase of good and services, infrastructures, energy or employee’s salaries. Capturing
a bigger part of these expenditures in developing countries while challenging can contribute to sustainable development.
Maximising the sustainable development impacts from mining requires the preparation of an overall sustainable development plan by the
government that identifies areas where local capacity can be developed and the kinds of goods and services to be targeted for increasing local
content. Governments can maximize benefits by identifying skills, goods and services for increasing local capacity that have the ability to be
applicable to other sectors of the economy. Consultation with industry is encouraged in developing these requirements to ensure they are realistic.
When developing local development or local content provisions, governments need to ensure that such provisions are consistent with their
international treaty obligations, notably with respect to: (a) the Schedule of Commitments undertaken as World Trade Organisation (WTO)
members under the GATS and TRIMs Agreements. Some countries such as Botswana, China, DRC, Guinea, India, Peru and Tanzania exclude the
entirety of the mining sector from Schedule of Commitments while countries such as Australia, Canada, Co te D’Ivoire, South Africa, United


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                          564 | Page
                                              AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                   PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
States and Zambia include services incidental to mining; (b) negotiated bilateral investment treaties (BITs), which are agreements between two
countries that establish the terms and conditions of foreign investment within a country and provide rights directly to the investors of each country
which is a party to the treaty. Some BITs expressly prohibit countries from imposing certain types of local content requirements on companies and
can be directly enforced by mining companies if they are incorporated in the same country as has entered into a BIT with the host country.
As part of the sustainable development plan or policy, governments are also encouraged to develop curricula in high schools, universities and
technical training colleges, at the national or at regional level with others countries, to create or increase local capacity in targeted specialized
skills. This could be a complementary policy to enhance the effectiveness of local skills training requirements put on the mining industry.
Finally, it is essential that any policies addressing local development/content clearly define what the term “local? means ac cording to each
individual country context and in a way that is consistent with the national vision for maximizing the benefits of the extractive sector. It is
important for a government, when doing so, to take into account existing free movement of persons and good regulations or policy at regional
integration organizations where it may be a member state. The following are some examples of how “local? can be progressively defined (a) for
the purposes of workers and service providers: nationals, geographic long-term residents of the country, regional citizens and/or long term-
residents, continental citizens and/or long term-residents and (b) for the purposes of goods: nationally, regionally, continentally produced. It is
critical to take a look at the potential for a progressive definition of “local? building from a “national? to a regional and ultimately continental
category.

                                                           40. Local Development
                                                  40.1 Local Employment and Training


Local employment and training requirements refer to provisions that encourage or require mining license holders to prioritize the hiring,
professional development and skills training of local individuals. Designed to maximize direct job creation from mining, these provisions may also
address the need for transfer of skills and technology, recognizing the limited technical expertise present in some countries and ensuring that
knowledge transfer takes place during the life of mining projects. A progressive increase in management and technical skills transfers can be
evidenced by the progressive change in the composition of technical and management employees from largely expatriate to local over the life
cycle of the mine.
To fulfil this aim, governments are encouraged to require companies to do some if not all of the following: use local workers for unskilled work;


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                           565 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
hire local individuals for skilled positions and managerial positions at increasing levels over time; and train local individuals, including through
internship programs, scholarship programs etc. “Local? as noted above, can be progressively defined as impacted communities, sub-regional,
national, regional continental workers.
While the requirement for mining licence holders to employ locally and implement/ fund training and skills-building programs should be clearly
stated in law, the details concerning specific targets, percentages, and schedules should rather be set out in regulations and individual mining
contracts so that they can be tailored to existing or planned capacity and can be changed over time Laws can also require mining license holders to
submit local content plans where mining license holders commit to certain targets and percentages, which are updated periodically to account for
the progressive availability of local skills. Note that monitoring compliance with targets and percentages, as well as local content plans requires a
good degree of government capacity. Obligations should be clear, reportable and adjustable and the specific targets, percentages and schedule for
implementation should be public. Governments with little capacity can require the mining license holders to publish annual progress reports so to
allow for public participation in monitoring implementation. Such an approach should perhaps also be supplemented with processes that encourage
interaction between the community and company and local government to enhance the capacities needed to achieve, or even exceed, the
objectives. Finally ensure consistency with relevant national laws (e.g. labour, education) as well as any regional or international laws.
40.1 Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision is noteworthy because
                                                                            it stipulates the best practice that all unskilled labour positions must be given to
(1) Citizens of [Country] possessing the necessary qualifications and       nationals (i.e. such positions cannot be filled by expatriates). There are also reporting
experience shall be given preference for employment in all phases of        requirements to monitor compliance with these requirements and heavy penalties in
operations under a mining right, and in accordance with the national        case of non – performance of obligations. It is also noteworthy that the provision
labour laws. Such priority shall progressively apply to citizens of         refers to the application of national labour laws, which underlines the obligation of
member states of [Sub regional Community] and citizens of member            foreign investors to respect national law. It should be verified that a stability clause,
states of the Africa Union in accordance with national and regional         which are sometimes incorporated in mining agreements/contracts to protect
labour laws as applicable. The burden of proof shall be on the              investments from an unpredictable regulatory environment, does not apply to
employer.                                                                   reasonable changes in labour laws of general application so as to ensure the
(2) A holder of a mining right shall not import unskilled labour for the    application of best practices in labour laws to the mining operation.
carrying out of any of its operations undertaken under the mineral right.   However, it would be useful to clarify the criteria of a non-compliance to reach to a
(3) A holder of a small-scale mining licence or large-scale mining          “material breach? (level, frequency, etc.) and escalated specific penalties for different
licence shall carry out a scheme of training and employment of local        level of non-compliance (from suspension to cancellation).
employees in each phase and level of operations taking into account the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        566 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
requirements of safety and the need to maintain acceptable standards of
efficiency in the conduct of the operations.

(4) The training programme shall provide appropriate instruction and
training to ensure the advancement of employees of [Country
citizenship] in the skilled technical, supervisory, administrative and
managerial categories.

(5) A holder of a small-scale mining licence or large-scale mining
licence shall submit an annual written report to the [Regulating
Authority] describing the number of personnel employed, their
nationality, their positions and the status of training programmes for
citizens of [Country].

(6) Failure by a holder of a mining right to comply with the provisions of
subsection (3), (4) or (5) shall be regarded as a material breach and if
such person is the holder of a small-scale mining licence or large-scale
mining licence, the licence may be suspended or cancelled.?

34.1 Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Drawn from Burkina Faso mining law (2015), this provision is noteworthy for
(1) Holders of mining titles or permits are to abide by all local labour     several reasons: First, the local employment requirement applies not only to the
laws. Said holders and their suppliers and sub-contractors are to give       mining company but also to its sub-contractors. Second, the provision refers to the
priority, where there are equal qualifications and without any distinction   obligation of foreign investors to respect labour law and to gender issues. Third, it
as to sex, to managerial staff [who are Citizens of the Country] who         requires the submission by the mineral right holder of local employee training plans,
have the required skills to effectively manage mining operations.            and refers to a decree that will provide details on positions and progressive quotas for
                                                                             each life cycle of the mine which can allow for the achievement of an appropriate
(2) Businesses shall submit a plan for training local managerial staff, so
                                                                             mix of developed skills.
as to gradually replace expatriate staff, to [regulatory authority].
                                                                             The mineral right holder is also required to submit an annual report on the
(3) Businesses shall be obliged to comply with increasing quotas for         implementation of the local employment and training plan while the regulatory
local employment according to various levels of responsibility. A decree
                                                                             authority is required to publish the submitted report together with the local
by [the regulatory authority] shall establish the classifications for
                                                                             employment and training plan in a national journal.
positions and the required quotas for local employment, according to the
life cycle of the mine.                                                      It may be useful to require the mineral right holder to publish the report and plan ion


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        567 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
                                                                           its website especially in countries with little regulatory capacity so as to maintain a
(4) [The regulatory authority] is to receive an annual report from         more open regulatory environment. Such an approach of online publication of the
businesses on the status of the implementation of the requirements         report and plan by the mineral right holder would contribute to the ability of the
relating to the training, employment and promotion of local staff, and     mineral right holder to maintain its social license to operate vis-à-vis local
the annual report shall be published in national newspapers, together      communities.
with the training plan referred to above, in paragraph (2).

(5) Employment contracts for foreign workers in the mining sector are to
be approved by [the regulatory authority], under the conditions
specified in a joint order from [regulatory authorities].

                                                               40. Local Development
                                                          40.2 Local Goods and Services


Local goods and services provisions generally encourage or require mining license holders to locally procure goods and services needed for
business that are produced in-country and/or provided by locally-owned businesses. While these provisions may not necessarily bar mining license
holders from importing goods or contracting foreign firms for certain services, some mining laws will, in some cases, require license holders to
demonstrate absence of the applicable goods or services locally in order to be exempted from local procurement requirements, or offer specific tax
incentives to encourage mining license holders to engage the local market. Local goods and services provisions can only be implementable when
the government coordinates with the private sector to facilitate the creation and operation of local businesses with the capacity to service the
mining sector.
The purpose of such provisions is to stimulate the local economy and promote local employment, not only directly at the mine site, but also
indirectly. Local goods and services should be defined carefully so as to reduce the risk of intermediary or trading companies which are not local
in nature. A local company should be defined to maximize the country's goals, and could include a locally registered company, a company with
majority national ownership, or a company with both majority national ownership and majority national employees, particularly at the managerial
level. The level of detail in the definition of a “local company? will depend on a country’s current capacity and overall goals which should be first
set forth and developed in a local content policy. The risk of transfer pricing (see Section C) when such local companies are subsidiaries or
affiliates of the mining company should also be carefully assessed and addressed. Furthermore, from a regional perspective, it may be important to



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      568 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                        PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
nuance the definition of “local? to allow for a prioritization of national followed by regional goods and services.
Additionally, it is essential to develop lists of target goods and services for increasing local capacity which can have spill over effects or be
applicable to other parts of the economy, not only applicable to mining for best results. As with the definition of a local company, these lists
should be in line with an overall national development plan. Ultimately, the goal is to encourage the creation of local added value rather than mere
importers of foreign goods. In the same line, a coherent approach on tax incentives is crucial, especially regarding incentives on imports duties for
targeted goods in the list. Targets for local goods and services should be in line with local capacity and reviewed regularly. It is always important
to also review bilateral trade and investment treaties as well as WTO rules to ensure consistency with the specific obligations in the proposed
mining law.
It is important also that any policy on local good and services policy address the issue of quality and quantity provided in the country. Several
legislations in Africa subject the local good and services requirement to “comparable quality, quantity, delivery schedule and price? conditi on. In
that regard, government may encourage and facilitate the creation of mining local goods and services associations in order to help them enhance
their capacity to fulfil mining industry requirements.
Finally, as with local employment and training, the local good and services requirement should be clearly stated in law as obligation, while details
concerning specific targets, percentages, and schedules can and should be spelled out in more details in regulations and contracts to allow for
flexibility in adjusting requirements as local capacity develops. “Local? can also be progressively defined as impacted commu nities, sub-regional,
national regional and continental.
40.2 Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Inspired by language from Ghana’s mining law (2006) and regulations (2012), this
                                                                           provision supplements the general language from the law with more specific
(1) The holder of a mining right shall in the conduct of mineral           provisions from the accompanying regulations. The regulations are particularly
operations, and in the purchase, construction and installation of          noteworthy for their planning, review and reporting requirements, allowing for the
facilities, give preference to                                             parties to develop a detailed procurement plan that is realistic and can be adjusted if
(a) local materials and products; and                                      necessary.

(b) locally owned or resident service agencies.                            Although some sections in this provision are taken from the implementing
                                                                           regulations, the example reflects best practices in dealing with the procurement of
(2) Without limitations on the preceding sections of this Article [_], a   local goods and services in the context of a mining law.
holder of a mineral right shall procure goods and services with [local]
content to the maximum extent possible and consistent with safety,


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      569 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
efficiency and economy.

(3) A holder of a mineral right shall submit to the [Regulating Authority]
for approval, a procurement plan in accordance with sub regulation (1)

(4) The procurement plan shall be submitted within one year of the
commencement the holder’s operations.

(5) The procurement shall be for an initial period of five years, and
subsequently for a further five-year period.

(6) The procurement plan shall include:

(a) targets for local procurement;

(b) prospects for local procurement; and

(c) specific support to providers or suppliers as well as measures to
develop the supply of local goods and services including broadening
access to opportunities and technical and financial assistance?

(7) A person who fails to comply with Sections (1) and (2) above is liable
to pay the [Regulating Authority] a penalty of [ten thousand United
States dollars] for each month of the first six months of defaults and
subsequently ten thousand US dollars for each day that the default
continues

(8) The procurement plan shall be revised annually to take account of
the requirements of the local procurement list.

(9) The holder of a mineral right shall submit semi-annually, reports on
the implementation of the procurement plan.

(10) The [Regulating Authority] shall have a local procurement list and
specify in the list the goods and services with [National] content which
shall be procured in [country] by the holder of a mineral right.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   570 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
(11) A holder of mineral right, who fails to comply with Section (10) is
liable to pay the [Regulating Authority] the full import duty in respect of
the goods imported and a penalty as provided in the local procurement
list.

(12) The [Regulating Authority] shall review the local procurement list
annually.

(13) In assessing tenders for goods and services on the local
procurement list, where bids are within [two] percent of each other by
price, the bid containing the highest level of [Country National]
participation in terms of ownership and management by [Country
Nationals] and employment of [Country Nationals] shall be selected.

(14) A person whose local procurement programme has been approved
by the [Regulating Authority] under this [Code][Act][Law] shall submit
an annual report to the [Regulating Authority] on or before the third
first day of January each year, showing the level of compliance with the
approved programme.

(15) “local? for the purposes of this Article [_], shall mean on a priority
basis (i) citizens or companies or partnerships owned or controlled by
citizens of [Country], and in the absence of citizens of [Country]; and
progressively citizens or companies or partnerships owned or controlled
by citizens of member states of [Sub regional Community] and citizens of
member states of the Africa Union.

40.2 Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Nigeria’s Oil and Gas Industry Content De velopment Act (2010), this
                                                                              provision requires companies to comply with certain local procurement requirements
(1) The minimum [local] content in any project to be executed in the          as set out in the relevant regulations passed pursuant to the Act. Companies must
[Country] mining industry shall be consistent with the level set in the       also provide a detailed local content plan that set out, among other things, how
relevant Regulations issued pursuant to this [Act][Code][Law].                companies will give priority to locally manufactured goods and services, and must
(2) Where a project description is not specified in the Regulation, the       consider local content when evaluating bids for goods and services. To help ensure



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     571 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
[Regulating Authority] shall set the minimum content level for that           that locally manufactured goods and services meet industry standards, mining
project or project item pending the issuance of a Regulation.                 companies are also required to invest in or help establish facilities to facilitate local
                                                                              manufacturing or service-provision of the goods in return for certain fiscal incentives
(3) All [company] and contractors shall comply with the minimum
[local] content for particular project items, services or products
specification set out in the relevant Regulations.

(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section,
where there is inadequate capacity to any of the targets in the relevant
Regulations, the [Regulating Authority] may authorize the continued
importation of the relevant items and such approval by the [Regulating
Authority] shall not exceed 3 years from the date of the approval.

(5) The [local] content plan submitted to the [Regulating Authority] by
an operator shall contain a detailed plan, satisfactory to the [Regulating
Authority], setting out how the [company] and its contractors shall give
first consideration to [local] goods and services, including specific
examples showing how first consideration is considered and assessed by
the [company] in its evaluation of bids for goods and services required
by the project.

(6) The [local] content plan submitted to the [Regulating Authority] by
any [company] shall contain detailed plan on how the [company]
intends to ensure the use of locally manufactured goods where such
goods meet the specifications of the industry.

(7) All companies shall consider [local] content when evaluating any bid
where the bids are within 1 % of each other at commercial stage and the
bid containing the highest level of [local] content shall be selected
provided the [local] content in the selected bid is at least 5% higher than
its closest competitor.

(8) All [companies] shall maintain a bidding process for acquiring
goods and services which shall give full and fair opportunity to [local]
contractors and companies.



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                          572 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
(9) The award of contract shall not be solely based on the principle of
the lowest bidder where a [local] company has capacity to execute such
job and the company shall not be disqualified exclusively on the basis
that it is not the lowest financial bidder, provided the value does not
exceed the lowest bid price by 10 percent.

(10) The [Regulating Authority] shall make regulations which shall
require any [company] to invest in or set up a facility, factory,
production units or other operations within [Country] for the purposes
of carrying out any production, manufacturing or for providing a service
otherwise imported into [Country].

(11) The [relevant Regulating Authority charged with fiscal matters]
shall, in consultation with the [Minister] make regulations providing an
appropriate fiscal framework and tax incentives for foreign and local
[companies] which establish facilities, factories, production units or
other operations in [Country] for the purposes of carrying out
production, manufacturing or for providing services and goods
otherwise imported into [Country].

(12) “local? for the purposes of this Article [_], shall mean on a priority
basis (i) citizens or companies or partnerships owned or controlled by
citizens of [Country], and in the absence of citizens of [Country]; and
progressively citizens or companies or partnerships owned or controlled
by citizens of member states of [Sub regional Community] and citizens of
member states of the Africa Union.

                                                                 40. Local Development
                                      40.3 Infrastructure (Construction, Ownership, Control, Use)


Infrastructure provisions address whether and how a mining license holder may construct installations (such as transport, power, water and ICT



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                     573 | Page
                                               AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                    PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
infrastructure) needed to operate a mine, import inputs, beneficiate and/or export the ore/ mineral; who owns the infrastructure under the mining
license; and how a mining license holder may use public infrastructure (such as waterways and roads) and what investment, access and
maintenance obligations it has in this regard. These provisions may also address in particular what happens to such physical infrastructure after the
mineral right has terminated, detailing whether former license holders may remove certain improvements on the land and assignments and the
related costs. Such infrastructure may be provided by the state, may be constructed by companies, or be constructed by both in a public/private
partnership. Outside of the primary mining law these provisions are sometimes addressed in the mining licence or mine development agreement.
The right of way of all longitudinal infrastructure (such as railways and power lines) should always be retained by the government so that it can
subsequently leverage economies of scope by allowing other types of infrastructure (ICT lines and water lines) to be laid alongside such
infrastructure.
Infrastructure provisions in a mining law should broadly ensure that the country and surrounding community benefits from the infrastructure
investments made by the mining company to the greatest extent possible. Where such social benefits are evident, In some cases, they can
sometimes be achieved by requiring the infrastructure to be built and owned, or built, operated and subsequently transferred to the government or a
regulated third party to ensure some access to other users. In other cases, it may be appropriate for a government to offer financial incentives to
license holders who build infrastructure that can be used by the broader community and/or by third-parties (to the extent that this use does not
interfere with the mining activities and that the requisite fees, if applicable, are paid to the license holder). The goal is clearly to move away from
“enclave infrastructure? to infrastructure that promotes development . This may be an area where the ideal solutions have not yet emerged but it
certainly requires joint planning between the government and mining companies. As such, an infrastructure master plan is required to assess to
what extent infrastructure that a mine requires could also benefit non-mine users before open or shared access is required. This is because
requiring in the context of a negotiated mining agreement/contract, such access may result in reduced royalties or other tax incentives that may be
given away by the government in return. So if a cost-benefit analysis shows that access would not ultimately be feasible or beneficial, a
government may be better off negotiating for something else.
Further issues to be considered may include:

    -   Environmental management, safety and security (including waste, disturbance, soil erosion, traffic management etc. For further details, see
        sections on environmental management in the Environment section)
    -   Appropriate negotiation between the Government and the investor to share in an adequate proportion the burden of constructing and
        maintaining facilities that would be used both by the company and the population.
    -   To the extent of third party use, whether users will be assessed a user fee and how the amount is determined.
    -   Determine who will have the burden of maintenance of the new infrastructure. \


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                             574 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health

Provisions under this topic should also reference applicable related legislation, if any, that details further rules and regulations.
40.3 Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Guinea’s mining law (2011), this provision requires that essentia l
                                                                              mining-related infrastructure is either provided by the state, or is designed, built, and
(1) Building the infrastructure required for mining activities shall be       operated in the framework of a public-private partnership (PPP), thereby separating
done by the State or as part of a Public-Private Partnership (PPP). In        the ownership of the infrastructure from the ownership/ rights of the mining project.
any event, the State shall either act directly or through an intermediary,    In addition, all infrastructure projects must be awarded by international tender and all
in any entity which it owns or controls. Infrastructure projects are to be    transport infrastructure must guarantee access to third parties.
subject to competitive international invitations to tender and shall in all
cases be consistent with the development plan for transport                   Finally, the provision requires that all infrastructure (transport, water and power
infrastructure which guarantees that third parties have access to the         transmission lines, etc.) must be transferred to the government free of charge after a
infrastructure.                                                               period of time (limited to 20 years) that is necessary for a return on the infrastructure
                                                                              investment to be made.
(2) Regardless of how it is financed, transport infrastructure (railways,
roads, bridges), ports, airports, developments and their annexes, water
pipes and power lines, as well as any other permanent fixed assets, with
the exception of production tools, developed for the use of a mining title
must be transferred to the State free of charge once fully depreciation
and within a maximum period of twenty (20) years.

40.3 Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_] Use of Infrastructure                                             Drawn in part from Liberia’s mining law (2000), the sections provide th at all fixtures
                                                                              installed by the company in the mining area belong to the government, whereas all
(1) Communication lines and other infrastructure installed or developed       moveables belong to the company. In addition, the Government retains the right-of-
by the license holder within the area subject of the mining rights may be     way along which all longitudinal infrastructure is built and may lay other types of
used by Government or third parties provided however, that fair               infrastructure alongside the company’s infrastructure. Finally, the company is
compensation shall be paid and that such use does not unreasonably            required to allow access to some of the infrastructure it installs in the mining area.
interfere with or obstruct the licence holder’s operations.

(2) All fixed assets installed by licence holder shall become the property
of Government, upon termination of the mining rights, however, the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                          575 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
movable assets shall remain the property of the mining rights holders.

(3) The Government shall have the option to acquire all or part of the
moveable assets on terms to be set forth in the Mineral Development
Agreement, and shall acquire title to all non- moveable fixed assets.?

(4) Fibre optic cable and other infrastructure installed or developed by
the [licence holder] within the area subject of the mining rights may be
used by Government or third parties provided however, that fair
compensation shall be paid and that such use does not interfere with or
hinder the licence holder’s operations.

(5) The Government shall retain the right-of-way along which any
longitudinal infrastructure including, but not limited to, power lines,
fibre optic cables, roads, and railways lines, constructed and or
operated by the licence holder and may, in consultation with the licence
holder lay down or permit third parties to lay down other infrastructure
along those right-of-ways.

                                                                40. Local Development
                       40.4 Community Engagement (including Community Development Agreements)


Community development or engagement provisions in a mining law typically address how individuals or communities who stand to be affected by
the project should be consulted prior to the development of a project and throughout the mining cycle, as well as how benefits of a mining project
should be shared with them. Often in the form of agreements, these provisions are becoming more common under the context of free, prior and
informed consent (FPIC) best practices, particularly with note to vulnerable populations (ethnic and religious minorities, women, etc.)
In a mining law, community development provisions may be covered in general provisions requiring license holders to take into account the
impact of mining on surrounding communities through environmental, social and human rights impact assessments and mitigate such impacts in
the form of financial and/or in-kind compensation of equal or better value. Elsewhere, the law may specifically require license holders to draw up
and sign a community development (or benefits sharing) agreement with the community, spelling out the programs, approaches, and financing that


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                         576 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
will be needed to facilitate efficient and transparent engagement between the license holder and the community. It should be noted that
community engagement includes the building of infrastructure as part of a development agreement, and that any construction occurring in this
context must be held to the same standards of construction that apply to infrastructure that is built specific to the mining operation. Some laws
provide that companies must provide some portion of revenue directly to the affected community. Elsewhere a certain portion of tax revenue
collected is required to be redirected to the affected community via regional and/or local authorities. Others jurisdictions have put into place
specifics funds with contribution of government and mining companies to be used for local development investments and projects. Each of these
approach has its own advantages and challenges and should be carefully designed.
One key factor in promoting community development is to ensure company corporate social responsibility activities are aligned with local
development goals. The mining law and its regulation should provide clear guidance for negotiation and development of CDAs. Community
Development Agreements (CDAs) should therefore require, rather than encourage, consultation with local communities for setting priorities for
community development projects. Further, the agreement should state that the government will require such plans to be aligned with the relevant
local government development plan. Agreements should also provide that the Government will ensure formal mechanisms for community and
local government involvement in the implementation and monitoring of community development agreements, for example, through a committee
with representatives from the mining company, local community and local government. It is also important that the CDAs provide annual report
on implementation requirements, as well as annual meetings.
40.4 Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), this provision requires mining
                                                                              companies to contribute to the development of the community and protect its rights.
(1) The holder of a small-scale or large-scale mining licence shall assist
in the development of mining communities affected by its operations to        In addition, it requires the signing of a CDA and it articulates clear guidelines for
promote sustainable development, enhance the general welfare and the          what should be included in it, including:
quality of life of the inhabitants, and shall recognize and respect the
rights, customs, traditions and religion of local communities.                    -   how to define the community;
                                                                                  -   how to ensure the full participation of the community in the decision making
(2) The holder of a small-scale or large-scale mining licence is required             and monitoring processes;
to have and implement a community development agreement with the                  -   the preparations for mine closure; and
primary host community if its approved mining operation will or does              -   the approval process of the CDA by the regulating entity.
exceed any of the following limits –

(a) in the case of extraction of minerals from primarily alluvial deposits,
where annual throughput is more than one million cubic metres per


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       577 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
year;

(b) in the case of underground mining operations, where annual
combined run-of mine ore and waste production is more than one
hundred thousand tonnes per year (waste material not exiting mine
mouth to be excluded);

(c) in the case of open-cast mining operations extracting minerals from
primarily non-alluvial deposits, where annual combined run-of mine
ore, rock, waste and overburden production is more than two hundred
and fifty thousand tonnes per year; or

(d) where the licence holder employs or contracts more than one
hundred employees or workers at the mine site on a typical working day
(including all shifts).

(3) The primary host community is the single community of persons
mutually agreed by the holder of the small-scale or large-scale mining
licence and the local council, but if there is no community of persons
residing within thirty kilometres of any boundary defining the large-
scale mining licence area, the primary host community shall be the local
council.

(4) If the holder of the small-scale or large-scale mining licence and
local council cannot agree on which community is the primary host
community, the licence-holder may notify the [Regulating Authority]
requesting clarification, and the [Regulating Authority] shall notify the
licence holder and local council within sixty calendar days from the date
of such notice, specifying which community is the primary host
community.

(5) The holder of a small-scale or large-scale mining licence who is
required to have a community development agreement shall negotiate
with the primary host

community the terms of the agreement, and such agreement shall include


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                  578 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
the following-

(a) the person, persons or entity who represent the primary host
community for the purposes of the community development agreement;

(b) the objectives of the community development agreement;

(c) the obligations of the licence-holder with regard to the primary host
community including but not necessarily limited to-

 (i) undertakings with respect to the social and economic contributions
that the project will make to the sustainability of the community;

 (ii) assistance in creating self-sustaining, income-generating activities,
such as but not limited to, production of goods and services needed by
the mine and the community;

 (iii) consultation with the community in the development of mine
closure measures that seek to prepare the community for the eventual
closure of the mining operations;

(d) the obligations of the primary host community with regard to the
licence- holder;

(e) the means by which the community development agreement shall be
reviewed by the licence-holder and primary host community every five
calendar years, and the commitment to be bound by the current
agreement in the event that any modifications to the agreement sought
by one party cannot be mutually agreed with the other party;

(f) the consultative and monitoring frameworks between the licence-
holder and the primary host community, and the means by which the
community may participate in the planning, implementation,
management and monitoring of activities carried out under the
agreement; and

(g) a statement to the effect that both the licence-holder and primary


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   579 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                         PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
host community agree that any dispute regarding the agreement shall in
the first instance be resolved by consultation between the licence-holder
and the primary host community representative(s), and if this fails to
resolve the dispute, either party may submit the matter for the
[Regulating Authority], in consultation with the local council, to decide,
and the decision of the [Regulating Authority] shall be final and binding
on the licence-holder and the primary host community.

(6) A community development agreement shall take into account the
unique circumstances of the licence holder and primary host community,
and the issues to be addressed in the agreement may include the
following issues-

(a) educational scholarship, apprenticeship, technical training and
employment opportunities for the people of the community;

(b)financial or other forms of contributory support for infrastructural
development and maintenance such as education, health or other
community services, roads, water and power;

(c) assistance with the creation, development and support to small-scale
and micro enterprises;

(d) agricultural product marketing;

(e) methods and procedures of environment and socio-economic
management and local governance enhancement; and

(f) other matters as may be agreed.

(7) A community development agreement may not address any of the
following matters-

(a) the imposition of any additional rent, fee, or tax for the benefit of the
primary host community;

(b) the provision of any passenger car, truck, or four-by-four vehicle to


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                     580 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
any individual of the host community or to the host community, other
than a specialized purpose vehicle such as an ambulance, fire engine, or
bus; and

(c) the provision of any monetary amount, service, good, or facility for
the sole benefit of an individual or single family unit.

(8) A community development agreement agreed and signed by the
authorized representatives of a small-scale or large-scale mining licence
and its primary host community shall be submitted for approval to the
[Regulating Authority] who shall, if the agreement meets the
requirements set out in this Part, approve such agreement within forty-
five calendar days of it being submitted.

(9) If the community development agreement is not approved, the [
Regulating Authority] shall notify the holder of the small-scale or large-
scale mining licence and the primary host community representative and
such notice shall contain the specific reasons for denial and the means
or directions by which such reasons may be corrected.

(10) The holder of the small-scale or large-scale mining licence and host
community representatives may submit any number of revised
agreements.

(11) If the holder of the small-scale or large-scale mining licence and its
primary host community fail after reasonable attempts to conclude a
community development agreement by the time the licence-holder is
ready to commence development work on the mining licence area, the
licence-holder or the primary host community may refer the matter,
jointly or individually, by notification to the [Regulating Authority] for
resolution, and the decision of the [Regulating Authority], in
consultation with the local council, thereon shall be final.

(12) A notification under subsection (4) from either or both parties shall
include the draft community development agreement proposed by the



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   581 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
party, description of the efforts to negotiate an agreement, issues that
have been agreed, issues which have not been agreed, and proposals to
resolve issues, and the [Regulating Authority] shall determine the matter
within sixty calendar days of such notification.

(13) The holder of the small-scale or large-scale mining licence shall
provide a copy of the community development agreement approved by
the [Regulating Authority] to the Director within thirty calendar days of
the date on which such agreement was approved, and the agreement
shall be considered non-confidential and available to the public at the
Mining Cadastre Office.?

40.4 Example 2                                                                Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Burkina Faso’s mining law (2015), this provision takes an approach
(1) From a Mining Fund for Local Development, financing shall be              based on special funds to finance local project rather on CDAs. It concerns
allocated to regional development plans and community development             community engagement, as the use of the funds should be based on projects as
plans.                                                                        provided in community development plans and regional development plans. And
                                                                              priority is given to social development projects in those plans.
(2) Money shall be paid into the Fund through contributions, on the one
hand, from the State, of up to 20% of the proportional fees collected,        Noteworthy, the provision requires the contribution of State and mining companies.
which relate to the value of the products extracted and/or sold, and on       There are also annuals publications obligations on amount available in the funds and
the other hand, through contributions from mining title holders and           use of the money to ensure transparency. Finally, details concerning the funds will be
recipients of industrial operating permits relating to quarry materials, of   spelled out in more details in regulations
up to 1% of their monthly turnover excluding tax, or the value of the
products extracted during the month.

(3) All holders of valid mining titles and recipients of valid industrial
operating permits relating to quarry materials when the present
[Code][Act][Law] comes into operation shall be under an obligation to
contribute to the Mining Fund for Local Development.

(4) The Ministries in charge of Mining and Finance shall produce a
comprehensive and exhaustive joint annual report on the status of



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        582 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
contributions to the Mining Fund for Local Development. This report
shall be published in the Faso Official Gazette and it shall be widely
circulated in the press at the end of the second quarter of the year in
progress, for the status for the previous financial year.

(5) Resources allocated to territorial communities from the Mining Fund
for Local Development shall be included in the recipients' community
investments programmes. They shall be allocated primarily to social
sectors.

(6) Annual reports on the use of such resources are to be submitted to
regional and municipal councils for adoption, and to the relevant
organisations duly appointed by the State, for review. Annual reports on
the use of resources from the Fund shall be widely published.

                                                                           41. Labour


Labour as it pertains to the mining sector generally covers the legal and human rights that govern the labour relations between workers and
employees. These rights, detailed in international as well as national labour and/or employment laws, usually address issues such as the negotiation
of workers’ pay, benefits, safe working conditions, and rules regarding the organizing of labour unions. Labour can be a sens itive issue in the
mining industry, as the perceived or actual failure to uphold relevant rights can strain not only worker and company interactions, but also those
with local communities around the mining site (such as in the case of community exposure to toxic pollution). In addition to basic rights and
duties, effective management of labour concerns also includes creating and maintaining an environment that prevents forced labour and child
labour.
From the government perspective, in order to minimize or eliminate harm to citizens as well as business disruptions, a strong legal framework of
labour and employment laws is crucial. In addition to labour issues addressed in the primary mining law, this framework must also include specific
regulations that are tailored to the context of work in the mining sector, such as those addressing health and safety precautions in detail.
Companies also play a role in strengthening the labour environment critical to site operations by establishing clear company-wide policies that
reflect international and national best practice, spelling out the rights and obligations of all stakeholders at a mining site and ensuring that all staff,



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                583 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
regardless of contract type, are familiar with the relevant policies.

                                                                            41. Labour
                                                         41.1 Applicability of Labour Law


This topic is used to make reference to all other applicable law resources relating to labour law. It is important to indicate other relevant law texts
because the law reader/user otherwise may not be aware of legal obligations arising from the other general legal sources. The indication at the
beginning of the labour section alerts the user to read other labour law sources in conjunction with the mining law. These sources can be national
codes and regulations but also international applicable law sources.
In order to reduce the potential human rights risks, mining companies in Africa are faced with the increasing requirement to adopt and apply
international labour standards such as established in the Safety and Health in Mines Convention, 1995 (No. 176).
41.1 Example 1:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Drawn from Rwanda’s mining law (2014), this provision is a general reference to the
                                                                             labour laws and regulations. The text works if the country has a strong and
The prospecting and operating of mines and quarries must comply with         independent                                    labour                               law.
the following general principle: the working of mines, quarries and the      The article is placed at the beginning of the mining law under the title general
exploitation of the resulting products must comply with the laws and         principles. In addition, it is advisable to place such reference at the beginning of the
regulations relating to labour.                                              sector concerning labour law. If there are multiple applicable law sources it is
                                                                             advisable to name the specific laws (e.g. labour law, social security provisions, etc.).


41.1 Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Inspired by language from Sierra Leone ’s mining law (2009), Congo’s mining law
                                                                             (2002) and Cameroon’s mining law (2010), this provision highlights the prevalence
All labour relationships in the mining sector, independent of their legal    rule as applicable to the Mining Code, ensuring that the labour rights of the workers
qualification by the parties, except those with independent contractors      are implemented, even if the general law is less strong on these standards.
duly recognized by the relevant [Regulating Authorities], are regulated
by the [national Labour Code] and its regulations. If dispositions of the    It would be advisable to set principles and rules at least for the following subjects in


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                         584 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
[Labour Code] or its regulations establish lower standards than in the    the Mining Law itself, because they are particularly important for the mining sector:
present [Code][Act][Law], the latter shall prevail.

                                                                          - time of underground work

                                                                          - health and safety

                                                                          - national quota of workers

                                                                          - right of participation into unions

                                                                         41. Labour
                                                           41.2 Specific Prohibitions


In addition to the general labour rights and obligations outlined in this section, international law and best practice place a focus on the prohibition
of particular types of labour, including but not limited to: child labour, forced labour and the use of indentured, migrant and/or prison labourers.
The main drivers for use of these prohibited forms of labour are poverty, as well as the treatment of these groups as being cheap or free sources of
labour. The presence of mining sites can exacerbate the exploitation of these vulnerable communities if appropriate labour policies are not
instituted, followed and enforced carefully.
Mining laws can help to mitigate some of these risks by clearly stating the prohibitions within the law, for example by using the definition of a
child consistent with the Convention on the Rights of the Child as a basis for determining when a child is underage for labour purposes. The law
must also include adequate enforcement mechanisms, such as assessing the types of labourers working on site during official inspections, and
including appropriate sanctions where a site is found to be engaging in prohibited forms of labour. Lastly, as with all areas of the mining law,
prohibition of gender discrimination in labour practices should be clearly spelled out, and should include specific gender targets in the hiring,
training, and knowledge transfer provisions in the mining law, labour and employment law, as well as relevant local content policies.
41.2 Example 1:                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                               Usually, mining laws have specific prohibition of hiring children as workers.
                                                                          Accepting that children are special subjects of protection of law (as will be reflected
(1) Mining activities shall not employ as their workers:                  in the next example), the law should also include protection for other human groups,


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     585 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
a) Any human being, no matter his or her condition, minor of 18 years        that due their usually weak standing in the relationship with the mining projects, thus
since his date of birth. If the date of birth cannot be officially           being forced to work under unfair and dangerous conditions.
determined, the [Regulating Authority] will determine the age of the
worker to the effect of the application of this prohibition;

b) Indentured workers;

c) Prisoners, except under regulated work, duly coordinated with the
[Regulating Authority]

d) Undocumented migrant workers, or any other foreign person without
an appropriate work permit.

41.2 Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Inspired by Sierra Leone’s mining law (2009), and Tanzania’s labour law (2004), this
(1) A holder of a mining right shall not employ or in any way use the        provision includes specific details that allow both government officers and users to
following prohibited forms of labour for any mining activity,                understand the reasons and circumstances why children should not work in mining
underground and over-ground:                                                 and the consequences of it.

(a) A child under eighteen years of age shall not be employed in a mine,     We suggest a clear and detailed language, because parties in the relationship can
or in any other worksite including non-formal settings and agriculture,      clearly foresee the consequences of them omitting the application of the law.
where work conditions may be considered hazardous by the [Regulating
Authority] and/or

that places at risk the child's well-being, education, physical or mental    Even if this provision is included in the general Labour Code, we advise to include it
health, or spiritual, moral or social development.                           again in the mining law. Examples 1 and 2 do not exclude each other.

b) Indentured workers or other forms of forced labour, including
unregulated use of prison labour;

c) Undocumented workers, migrant workers, or any other person
without an appropriate work permit.

Article [_]

(1) It is an offense under this law to procure or employ prohibited labour



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        586 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
in contravention of this section.

(2) In any proceedings under this section, if the age of the child is in
issue, the burden of proofing that it was reasonable to believe, after
investigation, that the child was not underage for the purposes of this
section shall lie on the person employing or procuring the child for
employment.

(3) The [Regulating Authority] will determine appropriate sanctions or
other punitive measures in related regulations.

                                                                           41. Labour
                                                        41.3 Mine Workers Rights & Duties


Mine workers’ rights and duties provisions typically address the protections and obligations of mine workers within the context of their
employment at a mining site. Some issues addressed may include the right of a worker to leave a mine to protect his/her personal health or safety
and broad protection in the form of non-discrimination against any person in their capacity as a mine employee.
It is also important to include reference to mine working conditions as miners work in a specifically risky environment where rights and duties go
further than in most labour relationships. It should get regulated carefully and in detail, to minimize risks especially concerning health and security
of the workers.
41.3 Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 Drawn from Ghana’s labour law (2003), this provision contains a full list of rights
(1) The rights of a worker include the right to:                            and duties of mine workers. To avoid longer lists, the mining law can use a reference
(a) work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions;                   to others laws that specifically regulate the topics. However, at least a list including
(b) receive equal pay for equal work without distinction of any kind;       the principal rights and duties is advisable in the mining law.

(c) have rest, leisure and reasonable limitation of working hours and       Usually, duties are rights inversely read. This means that most of them are obligations
period of holidays with pay as well as remuneration for public holidays;    that are designed to protect the worker (e.g. applying health and safety codes).




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                        587 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                        PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
(d) form or join a trade union;

(e) be trained and retrained for the development of his or her skills; and
(f) receive information relevant to his or her work.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this [Act][Code][Law], the
duties of a worker in any contract of employment or collective
agreement, include the duty to:

(a) work conscientiously in the lawfully chosen occupation;

(b) report for work regularly and punctually;

(c) enhance productivity;
(d) exercise due care in the execution of assigned work;

(e) obey lawful instructions regarding the organization and execution of
his or her work;

(f) take all reasonable care for the safety and health of fellow workers;

(g) protect the interests of the employer; and

(h) take proper care of the property of the employer entrusted to the
worker or under the immediate control of the worker.

41.3 Example 2:                                                              Annotation

Article [_]                                                                  Drawn from a manual prepared by the Ministry of Labour of Perú,
                                                                             (http://www.mintra.gob.pe/mostrarTemaSNILphp?codTema=89&tip=20),                 this
(1) Rights                                                                   regulation details the rights and duties of the workers mainly in occupational health
(a) Request inspections and inquiries from the (Health Regulating            and safety matters. It is not a general list of rights and duties.
Authority), when the safety conditions at work are precarious.

(b) Know the safety risks at work, that might affect his/her health and
safety.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      588 | Page
                                                     AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                        PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
(c) Get information about security or health at work.

(d) Receive medical help.

(e) Receive medical and surgical attention, general and specialized.

(f) Receive hospital and pharmacy attention.

(g) Receive rehabilitation and prosthetic pieces, its correction or
replacement when needed by normal use.

(h) Receive continuous education opportunities

(i) Elect his/her collective workers’ representatives.

(2) Obligations/Duties

(a) Be responsible for his/her own safety and co-worker safety

(b) Do not operate or manipulate machines, valves, pipes or electric
conductors, if the worker is not trained for that.

(c) Report, immediately, any safety work incident.

(d) Comply, strictly, the safety directions and regulations.

(e) Participate actively in all programmed trainings.

                                                         42. Occupational Health and Safety


Mines are potentially hazardous and unhealthy places by reason of the risk of exposure to chemicals, the complex machinery used in some mines,
poorly kept mine equipment and conditions, among others. Unsafe working conditions in mines may thus cause serious injury, death, the spread of
disease and ultimately, heavy costs for the health system. Occupational health and safety provisions typically address the obligations of various
stakeholders, from license holders to government agencies, to create a safe working environment for persons who work in and around mining sites.
These provisions may be provided for in other pieces of specific legislation such as a mine health and safety laws which should then be referred to



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                          589 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
in the mining law. These provisions may also be addressed within the mining law in general obligation provisions for the type of license or as a
distinct chapter, and can include (but are not limited to):
-        The minimum age of mine employees (including child labour prohibition);
-        General occupational health and safety measures to protect mine workers (including use of explosives and hazardous materials);
-        Standards for adequate housing (where the license holder provides housing on or near the mine site).

                                                       42. Occupational Health and Safety
                                 42.1 Applicability of Health & Other Relevant Laws or Regulations


Health and safety is a subject matter that has increasingly become an integral part of the mining laws and regulations of most African countries,
particularly over the last 20 years. However, as mentioned above, there may be other applicable laws that govern the mining sector specifically or
labour generally. This topic addresses provisions that provide for the application of national laws with regard to health and safety standards and/or
international principles.
42.1 Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 Drawn and adapted from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision avoids
                                                                            mentioning specific pieces of legislation by name and instead provide for the
All holders of mining rights, must comply with the relevant provisions of   applicability of health and safety laws and regulations as currently in effect.
all laws affecting health and safety at a mine site and/or in mining
operations.                                                                 When the mining law mentions specifically an act by name (e.g. “the Health and
                                                                            Safety Act?), the mining law should include a clause that eliminates any confusion
                                                                            about the application of subsequent modifications to that law (e.g. “as amended from
                                                                            time to time?).

42.1 Example 2:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision identifies the relevant
                                                                            regulating entities tasked with drawing up health and occupational safety standards.
All holders of mining rights shall be obliged to observe the highest


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                     590 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
standards of hygiene and occupational safety as established by the          In cases where they may not exist other governing pieces of legislation, the law may
[Regulating Authority] in collaboration with the [Health Regulating         require the establishment of clear standards through the collaboration of relevant
Authority], the [Labour Regulating Authority], the [Environmental           government regulations.
Regulating Authority] and other relevant governmental agencies. In this
regard, mine and quarry operations shall be further obliged to draw up
and enforce workplace regulations in accordance with such standards to
ensure the hygiene and safety of their workers, plants and inventories.

                                                       42. Occupational Health and Safety
                                                  42.2 General Health and Safety Provisions


When a mining law includes health and safety provisions, it is recommended that the provisions be consistent with any other relevant and current
legislation, particularly those that deal with health and safety standards across all sectors in detail. In cases where there is no national legislation
related to health and safety, the mining law may establish the health and safety standards applicable to the mining sector and give authority to the
appropriate regulating entities to make rules concerning such matters. These provisions may also, where necessary, include the setup of funding
instruments (wealth funds, bonds, etc. to address non-environmental accidents and injuries.
42.2 Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_]                                                                 Adapted from Somalia’s mining law (1984), this provision calls for the
                                                                            implementation of international best practice as well as appropriate work place
(1) During exploration or mining operations, a mining rights holder, in     policies and regulations in order to safeguard the safety and health of people engaged
accordance with the generally accepted practices in the international       in mining operations.
mining industry, shall take all steps necessary to secure the safety,
health and welfare of all persons engaged in such operations.

(2) The procedures for the application and enforcement of such
standards and work practices shall be prescribed in regulations and may
be developed, in addition to the regulations, in the terms and conditions
of any applicable Agreement.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      591 | Page
                                                 AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
42.2 Example 2:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Drawn from Ghana’s mining law (2006), this provision provides for the making of
                                                                           regulations which will detail the requirements for health, safety and environmental
The [Regulating Authority] shall make regulations to provide for matters   protection.
concerning environmental protection, health and safety, including
ensuring the safety of the public and the safety and welfare of persons
employed in mines and the carrying on of mineral operations in a safe,
proper and effective manner.

                                                      42. Occupational Health and Safety
                                                              42.3 Inspection of Mines


Inspection of mines are carried out to ensure that mining operations are conducted in compliance with the standards established by law. Most
mining laws and regulations include sections on inspections. They may also be detailed in a health and safety law or other national law. The
requirement for mine inspections can also be found in the ILO Safety and Health in Mines Convention, 1995 (No. 176). Consequently, countries
who have ratified the convention may want to cascade down the requirements that flow from the Convention or reference the Convention or other
applicable national law in the mining law. A law may mandate a minimum number of regular inspections (usually every six months or once a year)
and one of such inspections should be required before the opening of a new mine. An investigative kind of inspection may also be conducted that
is focuses on specific issues such as high risk areas, equipment or practices. An investigative inspection of mines may be part of a regular mine
risk assessment or based on a complaint. Consequently, it is important to provide for anonymous reporting of non-compliance which allows the
public and mine workers to assist in monitoring mine safety. An effective inspection depends significantly on the expertise and professionalism of
the inspectors. Making rules on the procedures for mine inspection allows for a transparent process for mining operators and provides clear
guidelines for inspectors. A finding of non-compliance may, based on the level of risk, provide for a chance to cure and/or a penalty.
42.3 Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Drawn from Ghana’s mining health and safety law (2012), this provision outlines the
                                                                           powers of inspectors, including the times for inspections as well as the mode of
(1) A [Regulating Authority] may, at a reasonable time in the day or in    inspection. It allows the inspector to take samples of minerals and other substances
                                                                           as well as photos and extracts from documents. The inspector may also direct that


NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    592 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                        PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
the night and on the production of the appropriate authorization                remedial measures be taken to the interest of safety, health and the environment.
                                                                                Non-compliance with such directives attracts punitive measures.
(a) enter, inspect and examine a mine in a manner that does not
unnecessarily impede or obstruct the working of the mine;

(b) examine and inquire into

 (i) the state and condition of a mine or part of the mine and of matters
and things that pertain to the mine in so far as they relate to the safety or
health of persons employed in the mine, and

 (ii) matters relating to these regulations, to minimize any damage that
may be caused to the environment by mining and mining related
operations; and

(c) enforce compliance with these regulations.

(2) For the purpose of an examination, inspection, or enquiry, an
inspector may invite the manager of a mine or an official of the mine not
below the rank of a mine captain or its equivalent, together with any
other official or employee that the inspector considers necessary to
accompany the inspector and that manager, official or employee shall
comply with the request.

(3) A [Regulating Authority] may:

(a) take samples of minerals and other substances from a mine

 (i) for the purpose of analysis or testing; or

 (ii) for use in evidence in connection with an offence against these
regulations, and

(b) for the purposes of inspection,

 (i) take extracts from or make copies of a document, or




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       593 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
 (ii) take photos of a mine.

(4) A [Regulating Authority] shall give a receipt for any object or
document removed or taken in the course of the performance of the
Inspector’s functions.

(5) A [Regulating Authority] may, by written notice to a holder of a
mining lease, or the manager of a mine, order

(a) the cessation of operations in, and the withdrawal of any or all
persons from the mine or part of the mine where the inspector considers
necessary in the interest of safety health or the environment; or

(b) the discontinuance of the use of a machinery that the Inspector
considers unsafe, until the action necessary for safety as specified in the
notice is taken and completed.

(6) Where the [Regulating Authority] is of the opinion that a
circumstance, practice or omission in a mine or part of the mine is so
defective or dangerous as to be likely to cause bodily injury or cause
damage to any property and there is no provision in these regulations
concerning that situation, the Inspector shall:

(a) make an order which directs the holder or the manager of the mine
to remedy the situation immediately or within the time specified by the
Inspector, and

(b) confirm the order by notice in writing, specifying the matters
considered defective or dangerous and which the holder or manager is
required to remedy immediately or within the time specified in the order.

(7) A holder or manager who does not comply with an order made under
sub-regulation (5) commits an offence and is liable on summary
conviction to a fine of not more than [fifteen thousand penalty units] or a
term of imprisonment of not more than twenty-five years or to both.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                   594 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
(8) A holder or manager may appeal against an order made by an
Inspector under this regulation.

(9) A copy of an order made under this regulation shall be kept as part
of the record required to be maintained under the record keeping
obligations under this [Law][Act][Code].

(10) A [Regulating Authority] may:

(a) obtain and record statements from witnesses, or conduct enquiries
regarding mine accidents, dangerous occurrences and contraventions of
these regulations

(b) appear at inquests and call and examine witnesses and cross-
examine witnesses, and

(c) conduct a prosecution for an offence under these regulations.

(11) A [Regulating Authority] may:

(a) exercise any power that is necessary for giving effect to these
regulations; and

(b) impose penalties specified or deemed appropriate for an offence
under these Regulations.

(12) A [Regulating Authority], in exercising the powers specified under
these Regulations, may be assisted by a person who the inspector
believes has special or expert knowledge of the matter being inspected,
tested or examined.

42.3 Example 2:                                                           Annotation

Article [_]                                                               Drawn from Ethiopia’s mining law (2010), this provision des cribes the powers and
                                                                          the scope of (inspection) activities of an authorized inspector of a mine. Unlike
(1) Any authorized Inspector of the [Regulating Authority] may enter,     Example 1, this provision provides for the inspector, clear seizure powers of
during office hours, any license area and may:



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                 595 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
a) inspect any activity or process carried out in or upon the area in        materials that may be relevant to a legal proceeding.
question;

b) inspect any book, record, statement or other document and make
copies or extracts thereof;

c) examine any material or appliance found in the area;

d) take samples of any material and test, examine, analyse and classify
such samples;

e) S\seize any material, appliance, book, record, statement or other
document which might be relevant to a legal proceeding involving the
violation of this [Law][Act][Code], regulations or directives and keep it
in the custody of the [Regulating Authority]; and

f) require support necessary for the accomplishment of the inspection in
accordance with this sub-article.

(2) Where any material, appliance, book, record, statement or other
document is put under the custody of the [Regulating Authority] in
accordance with sub-article (1)(e) of this Article:

a) the person from whose possession or control any document is taken
shall be allowed, under the supervision of the Inspector, to make copies
or extracts thereof;

b) if no legal proceedings are instituted in connection with any of the
items seized, or if it appears that such item is not required at any trial
for the purpose of evidence or upon an order of court, that item shall be
returned immediately to the person from whom it was seized

(3) The Inspector shall show his letter of authorization to the
appropriate officer of the licensee for conducting inspection under sub-
article (1) of this Article.




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    596 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
                                                       42. Occupational Health and Safety
                                                              42.4 On-Site Regulations


In addition to the overall requirement to comply with health and safety provisions in the mining code or other laws and regulations, license holders
should be required, either by law or contract, to develop and enforce onsite health and safety regulations to govern company operations in
conformity with national legislation and regulations on this matter. These provisions may also specify which government officials and regulatory
bodies will ensure that license holders are in compliance, as well as a system of periodic review to ensure on-site regulations are up to date with
current health and safety best practices.
42.4 Example 1:                                                             Annotation

Article [_] Obligation to Draw up Workplace Regulations.                    Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision not only requires the right
All holders of mining rights shall be obliged to observe the highest        holder to draw up the workplace rules in accordance with standards issues by the
standards of hygiene and occupational safety as established by the          relevant regulating entities but also obligates a prior review of such rules by the
[Regulating Authority], in collaboration with the [other relevant           regulating entity for approval. Further, the rules must be made visible to the workers.
Regulating Authorities including health, labour and environment]. In
this regard, mine and quarry operations shall be further obliged to draw
up and enforce Regulations in accordance with such standards to ensure
the hygiene and safety of their workers, plants and inventories

Article [_] Approval of Regulations.
The texts of any and all such hygiene and occupational safety
regulations shall be submitted to the [Regulating Authority] for prior
review and subsequent approval. Once approved, copies thereof shall be
posted in the most visible locations for workers within plants, Operation
and other work sites.


                                                       42. Occupational Health and Safety



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       597 | Page
                                                   AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
                                                                        42.5 Accidents


Accident and injury provisions typically address the definition, reporting and investigation procedure for incidents that occur on the mining site.
Mining is considered an inherently dangerous activity, thus, prevention, response to, and reporting of accidents should be an integral part of the
country’s mining law and regulation. State procedure varies widely and may include some of the following examples:
-        Requiring license holders to report death or serious injury directly to a designated government official or regulatory body;
-        Managing the investigation process either through a designated regulatory body or through an independently created inquiry panel
42.5 Example 1:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Somalia’ mining law (1984), this provision requires that accidents are
                                                                              reported to regulating authority who undertakes an investigation. The regulating
(1) Whenever an accident occurs in connection with exploration or             authority is also obligated to share the findings of the investigation with the
mining operations causing or resulting in loss of life or serious injury to   appropriate labour authority.
any person, the person in charge of the operations shall, as soon as
possible, report in writing the facts up the chain of the right holder’s
Management, who shall in turn report in writing the fact to the
[Regulating Authority] who shall hold an inquiry into the cause thereof
and record a finding.

(2) A copy of the report and finding shall be submitted to the competent
labour authority

42.5 Example 2:                                                               Annotation

Article [_]                                                                   Drawn from Liberia’s mining law (2000), this provision goes further to regulate what
                                                                              is required in cases of danger and accidents. It covers aspects such as: reporting,
(1) Accidents occurring in a mine, quarry or in connection with               preservation custody, preservation of evidence and the practical application of the
operations that cause serious injury or death must be reported by the         regulation. The reporting requirement is not only to the Regulating Entity but other
operator as soon as possible to the [Regulating Authority], and to such       relevant entities, ensuring that all relevant authorities which may include security,
other Persons as may be prescribed by the laws of [Country] within the        labour and environment are timely informed. While it may seem to create an unclear



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                       598 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
time specified in such laws.                                                 chain of control, the provision maintains the sector Regulating Entity as the lead
                                                                             investigating authority in collaboration with other relevant authorities. The
(2) When accidents occur in connection with operations, the condition of     obligations also flow down to the right holder’s contractors and sub -contractors.
the premises where the accident occurred shall be preserved without
alteration until inspectors and representatives of the [Regulating
Authority] have completed their investigations, or authorization to alter
the condition of the accident scene or objects therein as obtained from
the [Regulating Authority]. However, the foregoing prohibition shall not
apply to the extent necessary to permit operations for the preservation of
human life and property.

(3) In cases of emergency, where the Mine or Quarry Operator has
failed to take appropriate hygiene and safety measures, the [Regulating
Authority] or its duly authorized agents shall, in collaboration with the
appropriate agencies of Government take whatever relief or preventive
measures are necessary to remove or mitigate the danger and when
necessary shall make demands on local government authorities with the
view to saving human life and property.

(4) When part of the work in a mine or quarry is awarded to any
contractor or subcontractor, the employees of any such contractor or
subcontractor shall in all respects be obliged to respect all regulations
provided for in this chapter.

(5) Subsequent to a discovery by any official of the [Regulating
Authority]’s inspectorate or a complaint that a holder of a mining right
has failed to implement any of the hygiene and safety regulations in this
chapter, the [Regulating Authority] may prescribe, in collaboration with
the [Health Regulating Authority], and the [Labour Regulating
Authority], after hearing representations and recommendations from
appropriate parties/agencies, measures required to ensure the hygiene
and safety of the workers, plant and inventories. In cases of emergencies
or imminent peril, the appropriate department of the [Regulating
Authority] may promptly employ or prescribe provisional measures



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    599 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                       PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
pending issuance of final orders by the [Regulating Authority].

                                                       42. Occupational Health and Safety
                                                                  42.6 Insurance Coverage


Given that mining activities are largely conducted in labour-intensive and high-risk environment, insurance coverage becomes fundamental to the
management of risk on site. It is therefore important that mining laws require license holders to obtain adequate insurance to cover on-site
personnel and property with respect to health and safety risks.
42.6 Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Inspired by language from Angola’s mining law (2011) and Sierra Leone’s mining
                                                                           law (2009), this provision requires mining rights licence holders to have insurance
(1) Mining rights licence holders must show proof of insurance coverage    against risks, in particular to cover occupational accidents suffered during the course
prior to the start of operations. At minimum, insurance coverage should    of mining operations and coverage for health and life insurance of employees.
cover risks including:                                                     Ideally, proof (or a plan to obtain) insurance coverage should be submitted to the
                                                                           regulating authority during the application process for the mining licence.

(a) damage to mining sites

(b) third party liability

(c) occupational accidents suffered by personnel on the mining site; and

c) health and life insurance for all employees

                                                       42. Occupational Health and Safety
                                                 42.7 Standards for Housing and Living Conditions




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                      600 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
The law should include, at a minimum, general provisions or reference to provisions which could appear in other legislation or regulations that
specify the minimum requirements and standards for housing and living conditions for mine workers. Possible issues to be covered can include
size of the dwelling, number of people to be housed within the dwelling, sanitation and utilities, protection against extreme climate conditions, pest
control and nutrition.
42.7 Example 1:                                                            Annotation

Article [_] Transformation of minerals industry                            Adapted from South Africa’s mining law (2002), this provision provides for the
                                                                           regulating authorities for mining and housing to jointly develop minimum housing
The [Regulating Authority] must, within [x] years from the date on         and living standards for the mining sector, to be published within a defined time
which this [Code][Act][Law] took effect, (a) and after consultation with   period in accompanying regulations. This approach allows for some degree of
the [Housing Regulating Authority], develop a housing and living           flexibility, giving regulating authorities the time to collaborate and draw up an
conditions standard for the minerals industry, to be published in          appropriately detailed standard for the sector.
subsequent regulations

42.7 Example 2:                                                            Annotation

Article [_]                                                                Drawn from Ghana’s Mining law (2012) this provision goes into more detail,
                                                                           discussing various amenities to be provided by the owner or manager of a mine.
(1) The owner of a mine, manager of a mine or a holder of a small scale    These include changing rooms and lockers, bathing and toilet facilities, an adequate
mining licence, shall ensure that changing rooms are provided              supply of potable water and facilities for storage and consumption of food.
(a) near to man riding shafts on the surface of an underground mine,

(b) at locations near to a work area of a surface mine, with separate
    provisions for males and females, and

(c) are proportionate in size to the number of persons employed in the
    mine.

(2) A changing room shall have

(a) sufficient lockers, cupboards or other suitable accommodation
capable of being locked to enable each employee store goods separately;

(b) adequate facilities for bathing



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                                                                    601 | Page
                                                    AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                        PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
(c) adequate facilities for drying clothes; and

(d) suitable toilet facilities.

(3) An adequate supply of potable water shall be provided at a
convenient and safe position close to each working place.

(4) The manager of a mine or holder of a small scale mining licence
shall provide at a convenient place on the surface of the mine facilities
for the storage and consumption of food in the mine.

(5) The manager of a mine or the holder of a small scale licence shall
ensure that the mine has sufficient and suitable toilets and urinals for the
use of employees of the mine and that

(a) where the number of persons employed does not exceed one
    hundred, there is one toilet for at most every twenty-five persons;

(b) where the number of persons employed exceeds one hundred, there
    is one additional toilet for at most every forty persons beyond the
    first one hundred persons;

(c) each main working level underground has a well-lit, well ventilated
    and screen toilet, which is kept clean;

(d) each bucket used in an underground sanitary convenience has a
    close fitting lid which is fixed on the bucket while it is removed to
    the surface; and

(e) a toilet is accessible to each workman.

(6) A person shall not pollute the mine with faeces or misuse a sanitary
facility

(7) The person in charge of a working place or a section in a mine shall



NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                    602 | Page
                                                  AMLA GUIDING TEMPLATE
                                      PART E: Local Development, Labour & Health
ensure

(a) that the working place or section is clean and safe; and

(b) in the particular case of an underground mine, each level, drive,
    cross-cut and station is clean and safe and free of any defects.

(c) the manager of a mine or a holder of a small scale mining licence
    shall ensure that

 (i) each toilet together with its surroundings within a perimeter of ten
meters is disinfected at least twice every week, and

 (ii) ((b) the dates of the disinfection are logged and the records are
open for inspection by the inspector




NOTE: This Document is part of a multi-part document, Parts A – E                  603 | Page
