                PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
The Public Procurement Monitoring System of Montenegro
1. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................... 4
2. METHODOLOGY ................................................................................................... 5
3. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK ................................................................................... 6
  3.1     Legal acts ........................................................................................................................................... 8
  3.2     National Strategy Documents............................................................................................................ 8
     3.2.1       Annual Public Procurement Report (2015) ............................................................................... 9
     3.2.2       Montenegro 2016 Report on the EU enlargement process ...................................................... 9

4. THE MONITORING FUNCTION OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT SYSTEM ............ 11
  4.1     Legal aspects.................................................................................................................................... 12
  4.2     Institutional aspects ........................................................................................................................ 13
  4.3     Technological (e-GP) ........................................................................................................................ 13

5. GAP ANALYSIS .................................................................................................... 14
  5.1     The Public Procurement Annual Report 2015 ................................................................................. 14
  5.2     The World Bank strategy to promote the adoption of e-GP in ECA countries ................................ 15
  5.3     Benchmarking against the WB set of KPIs ....................................................................................... 16

6. FROM POLICY TO MEASUREMENT AND MONITORING ...................................... 17
  6.1     A three dimension monitoring system ............................................................................................ 17
  6.2     The quantitative approach to public procurement ......................................................................... 18
  6.3     Key policy areas and performance indicators ................................................................................. 18
     6.3.1       e-Gov (comprising the e-GP project) ....................................................................................... 19
     6.3.2       Economic ................................................................................................................................. 20
     6.3.3       Environmental ......................................................................................................................... 21
     6.3.4       Social ........................................................................................................................................ 21
     6.3.5       Governance and integrity ........................................................................................................ 22
     6.3.6       International Public Procurement (barriers to international trade) ....................................... 24
     6.3.7       Health sector ........................................................................................................................... 27
     6.3.8       Local Government ................................................................................................................... 28
     6.3.9       Combination of general monitoring with health and local government................................. 29

7. THE WAY FORWARD .......................................................................................... 29




                                                                                                                                                                 2
ACRONYMS

AC    Administrative Court
AIA   Administration for Inspection Affairs
ASK   Agency for Corruption Prevention
CA    Contracting Authority
EC    European Commission
EU    European Union
KPI   Key Performance Indicator
MNE   Montenegro
MoF   Ministry of Finance
PPA   Public Procurement Administration
PPL   Public Procurement Law
SAI   State Audit Institution
SC    State Commission for the Control of Public Procurement
SME   Small and Medium Enterprise




                                                               3
    1. INTRODUCTION

Montenegro is currently in the process of modernizing and restructuring its public procurement system, not
only with a view to bringing its procurement system in line with international best practices and complete
its accession requirements to enter the EU, but also to constructing more efficient and competitive public
procurement, that will enable optimization of results.

In order to guarantee that significant improvements are built into the procurement system, the
Government of Montenegro has taken several steps to tackle its shortcomings, namely by devising
Strategies for the Development of the Procurement System along with Action Plans that establish specific
measures and goals and respective timeframes for completion and tracking the implementation of such
measures.

The assessments conducted by external entities to the Government of Montenegro have shown that such
Strategies have been productive in addressing issues in the public procurement system of Montenegro and
showcase a steady evolution towards better procurement practices.

In order to continue this action and to achieve its proposed goals in the Strategy for the Development of the
Public Procurement System of Montenegro for the period 2016-2020, the World Bank has been called to
provide assistance in devising a methodology that will address the following measures identified in the
Strategy:

(b) the preparation of practical implementing and monitoring tools (including administrative rules,
instructions, manuals, and standard contract documents);



(c) the strengthening of control mechanisms which are necessary to ensure full knowledge and reliability of
the system, including close monitoring and enhanced transparency of the execution phase of public
contracts based on systematic risk assessments with prioritisation of controls in vulnerable sectors and
procedures;



(d) effective functioning of the remedies system, including in the area of concessions, public private
partnerships and defence procurement;



(e) measures/ actions related to the prevention of and fight against corruption and conflict of interest in
the area of public procurement at both central and local level.



The present document is only concerned with the issue introduced by point (b) – to prepare a practical
methodology for the monitoring function of the Public Procurement system.

The monitoring function will be assessed and improvements suggested according to three main areas for
monitoring:

    •   Compliance
    •   Performance
    •   Integrity



                                                                                                           4
The analyses introduced by this methodology will most definitely concentrate on performance compliance
indicators. These will allow for a more quantitative-based approach to monitoring of the public
procurement practices in Montenegro, introducing a less formal concept of monitoring, which is currently
restricted to legal and regulatory compliance and emphasizes formal and administrative aspects of
procurement. Analysing and improving the system of procurement is entirely dependent on data available
and the analysis of the data for gathering business intelligence and increase productivity of all entities in
the system.

To this end, guidelines and key performance indicators (KPIs) on how to improve the monitoring, auditing
and reporting mechanisms will be introduced. This analysis will also include the benchmarking of the 2015
Annual Report by the PPA, where monitoring will be assessed in terms of compliance with proposed targets
and changes verified up to this point.

Other issues and documents will be addressed and mentioned as they are intimately linked with the
monitoring function, namely: data and information management mechanisms and tools; practices of
performance assessment; streamlining of the attribution of the monitoring capacity and improvements in
communication of results between the interested parties – from institutions to economic operators in the
system.

To this end, direct consultation of the Public Procurement Agency of Montenegro and other entities in the
system, as well as comprehensive desk research, were carried out with the aim of collecting information
and documentation describing the institutional, legal and operational aspects of the national public
procurement system.

This document is, thus, the result of combined efforts between the World Bank and the Government of
Montenegro to build the monitoring capacity of the public procurement system of MNE and to use the
resulting information to conduct optimized procurement and implement market consultations, which
should be the cornerstone of any quantitative assessment of a public procurement system.



    2. METHODOLOGY

The documents listed below were consulted for the development of a monitoring strategy for Montenegro:



MNE Legislation and Strategy Paper

    -   Law on Amendments to the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of Montenegro?, no.
        57/14 and 28/15)
    -   Rulebook on Methodology of Risk Analysis in performing control over Public Procurement
        Procedures (Anti-Corruption Methodology) pursuant to article 15 paragraph 4 of the Public
        Procurement Law – Official Gazette of Montenegro, 42/11, 57/14 and 28/15
    -   Rulebook on Manner of Keeping and Content Records on Violation of Anti-Corruption rules,
        pursuant to article 15 paragraph 4 of the PPL - Official Gazette of Montenegro 42/11
    -   Rulebook on the records of Public Procurement Procedures, pursuant to article 117 of the Public
        Procurement Law - Official Gazette of Montenegro 42/11
    -   Strategy for Development of the Public Procurement System in Montenegro for the period 2016-
        2020;
    -   Strategy for Development of the Public Procurement System in Montenegro for the period 2011-
        2015;


                                                                                                           5
    -   Report on Public Procurement in Montenegro for 2015;




EU enlargement

    -   European Commission (2016), Montenegro 2016 Report – 2016 Communication on EU enlargement
        Policy.



World Bank Group

    -   World Bank (2015), Promoting E-Government Procurement (E-GP) – Strategy and Role of World
        Bank in Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Countries;
    -   World Bank (2017), Benchmarking Public Procurement –Assessing Public Procurement Regulatory
        Systems in 180 Economies.



From a doctrinal point of view, the following references were vital to construct a monitoring model:

    -   SIGMA (2013), Procurement Brief 27 – Monitoring of Public Procurement



    3. ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK

The legal and regulatory frameworks of Montenegro’s Public procurement system are increasingly in line
with international best practices and the EU acquis.

Though the political commitment to enhance the Public Procurement system is visible from the produced
outputs of the Government (Strategies and Action Plans) and the implementation rate of measures
destined to tackle shortcomings is positive, MNE acknowledges the need to take further action in certain
areas of Procurement and has in the past years sought the support of external institutions to provide
technical input on how to go about dealing with the issues still pervading its public procurement system.

The monitoring function is one such issue that needs urgent consideration and that calls for solid measures
to be taken at all levels of the procurement system.

Among the main areas for action, the following should be mentioned:

       Development of information management systems for communicability of results;
       Increased Institutional communication and engagement of all parties in the system;
       Development of performance compliance assessments based on Business Intelligence acquired
        from market consultations;
       More Training opportunities for all entities in the system (including economic operators, namely
        SMEs);
       Streamlining of roles and responsibilities of institutions (e.g. increased collaboration between AIA
        and SAI on auditing and inspecting functions);
       Revision of the monitoring concept to encompass more substantial and procedural aspects and not
        only legal and regulatory considerations;



                                                                                                           6
       Revision of the PPL with regards to Monitoring capacity and the definition of SC’s status concerning
        the remedies system;
       Legal amendments to Administrative Law and Public Procurement Law to avoid conflict (as seen
        from the annulment rate of SC’s decisions by the Administrative Court).



The Table below summarises the roles of the key stakeholders in the Public Procurement system, lists the
most relevant issues to solve and prompts some suggestions for corrective measures to be considered.



    NAME              FUNCTION                ISSUES                        SUGGESTIONS
                 Reporting/             Insufficient        Conduct performance assessments based on
                 regulatory             capacity;           BI;
                 (regulation;           Data collection     Creation of online portal communicable to
                 standard bidding       is difficult.       other institutional databases in the PP
       PPA       documents;                                 system for improvement of reporting and
                 Statistics and                             monitoring capacity.
                 records; training;
                 performance
                 reports)

                 Audit                 Auditing             Less formal approach to auditing (not only
                 (In 5 sectors, namely focused on           focused on legal compliance, but more
       SAI       Public Procurement) formal and             committed with substantive and procedural
                                       administrative       aspects)
                                       aspects
                 Inspection control    Performance of       Revision of the inspectors’ attributions in the
                                       the system is        PPL to encompass more performance
       AIA                             solely based on      analyses of the procedures.
                                       legal compliance

                 Review of              Insufficient        Revision of PPL section on remedies system;
                 challenges             capacity;           Increased staff capacity and sponsor training;
                 (In charge of the      Immediate           Creating IT solution for a database on
       SC        complaint review       suspension of       records of previous decisions will enable
                 mechanism, through     procurement         more coherent decision making and better
                 remedies system)       procedures          communication of results to PPA

               Arbitration on           Currently           Harmonize the Administrative Law with the
Administrative challenges               annulling many      Public Procurement Law to avoid conflict and
   Court                                decisions of the    overlapping
                                        SC on challenges

                 Corruption             Public              Increase capacity in monitoring irregular
       ASK       prevention             Procurement         practices and provide training on public
                                        perceived as        procurement so that ASK staff knows what
                                        one of the main     kind of irregularities are most common in
                                        areas most          Public Procurement and how to address and
                                        permeable to        report on them.
                                        corruption

                                                                                                              7
    3.1 Legal acts

The Law on Amendments to the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of Montenegro?, no. 57/14
and 28/15), is hereinafter referred to as the Public Procurement Law (PPL). The PPL is currently in the
process of being reviewed so that it is compliant with the new EU public procurement regime as an
important part of the EU acquis i.e. Directive 2014/24/EU on public procurement, Directive 2014/25/EU on
procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors, and Directive
2014/23/EU on the award of concession contracts. All directives were due to be transposed into the
national legal systems of EU countries by 18 April 2016. A detailed approach to legal aspects is entailed in a
subsequent section- 4.1.



    3.2 National Strategy Documents

Two strategy documents have been analysed with the purpose of better understanding the features of the
state of play of the national public procurement system and the measures being considered to tackle
current issues in the public procurement system.

Only the most recent reports were considered for analysis in this methodology with a view to assessing the
national system of public procurement of Montenegro, because they provide more up-to-date insights on
what still needs to be improved in the monitoring and inform on the most recent reforms.

This does not preclude the need to gather additional documents to cover further the activities undertaken
within the fields of compliance monitoring, integrity and prevention of corruption, but to establish an
opportune and realistic assessment, only the most recent reports introduce significant added-value to this
end.

The strategies presented provide an important tool to assess the level of commitment with the goals
introduced in those documents and the pace of the implementation process of the suggested measures
through the action plans:

    -   Strategy for the Development of the Public Procurement System 2011 – 2015;
    -   Strategy for the Development of the Public Procurement System in Montenegro 2016 – 2020.

Both documents provide a detailed overview on identified shortcomings and put solutions forward. Action
Plans attached to the strategy documents help trace implementation and help us assess the velocity of
reforms undertaken since 2011.

With regards to the monitoring function, the following excerpts from the strategy currently under
implementation (2016 – 2020) should be highlighted:

    -   It is recognised that “Further efforts are required for harmonization of public procurement
        regulations with the EU acquis, as follows: (…) Monitoring of contracts; (…) Supervision and
        reporting on public procurement procedures?;
    -   “It is necessary that MNE invests in better management of data in order to monitor the entire
        procurement cycle and to make the system easier to use.? This is, in our perspective, closely linked
        with the setup of an e-GP system;
    -   Some of the problems identified in public procurement may be caused by the inadequacy of laws
        and regulations other than the PPL. The strategy mentions the case of the Law on Inspection
        Supervision (better monitoring of the award and implementation of contracts is required), the Law

                                                                                                            8
        on the System of Internal Financial Controls in Public Sector (better internal audit within contracting
        authorities remains crucial for improving monitoring and verification of implementation of
        contracts);
    -   Finally, it clearly states that “Strengthening of monitoring of the public procurement system? should
        be taken among the “PPA 's priorities in the coming period? (2016-2020).

This methodology is substantially aligned with the ongoing reform strategy and action plan (2016-2020),
bearing in mind the public procurement requirements that need to be met by Montenegro in the scope of
the accession plan to the EU


    3.2.1   Annual Public Procurement Report (2015)

The Annual Report on Public Procurement in Montenegro (2015)1 compiled by the Public Procurement
Administration (PPA) and published in May 2016 already offers a good overview of the national public
procurement system, and it is already very much in line with what will probably be one of the main
recommendations in this document, i.e. the need for improving the quantitative approach to public
procurement system assessment and appraisal.

The following aspects of the Annual Report 2015 should be highlighted:

    -   Chapter 4: the report provides a good update on the implementation of the “Strategy for
        development of public procurement in Montenegro for the period 2011-2015? before addressing
        the implementation of the new strategy for the period 2016 – 2020. Annual reports are expected to
        keep this function of monitoring the implementation of the strategy;

    -   Chapter 7: a key area for development, also from a monitoring point of view, is the preparation of
        the transition towards a fully-fledged e-procurement2 system. The relationship between
        procurement monitoring and e-procurement will be addressed in detail in the section 3.3 below,
        but it is of utmost importance to note that the e-GP theme is a standing priority in the PPA’s
        agenda and it is covered in both strategy documents and action plans (2011-15 and 2016-2020);

    -   Chapter 10: Statistical Report on Public Procurement. This chapter deserves a special mention as it
        was used as a central piece in the gap analysis and is being benchmarked against an “ideal set of
        key performance indicators (KPIs).? These KPIs only represent the starting point for designing a list
        that is tailored to the specific country needs, in addition to the standard areas that every modern
        public procurement system is expected to be monitoring. The mere inclusion of such statistical
        information in the annual public procurement report denotes a very positive trend as far as the
        underlying political drive is concerned, and should be considered as a key starting point for the
        current project.



    3.2.2   Montenegro 2016 Report on the EU enlargement process3


1
  The English version of the report published in the PPA’s website has been used.
2
  E-procurement is the expression mainly used in the European Union, namely by the 2014 Directives as “e -GP?,
standing for “electronic government procurement? is more used by organisations like The World Bank.
3
  Commission Staff Working Document, Montenegro 2016 Report SWD (2016) 360 final, accompanying the document
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions 2016 Communication on EU Enlargement Policy {COM(2016) 715 final },

                                                                                                             9
The national system of public procurement is highly influenced by the EU acquis4 due to the ongoing
negotiations for the accession of Montenegro to the EU, which, combined with its recent membership to
the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement (GPA),5 constitutes an external positive pressure
towards the acceleration of the ongoing public procurement reforms.

The assessment of the European Commission highlights a couple of areas that need improvement:

“Montenegro is moderately prepared on public procurement, an area particularly vulnerable to corruption.
Some progress was made thanks to the start of the implementation of a new 2016-2020 strategy on public
procurement, which was one of the 2015 recommendations. No progress was made on legal alignment,
where the area of concessions in particular remains at an early stage. More efforts are needed to
strengthen implementation and enforcement capacity at all levels and prevent corruption during the
procurement cycle. In the coming year Montenegro should in particular: → continue to strengthen the
implementation and enforcement capacity of its public procurement system at all levels, including on e-
procurement, the monitoring of contracts and supervision and reporting on procurement procedures;
(…)?.

And adds the need for “(…) Better monitoring of contract awards and contract implementation is needed .
While the 2014 amendments to the procurement law gave the public inspection service more powers in this
area and a third inspector was recruited in January 2016, the service’s capacity remains insufficient for its
tasks. In addition, better internal auditing within contracting authorities remains crucial for improving
monitoring and verifying contract implementation (see also chapter 32 — Financial control). “

“Montenegro urgently needs to invest in better data management to trace the complete procurement cycle
and make the system more user-friendly. With this in mind, work is ongoing to develop a full e-procurement
system. The PPA’s capacity to promote and enforce public procurement rules and monitor the
procurement market continues to improve. However, the PPA needs to invest more in assessing the
performance of the procurement processes, including on the risk of irregularities and factors that reduce
the competitiveness and efficiency of public procurement. The current level of the PPA’s resources remains
insufficient to address this task effectively.?

Another important aspect to take into consideration is the direction that the new EU Directives (2014) have
followed in terms of enhancing some monitoring mechanisms, both in terms of compliance of the national
laws with the Directives and in terms of performance of national systems (e.g. by establishing clear
reporting duties and offering Member States an increasing amount of statistical information). Therefore, it
appears that the EU acquis provides the right setting for:

    -    a much more quantitative approach to public procurement matters;




available                                  at                                      https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-
enlargement/sites/near/files/pdf/key_documents/2016/20161109_report_montenegro.pdf
4
  “The acquis is the body of common rights and obligations that is binding on all the EU member states. It is constantly
evolving and comprises: the content, principles and political objectives of the Treaties; legislation adopted pursuant to
the Treaties and the case law of the Court of Justice; declarations and resolutions adopted by the Union; instruments
under the Common Foreign and Security Policy; international agreements concluded by the Union and those entered
into by the member states among themselves within the sphere of the Union's activities. Candidate countries have to
accept the acquis before they can join the EU and make EU law part of their own national legislation. Adoption and
implementation       of   the    acquis    are     the    basis     of    the     accession      negot iations.?  Source:
https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/policy/glossary/terms/acquis_en.
5                                                        th
  Montenegro is a Member of the WTO GPA since July 15 , 2015.

                                                                                                                      10
    -   a positive shift from a strictly legal compliance-oriented approach to a more performance-driven
        monitoring system6.


    4. THE MONITORING FUNCTION OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT SYSTEM

It is important to define what we conceive as the monitoring function and, primarily, set the very definition
of monitoring. The latter should be defined according to the goals that one wishes to achieve, i.e., defining
standards for action and targets or goals, which can be more or less demanding. Through the monitoring
function, an assessment can be conducted on the progress to achieve such targets. Monitoring should be
separated from the concepts of auditing or inspecting, as these stand for entirely different realities –
monitoring does not entail surveillance, but rather a watchful accompaniment of a process. Auditing and
inspecting, on the other hand, involve “methods and proceedings applied to detect and remedy
infringements.? 7

There is a pervading issue in the monitoring system of Montenegro that requires a thorough revision of
what is here understood as the monitoring function. It becomes apparent that Montenegrin institutions
undertake monitoring only in a partial manner.

In fact, it is not the monitoring structures alone that should be revised and solidified, but also, and
primarily, the subject matter of the monitoring: the new EC directives introduce the potential for devising
solutions with the aim of reducing the formalistic aspect that characterizes the concept and scope of
monitoring activities of the public procurement system in Montenegro. In fact, auditing and monitoring
functions are at times unsuccessful precisely because they regard the success of the procurement
procedures based on legal-compliance alone. Several examples of this prevail in the institutional
framework: the State Audit Institution (SAI) conducts its auditing functions according to compliance
guidelines from a strictly legal perspective; simultaneously, inspection control conducted by the
Administration of Inspection Affairs is more based on administrative and formal requirements, rather than
on the subject of procurement, even considering that procedural errors are the most common
irregularities. The status of the public procurement inspectors as defined in the PPL also determines their
attributions (Article 148), which are much more of a formal nature and, as a result, the inspectors are not
instructed to look for performance indicators of the procurement procedures.

This aspect is ever more notorious if we look at the remedies system being applied in Montenegro with
regards to public procurement: “the State Commission’s decisions are normally final, but can be challenged
before the Administrative Court as reported in the EC’s Montenegro 2016 Report. “The number of SC’s
decisions being annulled by Administrative Court rulings remains significant (44% rejection rate), partially
deriving from conflicts between public procurement and administrative procedure rules.? 8 This illustrates
the prevalence of administrative and formal aspects over contextual aspects and subject matter of the
procurement procedure, which can more easily be assessed by the competent authority in this field, the
State Commission.

With this in mind, the Government of Montenegro should reassess the concept of monitoring and review
its application by its key institutions competent on the matter, so as to entail a more performance-based
assessment that will guarantee efficient decision-making and the application of the “value for money?
principle.

6
  This should not be put as “one or another? but we should rather stress the need to have better (and possibly fewer)
laws and regulations that enable systems to reach better performance (e.g. better value for money).
7
  SIGMA (2013), Procurement Brief 27 – Monitoring of Public Procurement.
8
  European Commission (2016), Montenegro 2016 Report

                                                                                                                  11
    4.1 Legal aspects

The first competence of the Public Procurement Administration in the list of Article 19 of the PPL is “1) to
monitor implementation of the public procurement system.? It might be assumed that the legislator wanted
this provision to refer mainly to performance monitoring, as opposed to more compliance-oriented
activities. The very same article refers, under item 15), to the tasks related to “inspection control?, which
requires some legal interpretation to be done in cooperation with PPA Experts in order to have a clearer
idea about how roles and responsibilities regarding both performance and compliance monitoring are
shared and whether they overlap, taking into consideration the key institutions dealing with these matters:
the Public Procurement Administration (PPA), the State Audit Institution (SAI), the Administration for
Inspection Affaires (AIA) and the Agency for Prevention of Corruption (ASK).

A proper legal interpretation of both relevant PPL provisions like those mentioned above and the specific
bylaws of the concerned institutions will help better assess whether there is any urgent measure to suggest
regarding the institutional framework.9

One important aspect taken from the PPL refers to the reporting obligations as they concern the
information and data that are generated at a decentralised level but need to be collected and analysed at
the central level.

Article 118 of the PPL provides that “A contracting authority shall, by 28 February of the current year at the
latest, submit to the competent state authority the report on conducted public procurement procedures and
on public contracts concluded in the previous year. The report referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall
be submitted both in written and in electronic form. The competent state authority shall prepare an annual
report on conducted public procurement procedures and on public contracts concluded in the previous year
and submit it to the Government by 31 May of the current year at the latest.?

This provision already establishes the timeframe for reporting for both contracting authorities and the PPA.
Nonetheless, the following enhancements could be considered in the framework of the ongoing PPL
revision:

    -   An explicit mention to the scope (minimum contents) of the report that must be sent by
        contracting authorities could be outlined in connection with the adoption of a Rulebook on Public
        Procurement Monitoring (not yet in existence);
    -   The possibility for submissions to be made exclusively in an electronic format, instead of requesting
        both written and electronic submissions, which reduces the added value of the electronic option;
    -   The enhancement of the formulation of the second paragraph in order to broaden the scope and
        contents of the annual report, which is already reporting beyond “(…) on conducted public
        procurement procedures and on public contracts concluded in the previous year (…)?;

The possibility of issuing an implementation act10 fully dedicated to the monitoring function e.g. a Rulebook
on Public Procurement Monitoring will be further developed and its suggested contents are further
described in the final report.




9
   In general, legal and institutional measures should be kept to the minimum necessary for the envisaged
enhancement of monitoring system within the short time so it is recommended that each legislative amendment be
proposed only in case its binding force (and correspondent enforcement mechanism including sanctioning the
infringements) is considered highly needed to push the reform forward.
10
   See footnote 10 regarding the need to limit as much as possible the legislative to the minimum strictly needed. In
many cases, there are improvements, which can be introduced without changing existing legal provisions.

                                                                                                                  12
     4.2 Institutional aspects

Overall, there are various bodies in charge of different types of monitoring (e.g. AIA for compliance, PPA
mostly for performance, and ASK for integrity) and the respective roles and responsibilities do not seem to
overlap. The institutional setup seems adequate and there are no major bottlenecks in the monitoring
function that could be attributed to the specific institutional architecture. In fact, there is a quite clear
separation of roles and responsibilities. However, there is also a cross-cutting shortfall in terms of capacity -
lack of staff and a need for more and better training regarding specific issues like monitoring and auditing.

However, the lack of capacity to better deploy internal audits within the contracting authorities (at a
decentralised level) is pointed out as one of the major shortfalls of the system by the EC and given
confirmation by the Procurement Strategy 2016-2020.

Thus, more than proposing the redesigning of the institutional framework within which the monitoring
function is delivered, the consideration of several initiatives to be launched and some permanent standing
cooperation mechanisms to be adopted among the key entities with regulatory and monitoring
competences will be proposed in the final report. The following could already be mentioned on a tentative
basis:

     -   Discussion and agreement on the adoption of a Rulebook on Public Procurement Monitoring aiming
         to describe in a systematic and concise manner the scope of monitoring (compliance, performance
         and integrity components), the roles and responsibilities of entities that perform monitoring
         activities, reporting lines, forms and standard templates to use, guidelines for the publication of
         monitoring related information, etc.;
     -   An interinstitutional agreement11 on the measures to be taken in order to enhance the public
         procurement monitoring system of Montenegro, including a memorandum of understanding on
         general aspects of the reform of the monitoring function (principles, goals, objectives, expected
         benefits) to be announced in a joint event (co-hosted by the key public stakeholders delivering the
         monitoring function), in order to raise public awareness on the institutions’ commitments
         regarding the enhancement of the system. The initial broad consensus between the key public
         bodies with responsibilities in this field can be considered a pre - requisite for mobilising allies and
         conveying the reform messages across remaining stakeholders (buyers, sellers, regulators,
         oversight and review bodies, civil society and NGOs, etc.);

     -   While respecting every entity’s role – and even its own independence – the Annual Public
         Procurement Report issued by the PPA could benefit from covering all areas of public procurement
         monitoring so stakeholders can find all relevant information in one single report regarding the
         three components of monitoring – compliance, performance, and integrity, even if other relevant
         entities (e.g. SAI, AIA, SC) continue to publish their specific reports with a broader scope than public
         procurement. To achieve this goal in a consistent way, the agreement mentioned in the above
         paragraphs is needed so other monitoring entities can contribute with the specific information they
         have, which is necessary to calculate the respective KPIs to be later transmitted to the PPA.


     4.3 Technological (e-GP)



11
  Experiences in different countries shows that, due to lack of prior agreement on key concepts, areas to cover, KPIs
to use (list, formulation and algorithms) and how to set the baselines and measure results, entities could not come up
with a common message about the scope and the functioning of the system.

                                                                                                                   13
As mentioned above, the transition towards a fully-fledged e-GP system in Montenegro is relevant to the
context of this project given that:

    -   As the public procurement systems grow in terms of complexity, volume and number of public
        contracts and contracting entities, the need for better information systems is also crucial;
    -   The enhancement of procurement monitoring is among the key benefits one can expect from e-GP
        systems as it is recognised in the Strategy 2016-2020: “An e-procurement system would further
        extend the available monitoring capacity, allowing for a full traceability on the tenders from
        publication of contract notice until the contract implementation.?

There are several practical aspects related to the interaction between both objectives – the enhancement
of monitoring and the implementation of e-GP – that should be taken into account at the earliest possible
stage, namely:

    -   The need to guarantee that the e-GP system is built in such a way that its recognised benefits in
        terms of monitoring are achieved e.g. the way public contracts related information is generated
        and circulated among the procurement community
    -   The workflows should facilitate data acquisition for both compliance and performance monitoring
        and comprise as many automated processes as possible so that procurement officers and policy
        makers can allocate more efforts to the analysis of the information.


    5. GAP ANALYSIS

Instead of undertaking a top-down approach through which all system players of the monitoring system
would be mapped and enhancement measures to the respective institutional setup would be proposed, (an
exercise that would be overlapping with the numerous existing reports and policy papers mentioned) and
without discarding the possibility of proposing some institutional changes at a later stage, the gap analysis
followed a different strategic direction, since:

    -   the existing monitoring system is analysed from a bottom-up perspective i.e., going through a
        certain benchmark - in this case the World Bank’s set of key performance indicators - and assessing
        the completeness and relevance of KPIs already in use against what it is considered to be more
        adequate to fulfil the needs of the country’s system (work to be performed together with PPA from
        now on);

    -    the system is assessed in a practical and quantitative manner, i.e. based on a concrete case and on
        real statistical data already made public (the Public Procurement Report, 2015);

    -   a pragmatic consideration in terms of reform strategy and tactics is taken into account in order to
        propose a way forward that is mainly focusing on improving the quality and effectiveness of what
        exists without going through a complex and long process of legislative change - this will keep the
        so-called “reform fatigue? at the lowest level possible;


In short, efforts will be made to find the way of enhancing the monitoring system with none or minimal
changes to the institutional setup and legal framework.

    5.1 The Public Procurement Annual Report 2015

The statistical information and analysis provided in the Annual Report 2015 is quite promising, especially
when looking forward and trying to identify ways for enhancing the existing monitoring system.

                                                                                                          14
Although a “positive dramatic improvement? can only be achieved through the transition towards a fully-
fledged e-GP system, the existing system should be enhanced and the appetite of some leading institutions
should be leveraged so that they can perform better already in a mainly paper-based system.

In the coming weeks, particular attention will be paid to the whole organisational and procedural aspects
that are behind the 2015 Report (which is the end result of a long and complex process of gathering,
treating and analysing data) so that possible improvements can be suggested, especially concerning (i) the
reporting and monitoring workflows (there are both electronic and paper based processes that needed to
be mapped), (ii) the data acquisition plan and procedures and (ii) the quality assurance mechanisms.

Now it is important to explain why the “World Bank Strategy to promote e-GP in ECA Countries?12 is being
used as a standard against which the statistical information-related chapter of the Annual Report 2015 is
benchmarked.



     5.2 The World Bank strategy to promote the adoption of e-GP in ECA countries

Why making reference and using this strategy document as the benchmark if the primary (or even the only)
goal of the current project is to enhance the monitoring function and not to promote the adoption of e-GP?

The reason is that the World Bank’s strategy can be used either to promote the adoption of e-GP as the
primary goal (in which case the monitoring aspects emerge as a sort of positive “side-effect? benefiting
from the monitoring friendliness of many e-GP features, components and tools) or to do the reverse: giving
the priority to the enhancement of monitoring while the e-GP project follows its own course, probably at a
more lengthy pace.

The following excerpt could be highlighted in the context of this project:

“Most recent experience has shown that the quantitative approach to reform of public procurement systems
is often neglected. It is also recognized that collecting data from paper-based systems is cumbersome, and
the data are very often unreliable or not readily available. The implementation of a procurement MIS 13
module (DW and BI)14 as part of an E-GP system would provide the data analytics needed to facilitate a
quantitative approach. A “(…) permanent quantitative measurement will: - Guarantee quality inputs to the
monitoring function; - Enhance the comprehensiveness and relevance of information; - Make longer data
series available and broaden the scope of analysis; - Promote the making of an independent analysis and
recommendations with a view to enriching the strategic decision-making process. The advantage is that the
more one spreads the electronic features and tools along the procurement life cycle, the easier it will be for
more data and information to be collected and processed.?




12
   This strategy document of the World Bank has been first presented at the workshop “E -Procurement Forum:
Enhancing Public Spending? held in Vienna, Austria, on Dec 1 -3, 2015 and is published at
http://www.worldbank.org/en/events/2015/10/20/e-procurement-forum-enhancing-public-spending#5 .
13
   Management information system
14
   Data Warehousing and Business intelligence

                                                                                                           15
The above illustration depicts the logical sequence of monitoring tasks to be undertaken within a system
composed by components and tools to be used primarily by the entities in charge of monitoring the public
procurement system. Policy areas need to be identified and selected in a priority- ranked list so the KPIs
proposed to be adopted and used are appropriate to measure the achievement of previously set policy
goals.

“The first task to be undertaken is to define the policy goals we want to measure in a quantitative, reliable
and comparable manner. The enhancement in the way we evaluate systems will allow countries to review
their own strategic plans. Over time, with a richer data set and a more accurate picture of reality, it will be
easier to achieve organizational goals.?




    5.3 Benchmarking against the WB set of KPIs

Instead of making general considerations about the Public Procurement Annual Report 2015, its statistical
chapter has been analysed in detail and benchmarked against the above-mentioned World Bank strategy,
namely by taking its Annexes III-A and III-B as a standard. The excel file below highlights the result of the
benchmarking purely based on desk research and needs to be discussed with PPA with regards to:

    -   Adding other KPIs that could respond to Montenegro specific monitoring needs (depending on the
        concrete set of policies to monitor);
    -   Identifying KPIs that need a specific formulation or algorithm for use in Montenegro;
    -   Reducing the list by skipping some KPIs e.g. because the underlying information is impossible or still
        too cumbersome to collect at the current juncture.




                                                                                                            16
                 SYNTHETIC INDICATORS
                                                                                         ALGORITHMS                        YES   NO


             Value of contracts formed through                                      Value of e-GP contracts
                e-GP (% of total Government
                       Procurement)
                                                                                    Total value of contracts



                Volume of contracts formed                                         Number of e-GP contracts
             through e-GP (% of total number of
                        contracts)
                                                                                   Total number of contracts



                                                                      Value of contracts with SME as contracting parties
             Value and volume of contracts with                                    Total value of contracts
                SME s as contracting parties –
                 awardees (% of total public
                       procurement)                                  Number of contracts with SME as contracting parties
                                                                                 Total number of contracts




               Price Reduction / Price variation
                       Savings Indicator
                                                   S– Percentage Savings
                                                   R – the Buyer’s Reserve Price
                                                   P – the Awarding Price



             Efficiency Improvement indicator
             for Contracting Authorities



             Efficiency Improvement indicator
             for Economic Operators




 Benchmarking the
2015 annual report # 1.xlsx




As the production of the 2016 Report is now underway, the Management of PPA may want to consider the
possibility of already testing some of the listed KPIs by using the data collected to that end. This could be
interesting in cases where data is available, but is not yet being treated on a KPI-oriented perspective.




     6. FROM POLICY TO MEASUREMENT AND MONITORING

     6.1 A three dimension monitoring system

It is proposed that the enhancement of the monitoring system takes into due account, and strikes a
balance, between three important perspectives that altogether contribute to deliver good quality public
services in a sustainable manner:

     -    The performance perspective;
     -    The compliance perspective;
     -    The Integrity and anti-corruption perspective.

It should be stressed that Montenegro is already gathering and treating relevant statistical data in all of
those areas. Nonetheless, the following improvements may be considered:

                                                                                                                                      17
     -   Need for more exhaustiveness;
     -   Need for dematerialising the collection of information;
     -   Need to make use of business intelligence tools;
     -   Need to enhance quantitative measurement through the use of a comprehensive set of key
         performance indicators15 (KPIs).


     6.2 The quantitative approach to public procurement

The attempt to measure public procurement performance in quantitative terms and to provide decision
makers, managers and practitioners with tools that enable a reliable and timely assessment of the
economic impact of implemented policies and practices is in the agenda of international organisations,
governments and academia. As the pressure from those who scrutinise the use of public money and
resources grows, the trend to quantify as many aspects of public procurement as possible makes its route
and is benefiting from the spread of e-procurement and information management systems. These are
generally supporting procurement operations or somehow connected with their outputs (e.g. online
publications). In the case of the monitoring function, the role of the quantitative approach is even more
obvious since it derives from the project objective, its purpose and the expected results.



     6.3 Key policy areas and performance indicators

The monitoring system, in order to be consistent and comprehensive, should be based on a decision about
policy areas to cover and policy goals to measure. This important initial decision should be taken as the
result of a consensus among the key entities that play a monitoring, controlling and oversight function in
the public procurement system. Experience shows that the lack of such an initial consensus has the
potential to undermine the credibility of the monitoring system16.




Data is collected in order to calculate the basic and synthetic indicators through the use of pre-defined
algorithms. Ideally, this is done through a technological platform comprising the following key components:

     -   A communication interface that allows the user (data provider) – in partners and contracting
         entities levels - to upload data;

15
   Expression used in its broadest sense so it comprises also compliance and integrity related aspects and not only
“performance?.
16
   Example: the case where the entity in charge of monitoring savings does not agree upfront with the Audit Office on
the concept to be used Potentially it may happen that reported savings recognised as such by the monitoring entity
are challenged (not accepted) in a concrete audit to the entity responsible for those “savings?. This may result in
increasing criticism from the audited entity and lack of trust from stakeholders.

                                                                                                                  18
       -     A data warehousing facility, where data are archived;
       -     A software solution/application that enables business intelligence to be undertaken in view of
             facilitating the analysis.

The measurement of the policy goals achievement is made through a set of Basic Indicators, Synthetic
Indicators and Algorithms.




       6.3.1     e-Gov (comprising the e-GP project)

Although Montenegro is already in the process of preparing the adoption of a fully-fledged e-GP solution as
an autonomous project, there are advantages of already including this component in the general
monitoring system, namely:

       -     both e-GP and non-e-GP parts of the system will coexist for some time once e-GP is launched and
             starts to be used by contracting entities;
       -     the KPIs suggested below provide a simple overview of the progress of the country in terms of e-GP
             take-up;
       -     the publication of the respective results – showing a good progress and rhythm or the need to
             speed-up - will trigger a positive pressure from the stakeholders, who are supporting this important
             reform towards the modernisation of the system and
       -     will help the project leader17 to forge the necessary alliances, both in the country and abroad, in
             view of promoting this reform.

                                                                                                            Algorithm
           SYNTHETIC INDICATORS                                BASIC INDICATORS                                 s


                                         Value of contracts awarded through e-submission                        1
Value of contracts formed through e-GP   Value of goods, services and works contracts awarded through e-
                                                                                                               2-4
 (% of total Government Procurement)     submission
                                         Value of contracts awarded by a CPB or through a centralised
                                                                                                                5
                                         purchasing arrangement


                                         Number of contracts awarded through e-submission                       6
 Volume of contracts formed through e-   Number of goods, services and works contracts awarded through e-
                                                                                                               7-9
  GP (% of total number of contracts)    Submission
                                         Number of contracts awarded by a CPB or through a centralised
                                                                                                               10
                                         purchasing arrangement


17
     The Public Procurement Administration.

                                                                                                                        19
       6.3.2    Economic

As the first pillar of a sustainable18 public procurement system, the economic efficiency cannot be
neglected and the following have been considered as the key areas to cover (synthetic indicators):

       -   Participation of SMEs in the public procurement market (which is also in the agenda of the ongoing
           reforms in Montenegro);
       -   Price analysis in terms of variation, reduction, expected savings deriving from the procurement
           methods used and the award criteria;
       -   Efficiency of the public procurement organisations / contracting entities (demand side) in terms of
           delays and administrative costs;
       -   Efficiency of economic operators (supply side) and
       -   Level of competition (which decisively impacts prices)
       -

       NTHETIC INDICATORS                                      BASIC INDICATORS                                  Algorithms
                                     Number and value of contracts awarded to large companies                      11-12
 Value and volume of contracts       Number and value of contracts awarded to SMEs                                 13-14
with SMEs as contracting parties –
                                     Number and value of contracts awarded to large foreigner companies            15-16
   awardees (% of total public
         procurement)                Number and value of contracts awarded to foreigner SME                        17-18
                                     Number and value of framework agreements awarded to SMEs                      19-20



                                     Average price variation indicator                                               21
                                     Average price reduction indicator                                               22
                                     Comparison with non E-GP awarded prices (a sample for showcasing)               23
                                     Average % of savings in open procedures                                         24
 Price Reduction / Price variation   Average % of savings in e-auctions                                              25
         Savings Indicator
                                     Average % of savings in framework agreements                                    26
                                     Average % of reduction price at call-off stage                                  27
                                      % of contracts awarded on the basis of lowest price                            28
                                     % of contracts awarded on the basis of most economically advantageous
                                                                                                                     29
                                     tender


                                     Average length of pre-award stage (from contract notice to contract
                                                                                                                     30
                                     award notice)
 Efficiency Improvement indicator    Average length of central purchasing procedure                                  31
     for Contracting Authorities
                                     FTEs per type of procedure                                                      32
                                     Average administrative cost per type of procedure                               33


                                     Average length of bid preparations                                              34
                                     Average cost per procedure                                                      35
 Efficiency Improvement indicator
       for Economic Operators        Type of electronic authentication required                                      36
                                     Total cost for participating in public procurement procedures (by type of
                                                                                                                     37
                                     contract)


18
     In order to be sustainable, it should be economic, environment and socially efficient.

                                                                                                                              20
                                         Average number of bidders per type of contract (goods, services, works)            38-40
                                     % of direct awards versus total number and value of public contracts                   41-42
                                         % of contracts awarded to SMEs in number and value                                 43-44
                                     % of contracts divided into lots, in number and value                                  45-46
                                     % of contracts divided into geographical lots                                           47
            Competition              % of contracts divided into quantitative lots                                           48
                                         % of subcontracts in number and value per type of contract                         49-54
                                     % of contracts awarded to consortia (grouping), number and value                       55-56

                                     Average ratio between required economic and financial capacity (e.g.                    57
                                     Annual turnover) AND estimated contract value
                                     % of abnormally low tenders                                                             58



    6.3.3          Environmental

The way public procurement is used as an instrument to promote horizontal policies like the environmental
one is dependent on high-level political decisions. In the event that Montenegro decides to make use of
public procurement to promote a national environmental policy, it is recommended that some concrete
policy goals and targets be clearly indicated e.g. the percentage of public contracts awarded upon the use
of environmental-related award criteria or based on the life-cycle costing to be achieved within a certain
period of time.

The table below shows a few examples of environment related KPIs that could be used as a part of a
broader policy to promote environmentally responsible public procurement.



                                            Value and number of contracts which formation procedure has included
                                            environmental related features or characteristics as technical                   59-60
                                            specifications (not subject to competition/evaluation)
  % of environmentally responsible
     contracts (% of total public           Value and number of contracts which formation procedure has included             61-62
            procurement)                    environmental related selection or award criteria

                                             Value and number of contracts awarded following a procedure containing          63-64
                                            life-cycle costing award criteria



    6.3.4     Social

The same approach is valid regarding the third pillar of sustainable public procurement. Also in this case, it
is necessary to set the policy goals and set the targets. The KPIs below illustrate possible ways of measuring
this perspective.
                                            Value and number of contracts which formation procedure has included
                                            social - related features or characteristics as technical specifications (not    65-66
% of socially responsible contracts (%      subject to competition/evaluation – “must have?)
    of total public procurement)
                                             Value and number of contracts which formation procedure has included            67-68
                                            social related selection or award criteria – “to be evaluated/scored?




                                                                                                                                     21
       6.3.5      Governance and integrity

One of the most cited shortfalls of the Montenegrin public procurement system is the lengthy review
mechanisms and court rulings relating to public procurement procedural decisions. The collection of
concise, but timely and accurate, statistical information about this function is of strategic relevance
because:

       -      It is critical to assess the quality19 of both procedural and substantive laws on public procurement;
       -      It is fundamental to understand the expectations of key players in the system and to devise
              balanced solutions for the identified shortfalls.

                                       % of contracts subject to non-judicial review                                  69
                                       % of contracts subject to court appeals                                        70
                                       Number of appeals per year                                                     71
                                       Average value of contracts giving rise to dispute                              72
             Litigation indicator
                                       Average length of review procedures                                            73
                                       Average length of appeal procedures                                            74
                                       CA/EO winning rate (% of total) review                                        75-76
                                        CA/EO winning rate (% of total) court appeals                                77-78



The monitoring and auditing activities should be, themselves, subject to a quantitative performance
measurement. The following are examples of indicators that may be used to cover this function:
                                       Value and number of ex-ante (before awarding decision) controlling
                                                                                                                     79-80
                                       procedures (% of total)
           Monitoring and auditing                                                                                   81-82
                                       Value and number of compliance audits
                                        Average length of audits (months)                                             83
As one of the overarching principles that should guide a public procurement system, transparency is at the
core of policy makers’ concerns. The simple act of measuring the concrete application of the principle
stimulates the creation of a favourable attitude towards transparency and promotes ethical behaviour in
public administration.
                                       Number and value of tenders published on the web (% of total
                                                                                                                     84-85
                                       procurement)

                                       Public access to all tender stages information                                 86
           Transparency indicator

                                       Quality of information per type of contract and stage of procedure provided    87
                                       and accessible to EOs and CAs (rank 1 to 5)



The “Ease of access? synthetic indicator is taken from the WB strategy document and may used to cross
check the outcome of the comprehensive set of KPIs that have been developed to measure the
international public procurement related matters.

               Ease of access          % of contracts reserved to national bidders                                   88-89



As a part of the dialogue with stakeholders, it is suggested that an annual survey targeting the contracting
entities (demand side) and the economic operators / business community (supply side) is administered,

19
     In the sense of serving the purpose of delivering cost-efficient and sustainable public services to the community.

                                                                                                                             22
with the aim of collecting, for instance, the five most positive and the five most negative aspects about the
public procurement system as perceived by these stakeholders. This tool will certainly help decision makers
to better understand and meet the expectations of the key actors in the public procurement market.


                                      Five most positive aspects of the national public procurement system
                                                                                                             90
 Attitudinal indicator demand side    (survey)
                (CAs)                 Five most negative aspects of the national public procurement system
                                                                                                             91
                                      (survey)


                                      Five most positive aspects of the national public procurement system
                                                                                                             92
  Attitudinal indicator supply side   (survey)
                (EOs)                 Five most negative aspects of the national public procurement system
                                                                                                             93
                                      (survey)




In 2016, the Agency for Prevention of Corruption ASK received a total of 56 corruption-related complaints
and requests for “whistle-blower? protection, none of which were related to Public Procurement. This
information calls for further in depth analysis in view of assessing whether there are in fact no public
procurement related infringements or if the monitoring system in place is not prepared to detect them. It is
rather unusual that no complaints and/or allegations of corruption cases and mismanagement of public
tenders are registered so the inexistence of registered cases/ complaints of corruption does not mean that
they don’t actually exist. This may owe to the fact that the problem may lie in the monitoring and reporting
systems, which have been so far unable to detect and/or report such cases in a systematic manner.

The PPL (2015) includes very comprehensive reporting guidelines to be applied in the event of corruption
cases. It also includes risk analysis reporting and other monitoring mechanisms that will allow for a correct
assessment of the corruption issues and detect which areas are more prone to corruptive practices.
However, the examples and results of the application of such methods are not available and thus, the
efficiency of these reporting guidelines cannot be assessed. There is insufficient proof that the
questionnaires are being carried out in the manner specified in the PPL, which does not allow us to infer
whether these guidelines are sufficient to the reporting structures or perfectly adequate to the system.

There is also a need to better coordinate the responsible entities in the reporting system and create joint
actions with ASK in the public procurement system, in order to increase its involvement and take the most
out of its potentially beneficial contributions.

The following KPIs could be considered to be adopted in connection with the integrity plans so that the
complete cycle of enforcement – from prevention to sanctioning – is covered:


                                      Number of entities with annual integrity plans                         120
   Corruption - prevention and        Value of procurement covered by annual integrity plans                 121
           sanctioning                Complaints related to corruption in public procurement                 122
                                      Sanctions related to corruption in public procurement                  123




                                                                                                                   23
A significant amount of work has to be developed in close cooperation with ASK in view of avoiding the
proliferation of tools and instruments that increase the burden of the management of public entities but,
because lacking the perspective of the full cycle of enforcement, do not add much value.


    6.3.6    International Public Procurement (barriers to international trade)

Montenegro became a member of the World Trade Organisation’s Agreement on Government
Procurement (GPA) on 15 July 2015, so the country is already committed to an international free trade
agenda even before joining the European Union. This membership entails some obligations to collect and
provide overall information about the public procurement system as well as some specific procurement
statistics – see Article VI - Information on the Procurement System and Article XVI/4 - Transparency of
Procurement Information - Collection and Reporting of Statistics.

In order to strictly (formally) fulfil their obligations as foreseen in the GPA, the kind of information
Montenegro is already collecting, treating and publishing through the PPA’s Annual Reports may suffice.

Notwithstanding the above, the specific information (statistical data) required by the GPA is far from being
enough to assess the openness of the national public procurement system to international economic
operators. In fact, the mentioned GPA provisions require only the following information:

        “ (…) (a) for Annex 1 procuring entities:

        (i) the number and total value, for all such entities, of all contracts covered by this Agreement;

        (ii) the number and total value of all contracts covered by this Agreement awarded by each such
        entity, broken down by categories of goods and services according to an internationally recognized
        uniform classification system; and

        (iii) the number and total value of all contracts covered by this Agreement awarded by each such
        entity under limited tendering;

        (b) for Annex 2 and 3 procuring entities, the number and total value of contracts covered by this
        Agreement awarded by all such entities, broken down by Annex; and

        (c) estimates for the data required under subparagraphs (a) and (b), with an explanation of the
        methodology used to develop the estimates, where it is not feasible to provide the data.?



Specific key performance indicators to measure international public procurement

The following are examples of indicators that can be used to measure the level of openness of a public
procurement market to international trade


                                      Total and PP Market of segment X in Montenegro versus EU's total supply
                                                                                                                94 - 95
  Value of Total and PP Markets for   seg. X in EU
 segment X in Montenegro and in EU    Total and PP Market of segment X in Montenegro (ME) versus EU's total
                                                                                                                96 - 97
                                      supply seg. X in ME




                                                                                                                          24
Purpose

Measure the weight of a market in Montenegro (Ind. 94 and 96 – total market; Ind. 95 and 97 – PP Market)
for a certain category of goods, services or works (e.g. cars bought by the state) in relation to:

Ind. 94: EU total supply, for both private and public purchasers, in a given Economic Sector (Segment), e.g.
total sales of cars from EU companies in EU.

Ind. 95: EU PP supply, for European public customers, in a given Economic Sector (Segment). This
represents the weight of public purchases in the total EU concerned industry sales, e.g. total sales of cars
from EU companies to EU public purchasers.

Ind. 96: EU total supply to Montenegro, for both private and public purchasers, in a given Economic Sector
(Segment), e.g. total sales of cars from EU companies in Montenegro.

Ind. 97: EU PP supply to Country Z in a given Economic Sector (Segment). This represents the EU exports to
the PP Segment Market concerned, e.g. total sales of cars from EU companies to Montenegrin public
purchasers.

Ind. 94 and Ind. 96 compare the total market from EU and Montenegro for a segment

Ind. 95 and Ind. 97 compare only PP market for the same segment.

The interest of including both is to undertake a sensitivity analysis through which we will be able to assess if
there are different contestability rates depending on whether it concerns public or private market. E.g. if
Ind. 96 shows that EU car exports reach 17% of the total car market in Montenegro, and at the same time,
Ind. 97 shows that only 2% of car public purchases in Montenegro comes from EU suppliers, it is very likely
that there are many more active barriers in PP market than on its correspondent private market in
Montenegro.

Data Sources

National Statistical Institutes, Trade Associations and Chambers of Commerce, sector specific market
research studies.



Public Procurement Market of segment   Total PP Market vs. Private Market                               98
             X           vs.           Domestic PP vs. Private domestic                                 99
       Total Market of segment X                                                                        100
                                       External PP vs. External Private




Purpose

Measure the relation between Public Procurement Market and Private Demand in the same country, for a
certain category of Goods, Services and Works, e.g. cars bought by the state vs. cars bought by private.

This type of indicator will allow to undertake a sensitivity analysis through which we will be able to assess if
barriers impact public and private markets differently – impact rate and evolution along a certain time
series, e.g. a lower EU contestability in a PP market as compared to the correspondent private market may
indicate the presence of PP related barriers to international trade as well as the evolution over time may
indicate a liberalisation or a protectionist trend going on.


                                                                                                              25
Ind. 98: this indicator relates the total value (local currency that can be converted in SDRs) of public
purchases (PP Market) for a certain category of goods, services or works (e.g. cars bought by the state);

Ind. 99: the “domestic PP market? consists of the total value of public purchases where the supplier is a
national economic operator selling goods, services or works produced in Montenegro.

Ind. 100: the “external PP market? consists of the total value of public purchases where the s upplier is a
foreign or national economic operator selling goods, services or works produced in out of Montenegro
(direct and indirect imports).

Data Source

National Statistical Institutes, Trade Associations and Chambers of Commerce, sector specific market
research studies.



                                                                                                     101 -
Segments reserved to national bidders   Number and Value of Segments reserved to national bidders     102


                                                                                                     103 -
 Impact of Barrier Bn on imports by     Number and Value of Segments impacted by Bn                   104
         procuring entities
                                        Total Value of Segments impacted by Bn                       105



                                                                                                     106 -
                                        Number and Value of Contracts Awarded to Foreign Companies    107
                                                                                                     108 -
                                        Number and Value of Contracts Awarded to EU Companies         109
 Origin and Size of Foreign Awardees
                                                                                                     110 -
                                        Number and Value of Contracts Awarded to Large Companies      111
                                                                                                     112 -
                                        Number and Value of Contracts Awarded to SMEs                 113



Purpose

These indicators are meant to show, in a simple way, the economic impact of identified active
barriers/measures, both in number and value, by segment and barrier, so as many indicators as identified
barriers should be made available (Bn). Please refer to the OECD's Taxonomy of measures affecting Trade in
Government Procurement Processes [TAD/TC/WP(2016)10/FINAL, 08 Feb 2017, OECD].

Ind. 101 and Ind. 102: provide, in a nutshell, the dimension of the protected segments of the PP market in
the sense that the access to them by foreign companies is denied by law or made impossible in practice. It
will show the percentage of segments that are “closed? to international markets, meaning that a barrier
exists, since it is reserved to “National Bidders?.

Ind. 103 and Ind. 104: show the segments that are affected by a certain barrier in relation to the total
segments affected by all the barriers (in number and value), in order to know which barrier impacts each
segment more.

Ind. 105: represents the relative weight of one barrier in relation to all the others. This will show the
“strength? or impact of each barrier, in order to understand which of them has more economic impact, e.g.
sum of the segments impacted by barrier/measure M1 in relation to the sum of the segments affected by
M1+M2+…+M9, giving me the percentage of M1’s impact when considering all the barriers.

                                                                                                             26
Data Source

Any existing studies about barriers to international trade caused by public procurement rules and practices.

                                          Value of Contracts Awarded by CPBs in Montenegro           114
   CPBs' role in international public
                                          Value of Contracts Awarded by CPBs to Foreign Companies    115
             procurement
                                          Value of Contracts Awarded by CPBs to EU Companies         116



                                          Value of Direct Awards in Montenegro                       117
Direct Awarding in International Public                                                              118
                                          Value of Contracts Directly Awarded to Foreign Companies
            Procurement
                                          Value of Contracts Directly Awarded to EU Companies        119



Purpose

This set of indicators is meant to provide a short characterization of awardees in terms of geographical
origin and size. Indicators 114 to 116 aim to shortly quantify the value of centralised purchasing managed
by a CPB and the value of contracts awarded to foreign (mainly EU) companies, which may denote the
existence of barriers to international trade. This may be particularly relevant because of the large volumes
of procurement handled by CPBs or through other joint procurement arrangements and schemes.

Data Source

National Statistical Institutes, Trade Associations and Chambers of Commerce, sector specific market
research studies.



    6.3.7     Health sector

Public Health care sector has been given a prominent place, together with Local Governments, in terms of
sector-based public procurement monitoring. In fact, the Annual Public Procurement Report (2015),
following a recommendation inserted in the Action Plan related to Chapter 23 – Judiciary and Fundamental
Rights, dedicates one section (10.20) to the “Procurement contracts within the health institutions?. The
information published in the Report refers to:

   - Health public procurement value (15.22% of the total public procurement value);

   - Types of contracts – goods, services, and works – in the sector by volume (euros);

   - Number of procedures by type of procedure;

   - Planned versus actual procurement by contracting entity and type of contract (goods, services,
     works)

In addition to the use of Forms A (for all public contracts other than those formed through “shopping
method? and “Direct award?), B (“Shopping Method?) and C (“Direct award?) , a 14 – question- survey
(Template of questionnaire is published in Appendix 11 of the Annual Report 2015) was distributed to the
34 Public Health Institutions of Montenegro and answered by 22 of them (65%) in the preparation of the
Annual Report 2015. This survey covered very generic public procurement related information about
number and type of procedures conducted, number of review procedures and the time span for a decision
to be taken by the State Commission and/or the Administrative Court, number of inspections (external
audits), their outcome and sanctions applied and a couple of questions aimed at shortly profiling the

                                                                                                           27
organisation of the public procurement function in the institution. A specific emphasis has been put in
quantifying the number and volume of direct awards within the total public procurement volume and value
which corresponds to the well-known concerns about transparency and competition raised by this
procurement method.

The growth of the public health expenditure, coupled with its weight in terms of GDP, calls for a close
monitoring which can be done by adding to other “general KPIs? some sector -specific details designed to
capture the triggers of expenditure and efficiency factors.

A careful analysis of the questionnaire that has been used for the survey as well as the information
published in the Annual Report 2015 – section 10.20 – allows for the following conclusions (assessment)
that should be taken into account in order to enhance the monitoring of this specific field of public
procurement:

   - Not all general public procurement information (and indicators) is replicated / mirrored in a sector-
     specific analysis so that readers can compare the same kind of indicators across sectors or, in this
     case, between health and the overall system in order to answer questions regarding comparative
     length of procedures, most used procurement methods, savings rates, litigation rates, etc.

   - No specific health procurement information is collected (e.g. price variance regarding international
     reference prices for pre-selected products, procurement planning and optimal use of individual
     contracts compared to multi-year and framework contracts, management of products expire dates
     and related supply chain factors determined by the procurement strategy and practice, supplier’s
     performance evaluation both in terms of quality and timely delivery, etc.).



What can be done?

There are three areas to explore within the Health related public procurement that require a joint effort
with the Health Administration in view of setting some specific KPIs:

   - The acquisition of medicines. A good monitoring system of procurement in this area will enhance the
     ability to make better deals in the market and achieve considerable savings. It is important to profile
     the sector’s public procurement features in order to check if the procurement function is optimised
     (e.g. through central purchasing or joint procurement needed to leverage demand in a global market,
     contracting methods and techniques, framework agreements);

   - The acquisition of healthcare services, in case there is some outsourcing in this area;

   - Building and maintenance of infrastructure i.e. hospitals and health care centres and facilities. As for
     works in general, infrastructure building and maintenance entails a considerable public
     investment/expenditure, which calls for a close and permanent monitoring along the entire
     procurement cycle (from planning to contract implementation).

In order to monitor the above-mentioned areas, a combination of “general public procurement indicators?
and “health-specific indicators? should be set up:

    6.3.8   Local Government

Local government is also an important area of public finance and procurement in the majority of countries
and Montenegro is no exception. In fact, the case of Montenegro calls for particular attention regarding the
way public procurement is managed and its impact on public expenditure.


                                                                                                          28
Contrary to what happens in the health sector, local government specific monitoring does not require
“sector-specific indicators?. A simple separate treatment of the same data, as was done for the other levels
of government (central government and other entities20) is sufficient.

Thus, the combination of large spectrum indicators (to cover the whole public procurement system
regardless of the sector of activity or the level of government and type of entity i.e. central and sub -
central government and other bodies of public law like the state - owned enterprises) with sector-specific
indicators and specific level of government or entity indicators could be graphically represented in section
5.3.9.



       6.3.9   Combination of general monitoring with health and local government

Based on the common matrix of indicators, the monitoring system is flexible and can accommodate several
specific dedicated “observatories? depending on what is considered more important to monitor at the level
of policy areas and goals. For the time being three components is devised:




Many other approaches can be accommodated in order to better inform the policy -making and the public
procurement management in the country. One example is the possibility of using the “international public
procurement KPIs? to monitor specific sectors of the economy e.g. to select a sector to be specially
monitored each year such as IT equipment, vehicles, furniture, medical equipment, etc.



       7. THE WAY FORWARD

Improving the public procurement monitoring system of Montenegro entails the need for setting clear
objectives shared by the key systems’ stakeholders so the Monitoring System Improvement Plan that has
been compiled is meant to enable PPA to approach the key Partners in this reform process with a clear
vision about the enhancement pursued.

20
     Corresponding to the concept used by WTO/GPA’s Appendix I (Annexes I, II and III).

                                                                                                         29
A progressive involvement of key partners and stakeholders is envisaged, from the core restricted group of
entities that play a specific role in the public procurement system (SC, AIA, SAI, ASK) led by PPA as the
entity with the overall responsibility for monitoring to the contracting entities and the society at large.

The following could already be suggested to be considered by PPA as elements of such plan:

    1. Forge an institutional agreement with SAI, AIA, SC, ASK about the key features and elements of the
       monitoring system:
           a. Policy areas to cover
           b. Policy goals to measure
           c. Key Performance Indicators to use
           d. Protocol regarding the collection and treatment of data
           e. Protocol on publication of results




    2. Setup of a Public Procurement e-Monitoring Platform

     A tool for information management is indispensable for the feasibility of monitoring and reporting
    functions insofar as it would help increase the capacity of the entities involved and would allow to
    increase transparency and actors’ accountability. The following benefits can be expected:

       -   Increased capacity of institutions by the use of intuitive and user-friendly tools that will keep
           the records on procedures and decisions;
       -   Less cumbersome method of collecting, aggregating and analysing data – resource allocation
           will be easier, tackling the issue of lack of capacity;
       -   Allow for best practices through knowledge exchange and capacity sharing;
       -   More transparent and easier access to information and data;
       -   Monitoring and reporting made easier through aggregation and centralisation of information;
       -   Inspection activities and auditing activities made easier;
       -   Increased ability to prescribe specific recommendations to each entity by the easy
           identification of default and irregularities in the macro scenario of the Public Procurement
           system More tailored reporting: besides continuing to produce the annual procurement report

                                                                                                         30
           (as already in place), aggregating the available information provided by the contracting entities,
           the ability to conduct tailored approaches and suggestions aimed at each of them individually
           will be a possibility, given the increased capacity to detect potential flaws of the system and to
           profile current practices of the CAs.


Such an e-Monitoring Platform would comprise:

       a. A communications interface that allows the user (data provider) – at partners and contracting
          entities levels - to upload data;

       b. A data warehousing facility where data are archived;


       c. A software solution/application that enables business intelligence.




                                                                                                          31
