Creating Competitive Markets for Service
Delivery
Policy Options and Country Experiences
By Natalia Agapitova, Senior Economist, World Bank Group

April 27, 2017



Objectives

This note is prepared at the request of the Ministry of Finance (MoF) of Russian Federation to support
drafting and implementation of new law on outsourcing municipal social services. Additionally, to
comments and inputs into the draft law by the World Bank Group (WBG), the Government requested a
policy review of relevant international experiences which could validate the proposed solution in the
law as well as in the consequent sub-legislation.

This note is part of the technical assistance provided to the MoF. The note explores various policy
options for engaging social enterprises as services providers and creation of a competitive market for
service provision in Russia. In particular, the MoF expressed interest to learn from examples of Canada,
Germany, France, Sweden, United Kingdom (UK) and United States (US).

This note is based on the existing work by the WBG and additional literature review to complement
existing work with examples from the above mentioned countries. The objective of the note is to:
    - Review policy options to stimulate quality service provision by social enterprises
    - Illustrate various aspects of policy options with examples from the relevant countries, and
    - Provide a comparative table of selected country experiences

Definitions

Social enterprises (SEs) are defined as private organizations that use business approaches to achieve
social, environmental and economic outcomes. The common criteria that the governments use to define
social enterprises are:
    - Social objective. The most defining characteristic of SEs that sets them apart from other profit-
         driven enterprises is their pursuit of a social or environmental mission.
    - Business principles. SEs operate on business principles, using entrepreneurial and/or business
         activities as a means to generate revenue and/or advance their social objectives.
    - Financial sustainability. A key factor that distinguishes SEs from charities, classic NGOs, and
         other subsidy-dependent organizations, is their pursuit of a financially sustainable business
         model. SEs are also often distinguished by their tendency to reinvest any profits generated back
         into their business model; however, some SEs (for example, those supported by government
         revenue) may not generate a profit.

                                                    1
    -   Flexible organization status. SEs can include both for-profit and non-profit entities, and are not
        limited to a particular legal structure. In many cases, SEs are classified as ‘hybrid’ structures
        between for-profit and non-profit.
    -   Innovation. SEs often represent a form of innovation from the status quo, whether in the
        products or services they deliver, or the means through which they do so.

Rationale for public sector support to social enterprise sector

The number of SEs providing social services has grown rapidly across the world, and is reaching sizeable
populations. For example, government statistics identify around 70,000 social enterprises in the UK
contributing USD 40 billion to the economy and employing nearly a million people (SEUK, 2015). Data
suggests that consumers often exhibit relatively high degrees of trust in these services and have
relatively high perceptions of their quality (Kannan 2013, Wodon 2013). Emerging evidence indicates
that SEs may also have advantages in terms of quality, affordability, and equity (OECD, 2015). Finally, SEs
bring dynamism to local economies by developing new products and services, taking risks that
traditional public and private service providers are unable to take, and creating local capacity (Canadian
National Social Enterprise Sector Survey Report, 2016). In light of this, many governments took the
opportunity to recognize and support SEs as partners in a shared mission to improve service delivery
(Agapitova, Triponel, 2017).

International experience demonstrates that decentralization of public services provides a window of
opportunity for these new actors to enter the service delivery market with the following benefits:
    - Fill access gap to social services,
    - Improve quality and equity of services and employment, and
    - Increase social cohesion and economic benefits.

However, the hybrid nature of SEs may lead them to be more severely impacted by business
environment constraints, and may subject them to difficulties not faced by mainstream enterprise
(Smith and Darko 2014). These include:
    - Limited access to appropriate capital. While this is also true for SMEs, early-stage capital for SEs
        is even scarcer for SEs. SEs often struggle to secure available funding because they do not meet
        investor requirements due to the hybrid nature of their business models (Intellecap 2012).
    - Volatile markets. SEs take on additional risk by catering to a customer base that is often has
        limited resources (for example, elderly) and/or does not has awareness about the value of social
        services offered (for example, preventive medicine)
    - Legal and regulatory constraints. Lack of clear legal status for SEs can limit their ability to secure
        both government contracts and investment capital. Even when there is a legal framework and
        legal form for SEs, many continue to operate as company, NGO, association, cooperative, etc.
    - Capacity constraints. Many SE face capacity constraints due to the dual nature of their business
        model, limited financial resources and lack of qualified human resources (including
        management).

Moreover, insufficient collaboration and engagement between governments and SEs can lead to the
development of a growing, yet fragmented sector that does not necessarily align with government
priorities or focus on areas where there is greatest need. Governments can play a critical and continued
role in market-shaping, supporting, and in some cases, a regulation on SEs.


                                                     2
Figure 1 below summarizes the key opportunities and constraints to SE engagement in service delivery
agenda.

Figure 1 Government Engagement with the SEs

                       Filling access gaps             Improving quality and cost-        Alignment and Integration:
                                                                 efficiency               building a cohesive system
 What             - Ongoing service delivery          - High cost                        - Ongoing funding gaps for
 challenges         gaps, particularly for the        - Lack of innovative solutions       service delivery
 does public        marginalized population                                              - Need for greater innovation
 service            (e.g. handicapped, elderly)                                            in public sector services
 delivery                                                                                - Need for sustainability
 face?
 How can SEs      - Address immediate service-        - Improve quality of service        - Leverage private sector
 help?              delivery gaps across sectors        delivery                            resources to make public
                    in a sustainable and cost-        - Flexibility to better meet the      spending go further
                    efficient way                       needs of the customers            - Develop innovations that
                                                      - Increase local employment           can be incorporated or
                                                        opportunities in services           scaled through public
                                                      - Reduce costs                        systems
                                                                                          - Create opportunities for
                                                                                            private investment in long-
                                                                                            term social impact
                                                                                          - Generate additional, socio-
                                                                                            economic returns
 Why is there     - SEs still face high barriers to   - Many SEs still struggle          - SEs have proliferated as
 a need for         entry in the market and             financially to provide social       individual entities, often in an
 government         obstacles that impede their         services in a sustainable           ad-hoc way that is not tightly
 stewardship?       growth                              way                                 integrated with public sector
                                                      - Lack of unified quality             delivery and government
                                                        standards                           policy
                                                      - Fragmentation and
                                                        duplication of effort
                                                      - SEs face additional
                                                        obstacles from mainstream
                                                        businesses



Mechanisms for Government Support to Social Enterprises
This section presents the policy tools that are most commonly used in OECD countries to build
competitive markets for service provision by SEs through demand and supply side policies.

Enabling Demand for SE Goods and Services
Reaching and serving marginalized populations can be challenging, and the barriers at entry into new
markets can often be high. Governments can foster the demand for SE services through:

        Social procurement. Public services contracts that take into account the social and
         environmental well-being in connection with the value for money. The objective is to incentivize
         public sector collaboration with SEs and work jointly to maximize social and financial return on
         investment. Specific measures include: preferential treatment of SEs when bidding for public
         service contracts (e.g. automatic shortlisting), incorporate social considerations as part of the
         public contracts (e.g. 25% of public service contracts incorporate social considerations); revision
         of public procurement criteria to incorporate social externalities that the enterprises bring.


                                                            3
        Consumer incentives for the purchase of social services. The advantage of consumer incentives
         is that it drives demand for social services, but also gives the power of choice to consumers and
         promotes competition among providers. Consumer subsidies can also promote and facilitate
         usage of social services by reducing financial burden on the beneficiary through direct
         government subsidies for dedicated programs (e.g. education services for children with learning
         disabilities). Certificates of government funding usually allow beneficiaries to fully or partially
         cover for social services. In some cases, the certificates can be used to reimburse expenses.
         Additionally, a tax exemption directed to consumers of products or services of SE would be an
         example of a tax exemption as a demand policy tool.
        Awareness campaigns. In contexts where SEs are relatively new to the service delivery market,
         government endorsement of SEs can stimulate demand for SEs solutions from the beneficiaries.
         It can also create more understanding about the advantages of working with SEs among public
         servants. Additionally, government campaigns for new service areas car increase awareness
         about the availability and use of new social services and pave way for SE activity (e.g. counseling
         services for unemployed).
        Training for public servants. Training course can help get more value for money out of
         procurement of public services, and improve effectiveness of SE contracting. Training often
         combines technical and collaboration aspects that help public servants understand the nature of
         SEs, value of their services, technical aspects of contracting of social services, M&E
         arrangements, and “soft? aspects like communication.

Figure 2 Social Procurement


Government social procurement is gaining interest from institutional buyers because it provides an opportunity
to generate greater value for through the procurement process.
     For government, the added value is created through the delivery of social benefits beyond those
        conferred by the products and services being purchased, allowing governments to get better deal for
        taxpayers and public-service users and finding solutions to untacked problems with positive
        externalities. Moreover, governments can play a catalytic role by using their financial power to create
        new markets that benefit both the economy and society.
     For social enterprises, this new type of procurement creates a level playing field to bid for contracts
        and scale their business models. It also helps to grow and attract investments thanks to government
        collaboration and longer term government contracts.
     For society, social procurement aligns with the increasing focus on a more sophisticated and multi-
        stakeholder understanding of the solutions available to government to address demanding social
        problems. It also aligns with an increasing demand from consumers and taxpayers for socially
        responsible products and service delivery chains.

Social procurement integrates social outcomes in the requirement of a contract, alongside the goods or services
to be delivered. In practice, it usually works as follows:




                                                        4
Source: Cristina Navarrete Moreno, 2016. Procuring Social Impact, http://blogs.worldbank.org/team/cristina-
navarrete-moreno




Stimulating Supply for SE Goods and Services
Governments can also try to increase the SE’s incentives to invest and grow the supply of innovative
solutions to social and environmental problems. Interventions in the financial, regulatory and capacity
development area of the ecosystem are the most common.

Financial mechanisms to stimulate supply of SE solutions to service delivery include:

       Concessional Loans (Social Finance) help pursue sustainable financial management of social
        services through recoverable investments.
       Grants, returnable grants and matching grants can support SEs, especially at early stages of
        development.
       Impact Bonds are results-based financing tools, focusing the allocation of money to social
        programs that yield effective results. Help governments fund critical social programs through a
        combination of government initiation, private investment and non-profit implementation. In an
        Impact Bond model, an investor (or group of investors) provides up-front financing for the
        operations of a service provider, receiving a return from the outcome payer (usually a
        government or donor) once results have been achieved.
       Guarantee Funds facilitate the financing of SEs and stimulate sound credit transaction by
        extending credit guarantees (often backed by the government) for the liabilities of promising
        SEs, which lack tangible collateral.

Regulatory measure could include:
    Standards and certifications allow recognition of SEs that can receive benefits, such as priority in
       public procurement, tax reduction, social insurance premium and financial assistance.
    Tax incentives for SEs allow to lower the cost of doing business for SEs and make their models
       more sustainable. It also allows the SEs to offer more affordable services to their customers.
       Sometimes tax incentives are associated with a particular type of SEs: sectoral (e.g. preventive
       medical services), by organization types (e.g. non-profits) or age (e.g. startups under a certain
       threshold of revenue).

Capacity development can also help build the pipeline of new SEs and enhance the capacity of SEs
already operation on service delivery market:

                                                       5
       Extension services can help to build a pipeline of start-up social ventures into the social
        investment market (e.g. training and skills development programs for SEs, business
        development services, SE incubators).
       Strengthen SE skills to bid for public service contracts. These can include tools and techniques
        (understanding of public procurement processes, proposal writing, M&E, tips on how to
        communicate with public servants) to win and deliver public service contracts.
       Create incentives and platforms for SEs to coordinate and collaborate and harnessing
        community, stakeholder and volunteer involvement
       Support intermediary organizations to provide capacity building to SEs

In addition to specific instruments, strong coordination and institutional arrangements are often needed
to implement the policies at national and subnational levels. A public-private space for coordinating
interventions and policies is Social Enterprise UK, which has SEs, charities, private business and public
sector organizations among its members. All of these actors are active at the policy level through
dialogue, research and consultation processes.

            o   trade-off linked with distortions some of the demand-side policies/instruments that
                change prices could have.


Conclusions and Options for Consideration

Although comprehensive policy approaches to support social enterprise sector are rare, there is a wide
range of instruments that are deployed to support various part of the ecosystem. Only a handful of
governments (e.g. UK) adopted legal or operational definition of social enterprises, and have dedicated
government bodies responsible for SE policy formulation. However, this is an emerging area and EU
countries are increasingly moving in this direction.1

However, there is a wide range of policy instruments that was deployed to support supply and demand
for SE services.

Evidence on effectiveness of policy support is limited. Policies affecting the SE ecosystem are often not
targeting the SEs as such. Even when dedicated policies are adopted, their effectiveness is difficult to
assess because the baseline data on SE sector is often missing. Impact evaluations of public policies
affecting SEs are extremely rare.

Additionally, there might be significant market distortions effects, especially from supply side
instruments that can create private sector dependence of public incentives, and crowd out market
based solutions. Market and competition analysis helps identify the appropriate incentive systems, and
the appropriate timeframe for government support.

The following steps might be helpful to identify the scope of support to build supply and demand of SEs
that will support the implementation of the law on outsourcing municipal social services in Russia:



1
 https://www.employment.gov.sk/en/the-slovak-eu-council-presidency/news/conference-on-
social-economy-social-enterprises.html
                                                    6
   -   Workshop to discuss various policy options with international experts and prioritize the most
       promising instruments
   -   Map the SE sector in Russia to understand the demand and supply for service provision, and the
       current state of the SE sector including the level of activity, capacity of SEs, sectoral attribution,
       etc. The mapping could be based on survey methodology developed by UK or Canada. The
       mapping could be further deepened though the ecosystem analysis that will take into
       consideration the enabling environment for social enterprises in Russia (policy and regulations,
       financing solutions, human capital and culture, information and networks). The World Bank
       implemented this type of social enterprise ecosystem diagnostic in 20 countries.
   -   Organize study tours to most relevant countries (for example, UK and Canada) to learn from
       peers and concrete examples of implementation.
   -   Design the program and conduct pilots in 4-6 municipalities to test the validity of approaches,
       which will be important in the context of relative lack of evidence about impact of SE support.

References
Agapitova, N. Triponel, A. 2017. Legal Framework for Social Enterprise: Lessons from a Comparative
Study of Italy, Malaysia, South Korea, United Kingdom, and United States. World Bank, Washington, DC.
© World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/26397
Agapitova, N., Linn, J. 2016. Scaling up social enterprise innovations: Approaches and lessons. Working
Paper Series, #95. Brookings, Washington D.C. https://www.brookings.edu/research/scaling-up-social-
enterprise-innovations-approaches-and-lessons/
BLAB. “What is a Benefit Corporation?. Accessed on May 18th, 2016. http://benefitcorp.net
Challenge.gov. “About? Accessed on May 17th, 2016. https://www.challenge.gov/about/
Corporation for National & Community Service. “Social Innovation Fund.? Accessed on May 18th, 2016.
http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/social-innovation-fund
EFESEIIS. 2015. Social Enterprise, Social Innovation and Social Entrepreneurship in Germany: A National
Report. http://www.fp7-efeseiis.eu/?wpdmdl=708
Elson, P. Hall, P. Wamucii, P. 2016. Canadian National Social Enterprise Sector Survey Report.
https://ccednet-rcdec.ca/sites/ccednet-rcdec.ca/files/final-national-report-may-16-2016.pdf
European Commission, 2014. A map of social enterprises and their eco-systems in Europe. Country
Reports: Germany, France and Sweden.
Executive Office of the President. “Memorandum to the Heads of Executive Departments and
Agencies.? https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/memoranda/2012/m-12-14_1.pdf
Gov UK. “2010 to 2015 government policy: social Enterprise?. Accessed on May 14th, 2016.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-social-
enterprise/2010-to-2015-government-policy-social-enterprise
OECD, 2014. The Social Enterprise Sector: A Conceptual Framework. Paris
OECD, 2015. Social Impact Investment: Building the Evidence Base.
Quarter, J., Mook, L. 2010, “An Interactive View of the Social Economy,? ANSERJ Canadian Journal of
Nonprofit and Social Economy Research, vol. 1, no. 1.
SEFOR?S, 2014. The State of Social Entrepreneurship. Country Reports for Germany, France and Sweden.

                                                     7
Social Enterprise UK, http://www.socialenterprise.org.uk
The National Archives, “Public Services (Social Value) Act 2012? Accessed on May 14th, 2016.
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/3/enacted
The White House. “National and Community Service at CNCS?. Accessed on May 16th, 2016.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/sicp/initiatives/national-community-service
The White House. “Steps to Catalyze Private Foundation Impact Investing.? Accessed on May 17th, 2016.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/04/21/steps-catalyze-private-foundation-impact-investing
World Bank. 2016. Economic and Social Rationales for Government Support of the Social Enterprise
Sector. The Case for Public Stewardship.
World Bank. 2016. Government Support to the Social Enterprise Sector: Comparative Review of Policy
Frameworks and Tools. Policy Note by Natalia Agapitova, Belén Sanchez and Elaine Tinsley.




                                                  8
Annex: Country Cases

List of Country Cases:

    1.   Canada
    2.   Germany
    3.   France
    4.   Sweden
    5.   United Kingdom (UK)
    6.   United States (US).



    1. CANADA
Social Enterprises have been part of the Government vision during some periods along the last decade,
especially during the period 2004 – 2006, when the Social Economy Initiative was implemented.
Different visions of the Governments in turn made it difficult to build a long-term national vision for the
sector. However, at the local or regional level, social enterprises have tracked more attention and
support from the public sector.

The Economic Action Plans of 2014 and 2015 of the Federal Government included support to social
entrepreneurs with innovative solutions and announced the implementation of a social finance
accelerator initiative to help develop promising social finance proposals (Government of Canada, 2014 -
2015).

The Government also supported the development of the Canadian National Social Enterprise Sector
Survey 2016, which got a response of 1350 social enterprises, and through Canada Business Network,
social enterprises have access to comprehensive information about all the resources available to start
and growth their social ventures.

At the local level, the government of Ontario developed a Social Enterprise Strategy in 2015 that focuses
on building a social enterprise brand, creating a vibrant social finance marketplace, connecting social
enterprises with stakeholders and improve service delivery by integrating social enterprises on public
procurement. In Quebec, the Government implemented an Action Plan for Collective Entrepreneurship
from 2008 to 2013, and last year launched a new plan for 2015 – 2020 which includes the
recapitalization of the Social Investment Network of Quebec (RISQ) to $ 10 million in height, the
allowance of $ 20 million of collective entrepreneurship Infrastructure Program (CEIP) and the budget of
30 million dollars for the revival of the Program to Promote the capitalization of social economy
Investment firms of Québec.

Regulatory measures. The common legal structures used by social enterprises at the national level are
charities, non-profit societies, co-operatives and corporations. At a local level, the Community
Contribution Companies (C3s) and the Community Interest Companies (CICs), were introduced as new
legal forms for social enterprises in British Columbia and Nova Scotia respectively (O´Connor, 2014).

Financial Mechanisms. The Ministry of Employment and Social Development is piloting innovative
funding schemes with social enterprises like pay for performance schemes and matching taxpayer
                                                    9
dollars with non-government contributions to extend the impact of interventions. An example is the
Project Employment Support to Ex Offenders – Rideau Social Enterprises implemented in Ontario from
2011 – 2013 to test if providing skills development and work experience through social enterprises to
ex-offenders improves their chances of securing permanent employment, thereby preventing and
reducing the incidence of homelessness (Employment and Social Development Canada, 2014).

Another example is how social enterprises are actively engaged in affordable housing projects in
Canada. They are engaged in several endeavors from the provision of affordable housing to related
activities that help improve the quality of life for tenants (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation).

At the local level, different Social Finance Investment Funds provide access to capital for social
enterprises, for instance the Social Enterprise Demonstration Fund of Ontario and the Edmonton Social
Enterprise Fund.

Capacity Development. The Ministry of Employment and Social Development commissioned the Social
Finance Accelerator Initiative to facilitate workshops, advisory services, mentorship, networking
opportunities and investor introductions to help promising social finance proposals become investment-
read and turn social entrepreneurs’ proposals into action.

The Government also promotes workshops and trainings like the “New pathways to health and well-
being through social enterprise workshop? co-hosted by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and
other institutions to start collaboration and engagement of social enterprises to impact health in
Canada.

At the local level, initiatives like the Youth Entrepreneurship Challenge in Quebec are promoted to
support experimental entrepreneurial activities with potential to contribute to lessening spatial
disparities in entrepreneurial and economic performance.

    2. GERMANY
In 2000 chancellor Schröder with the help of McKinsey and the ProSieben Sat1 Media AG founded the
start social competition with which they awarded and supported emerging social entrepreneurs. The
initiative was later transformed into a registered association (2003) and enjoyed the patronage of
chancellor Merkel since 2005. Since then, the government supported a number of SE initiatives:

    -   Award for sustainable social entrepreneurs as part of the award for the German sustainable
        entrepreneur (DNP)
    -   the National Engagement Strategy of the Federal Ministry for Families, Senior Citizens, Women
        and Youths (BMFSDJ)


However, at the national level the support for social entrepreneurs is not systematic, and there is a lack
of a unified definition and framework for social entrepreneurship.

Regulatory Measures. Most regulatory aspects relate to the delivery of social services as enshrined in
the German Social Code, other social services and various forms of civic engagement dominated by a
strong biotope of foundations and associations:

    -   The Social Code (Sozialgesetzbuch, SGB) incorporates welfare services regulated by the former
        Federal Social Assistance Act (Bundessozialhilfegestz, BSHG) sets out forms of financial support
                                                    10
       and in-kind welfare services, financed from social security funds, which citizens in corresponding
       life situations have a right to claim.
   -   Individuals entitled to a welfare service have the right of choice of the institution delivering that
       service ("Wunsch- und Wahlrecht"). This was originally referring to a choice between
       institutions belonging to different confessions or non-religious welfare organizations, but the
       concept can today also be understood to refer to the opening up of the market of supplying
       certain welfare services of the SGB to providers not affiliated with the welfare federations, for-
       profit companies and a number of municipality-operated services.


Financing mechanisms. Various financing mechanisms are made available to SEs by governments at
national and sub-national levels.

   -   Public Procurement. The Federal Ministry for Transport, Construction and Urban Development
       (Bundesministerium für Verkehr, Bau und Stadtentwicklung, BMVBS; today BMVI) has been
       issuing regular calls for application for socially innovative entrepreneurial initiatives targeting
       sustainable urban development.
   -   The national development bank KfW has a funding program to invest in SEs, defined as “small
       and medium sized enterprises that want to solve social problems in Germany with an
       entrepreneurial approach and an innovative business model?, that have already established
       themselves in their respective market and are in the growth phase. Also, the foundation of the
       KfW bank (KfW Stiftung) supports various social initiatives with grants or investment.
   -   Funding at sub-national level (Länder and municipalities). For example, the State Bavaria
       supports, inter alia, the start-up of ‘social cooperatives’.

Capacity Development. German cities often specific policies towards the promotion of social
entrepreneurship, organise networking events and other capacity development support to SEs.

   -   The Social Impact Labs in Berlin, Hamburg, Frankfurt and Leipzig (operated by the Social Impact
       gGmbH) as well as the Social Lab Köln (in the field of education) offer various services especially
       for start-up social enterprises: co-working infrastructure, consultancy, financial matchmaking,
       networking, research and pilot projects. The project “AndersGründer? of the Social Impact
       gGmbH supplies all-round support to social innovators.
   -   The Impact HUBs in Munich and Berlin offer co-working space, meeting rooms and other
       business infrastructure for persons establishing themselves as social entrepreneurs.34
   -   COLABOR in Cologne supplies young social enterprises, NGOs, especially those with an
       ecological mission, and supporting professionals with work facilities and a networking platform.
   -   IdeaCamp from Berlin targets young (student) social entrepreneurs with a co-working facility, a
       mentoring program, guidance material, workshops and seminars, as well as networking
       opportunities.
   -   Many local municipalities have forums around civic engagement concerning social inclusion,
       integration of migrants, ecology and sustainability. For example, the town of Minden - following
       examples from the Netherlands - organizes regular exhibitions and market exchange
       opportunities for NGOs and social entrepreneurs, potential donors, cooperating companies,
       customers and volunteers.




                                                    11
    3. FRANCE
Although France has been a pioneer in the development of the broader concept of ‘social economy’, the
term of social enterprise is fairly new: the legal form of social enterprise, the Société Coopérative
d’intérêt Collectif (SCIC), was created in 2002. SCICs are the legal embodiment of the idea of a social
cooperative that is an enterprise with social objectives. However, most social enterprises in France use
the form of an association because it is flexible and cheaper.

Regulatory Measures. There is no formal policy or legal framework specific to social enterprise, but
there is a strong political recognition of the SE sector at national and sub-national level. For example,
the Supreme Council for Social and Solidarity Economy was established in 2010.

The number of available public support schemes and general interest of public authorities in the
development of social economy/social enterprises is one of the highest among EU Member States,
especially at the subnational level.2

Although ‘social clauses’ have been available in France for more than 10 years, the proportion of public
procurement procedures with ‘social clause’ is about 15 percent of public contracts. In general, social
clauses were more frequently used by local communities then central authorities. Recent analysis by the
French National Observatory on Social Economy concluded the government needs to build awareness
and capacity of public authorities (e.g. mayors of cities, relevant decision makers in central government
and state agencies responsible for public procurement) to expand the uses instruments and procedures
on ‘social clauses’ already in place.

There are no formal policies specifically defined to support social enterprise. In general, the public
support system (but also non-government initiatives) is geared toward specific types of entities (e.g.
associations) or specific type of contribution (e.g. work integration) rather than specific group of
organizations defined as social enterprises per se.

Financial Mechanisms. The following financing tools and schemes have been set up to promote social
investment:

    –   Tax incentives for social economy/philanthropy: 50 percent of donation to NGOs is exempted
        from taxation. Individuals can benefit from a tax credit up to 66 percent of the donated amount.
    –   Dedicated SE funds: The Caisse des Dépôts (public long-term investor and the most important
        fund in France) offers support to social investment through: fund of funds with a focus on social
        entrepreneurship; and EUR 500 million available for long term leases available to social
        enterprises. As a part of Future Investments Programme (Programme d’Investissements
        d’Avenir), a budget of EUR 100 million has been allocated to fund social enterprises.
    –   Socially-oriented pension funds: Since 2010, each French company with more than 50
        employees has to provide a socially-oriented pension scheme to its employers. For example,
        FCPES (Fonds Commun de Placement d'Entreprise Solidaire) invest from 5-10 percent of their
        funds in social enterprises or social funds.




2
 Since EU funds play a relatively small role in the French context, e have not included them in this
analysis.

                                                     12
    -   Impact Investment. A part of the Public Investment Bank (BPI55) is exclusively channeled to SEs.
        Some regions are active in supporting social investment, e.g. Region Ile de France, which made
        EUR 2 million EUR available to support social investment.
    -   There are also over 20 Territorial Centers for Economic Cooperation in France that offer a
        variety of services for SEs.

Several regions (sub-national entities in France) offer support to SEs:

    -   Rhône Alpes Region offers Forum of Solidarity Employment (‘Le Forum de l’emploi solidaire’),
        one of the largest employment fairs in the region established to promote employment in the SE
        sector. iDéclic Solidaire program provides funding and capacity development for SEs.
    -   Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur has established a regional development strategy that recognizes the
        role of SEs. The regional PROGRESS Program has an SE observatory and collects data on SEs.
    -   Languedoc-Roussillon Region provides support services to social innovation projects through
        ‘REALIS’ program (SE business incubator, school for social entrepreneurs and advocacy activities
        on behalf of the SE sector).

    4. SWEDEN
Sweden has a long tradition of social engagement and SE involvement, including through the popular
mass movement. However, there is no legal form that is specifically designed for use by social
enterprises in Sweden. Social enterprises use adaptations of the cooperative (economic association),
non-profit association, limited company, limited company with distribution restriction and foundation
forms to carry out their activities. The most commonly used legal forms adopted by social enterprises
are the cooperative, non-profit association and limited company which are adapted to provide for a
social purpose in their constitutions.

There are no ministries specifically responsible for social enterprises in Sweden, and a number of
government agencies have been tasked with supporting the development of the SE market – primarily
the Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional Growth (formerly NUTEK and since 2009 Tillväxtverket),
the Swedish Agency for Youth and Civil Society and the Swedish Public Employment Service.

Regulatory measures. The Swedish Government among others recognize the

    -   WISE certification (work integration social enterprise). WISE can be obtained by an organization
        that operates with the aim of integrating people into society and working life and creating
        involvement by co-workers. WISEs are required to reinvest profits into furthering their aims and
        be independent of public authorities. However, there is no explicit recognition/incentives for SEs
        with WISE certificate.

Financial mechanisms. There are a number of government initiatives that support SE funding:

    -   The Swedish Inheritance Fund. If a deceased person has no spouse or close relatives and has not
        left a will, his/ her property goes to the Swedish Inheritance Fund. The Fund provides grant
        funding to organizations and other voluntary associations wishing to test new ideas for
        developing activities for children, young people and persons with disabilities.
    -   Municipalities acting as the guarantor or even providing the loan. For example, the municipality
        of Hudiksvall supports a model based on coordination and cooperation between public


                                                    13
          authorities and social enterprises. The risk-sharing schemes also involve other actors:
          Coompanion Gävleborg, the Public Employment Service, the Social Insurance Agency.


Capacity Development. Most of the capacity development programs are offered by universities or
private providers. However, government also provides support to SEs at national and subnational levels:

     -    Incubator for social entrepreneurship, which is located at the Centre for Social Entrepreneurship
          (CSES) in Stockholm, and Social Initiative, which helps social entrepreneurs/ enterprises create
          operational business models and/ or social impact indicators.
     -    Impact Hub Stockholm, which provides co-working office space, and Inkludera Invest, which
          provides non-monetary support and guidance for social enterprises in exchange of social
          impacts.


     5. UNITED KINGDOM
Social Enterprises have been part of UK´s Government policy agenda for almost two decades. Important
milestones characterized the evolution of government support towards social enterprises. In 1997,
during his first policy speech, former Prime Minister Tony Blair committed to support social
entrepreneurs. In 2001, the Social Enterprise Unit was created in the Department for Trade and
Industry. Later, in 2005 a new legislation was enacted to introduce a new form of corporate entity
suitable to social enterprises, the Community Interest Company3 (Social Enterprise UK, 2016).

More recently, social enterprises were included in the Coalition Government Program 2010 – 2015,
which reflects the commitment of the government to keep fostering social enterprises and to create
mechanisms through which they can get involved in the provision of public services.

Regulatory measures. Important regulations were approved during this period. In 2012, the Social Value
Act was passed in order to open up more opportunities for social enterprises to deliver public services,
and in 2014 the Government launched the Social Investment Tax Relief, which gives 30% personal tax
relief for investors in social enterprises up to £5m.

UK has pioneered initiatives like the Red Tape Challenge to facilitate and speed up the creation of social
enterprises and studies like the Dame Mary Marsh Review of Skills & Leadership in the Voluntary,
Community and Social Enterprise Sector which identified social sector’s most vital needs around
attracting and developing a skilled workforce and leadership.

Financial mechanisms. A rich array of financial support schemes is available for social enterprises
including impact bonds and grants like Big Society Capital, launched in 2011 with £600m of investment
for social enterprises and the Big Lottery Fund that supports the aspirations of people who want to
make life better for their communities, by giving grants from £300 to more than £500,000.

The Government has also provided financial support to social enterprises in order to help them develop
the skills necessary to manage contracts with the State for delivering public services. For instance, the
Investment and Contract Readiness Fund (a £10 million fund managed by the Social Investment Business


3
  According to the Government of the United Kingdom, a Community Interest Company is defined as special type of limited company which
exists to benefit the community rather than private shareholders.
                                                                14
on behalf of the Office for Civil Society) that aims to ensure social ventures are better equipped to
secure new forms of investment and compete for public service contracts.

Capacity Development. The Government launched funds like the Investment and Contract Readiness
Fund which helps social enterprises to be ready for engaging on public contracts, and the Social
Incubator Fund that provides grants to social incubators and aims to help drive a robust pipeline of start-
up social ventures into the social investment market, by increasing focus on incubation support, and
attracting new incubators into the market.

Networks like Social Enterprise UK and the Social Entrepreneurship Partnership (formed by the School
for Social Entrepreneurs, UnLtd, CAN, Plunkett Foundation and Social Firms UK) are strategic partners
for the Government and they receive public financial support over four year programs in order to
continue representing the sector to government and vice-versa among other commitments.

Last but not least, the government offers support for Human Capital development through a series of
training focused on increasing the commercial skills of social enterprises and their ability to engage on
public service delivery through public procurement.

    6. UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
The Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act signed in 2009 triggered an important public effort to
promote social enterprises domestically and internationally during the last years, specially under the
notion that service is a solution to educational, health, clean energy and economic opportunity
challenges.

During the last years, the Administration has focused several efforts towards catalyzing social
innovation, impact investing and has emphasized the importance of using evidence and evaluation of
policy decisions to guarantee a more effective government (Executive Office of the President, 2012).

As of 2016, the Office of Social Innovation and Civic Participation, the Corporation for National and
Community Service and the US Small Business Administration were key public actors in the social
enterprise ecosystem, and are providing different programs to foster the growth of this sector. USAID
has been focusing its efforts on promoting social enterprises with a global perspective.

Regulatory measures. Among the most relevant regulations to support social enterprises are the
different State reforms through which a new legal form for social enterprises has been created. In 2010,
Maryland became the first U.S. state to pass the benefit corporation legislation. 31 additional states
including Washington D.C. have passed similar legislations (Benefit Corporation4, 2016). Similar
legislations in other states reflect other alternatives like the Low – Profit Limited Liability Company (LC3)
or the Flexible Purpose Corporation (FPC).

At the federal level, regulations to facilitate the flow of private capital toward business models that can
generate social, environmental and financial returns, like the Program – Related Investments (PRIs) of
the US Treasury Department and IRS, or the Economically Targeted Investments (ETIS) of the U.S.
Department of Labor have been approved.


4




                                                     15
The Administration also passed in April 2015, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, which
allows social enterprises to use crowdfunding as a raising capital strategy (up to $1 million US dollar)
from micro investors who can purchase a part of the venture.

Financial mechanisms. The U.S. Government is also providing funding initiatives that provide financial
solutions for social enterprises, specially grants programs like Social Innovation Fund of the Corporation
for National and Community Service, that provides grants that range from 1 to 5 million US Dollars for
up to five years to grow promising community-based solutions that have evidence of results in areas
like: economic opportunity, healthy futures, and youth development. Significant public investment is
also allocated through impact investment schemes like the Impact Investment Fund of the US Small
Business Administration, which each year makes roughly $200 million US Dollar available to support
small business investment strategies that maximize financial return while also yielding enhanced social,
environmental or economic impact, or the Pay for Success Grant Program that will provide up to $10.6
million in grants in 2016 to organizations seeking to advance and evaluate emerging models that align
payment for social services with verified social outcomes (The White House, 2015).

Capacity Development. Different efforts have been deployed by the State under the National Impact
Initiative (NII), to support capacity of SEs. One of the main focuses was on raising awareness and
promote successful stories through initiatives like the Community Solutions Tour, where the President of
the United States visits local initiatives in order to highlight good examples of service, social innovation
and partnerships that are having impact. Finally, on a coordinating effort between the White House
Office of Social Innovation and Civic Participation (SICP), the Office of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), and the Federal agencies, the Government promotes the use of prizes and challenges to engage
civic innovators, entrepreneurs, and citizen scientists to solve problems in areas like energy, public
safety, health, cyber security, and infrastructure through the platform Challenge.gov.




                                                    16
