                             Water    Global       Practice




                                              Please replace photo
                                             with higher-res version.




Turbulent Waters
Pursuing Water Security in
Fragile Contexts

Claudia W. Sadoff, Edoardo Borgomeo, and Dominick de Waal
About the Water Global Practice
Launched in 2014, the Word Bank Group's Water Global Practice brings
together financing, knowledge, and implementation in one platform.
By combining the Bank's global knowledge with country investments,
this model generates more firepower for transformational solutions to
help countries grow sustainably.

Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/water or follow us on Twitter
at @WorldBankWater.
Turbulent Waters
Pursuing Water Security in
Fragile Contexts

Claudia W. Sadoff, Edoardo Borgomeo, and Dominick de Waal
© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank

1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433

Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,

interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The

World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,

colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any

judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the

endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination

of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as

long as full attribution to this work is given.

Please cite the work as follows: Sadoff, Claudia W., Edoardo Borgomeo, and Dominick de
Waal. 2017. Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts. Washington, DC,
World Bank.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank

Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-

2625; e-mail: pubrights​@­worldbank.org.

Cover photo: Dorte Verner/World Bank. Further permission required for reuse.

Cover design: Jean Franz, Franz & Company, Inc.
Contents

Foreword	v
Acknowledgments	vii
Abbreviations	ix


Summary	1


Chapter 1  The Scale of the Water Insecurity and Fragility Challenge	      3
Note6
References	6


Chapter 2  The Vicious Cycle of Water Insecurity and Fragility	            7
Water Security	                                                            7
Fragility	8
The Dynamics of Water Insecurity and Fragility	                            9
References	14


Chapter 3  Interactions between Water Insecurity and Fragility	           17
Failure to Provide Water Services	                                        17
Failure to Protect from Water-Related Disasters	                          25
Failure to Preserve Surface, Ground, and Transboundary Water Resources	   27
Multiple Failures to Address Water Insecurity	                            30
Notes	37
References	38


Chapter 4  Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts	                   43
Water Management as a Catalyst for Development and Stability	             44
Water Management Institutions as Buffers to Shocks	                       46
A General Framework for Investment that Reverses the Cycle
      of Water Insecurity–Fragility	                                      47
Note50


Chapter 5  Conclusion	                                                    51
References	52


Appendix A	                                                               53
A Harmonized List of Fragile Situations	                                  53




Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts              iii
     Figures
     1.1.	 The Widening Poverty Gap between Countries Affected by Violence and
           Countries Not Affected	                                                         4
     1.2.	 Top Five Global Risks of Highest Concern for the Next 18 Months and 10 Years	    5
     2.1.	 The Vicious Cycle of Water Insecurity and Fragility	                            10
     3.1.	 Fragility and Access to Improved Sanitation and Drinking Water Sources	         18
     3.2.	 Progress in Water Supply Coverage across Different Country Groupings
           in Africa, 1990–2008	                                                           19
     3.3.	 Fragility and Burden of Water-Borne Diseases and Prevalence of Stunting
           in Children under 5 Years 	                                                     20
     3.4.	 Main Reasons for Movement among 141,480 Somalis Displaced between
           July and September 2011	                                                        34
     4.1.	 Monthly Collections by the Guma Valley Water Corporation during
           the 2014 Outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease in Sierra Leone	                       46


     Maps
     3.1.	 Landsat Satellite Images Showing the Constant Decline of the Aral Sea
           from 1977 to 2013	                                                              29
     3.2.	 Growth of Urban Areas and Loss of Forest Cover in Sierra Leone’s
           Freetown Forest Reserve between 1986 and 2015	                                  32
     3.3.	 Percentage of Internally Displaced Persons in Iraq Citing Water Scarcity
           as the Main Reason for Displacement and for Preventing their Return to
           their Place of Origin	                                                          35


     Tables
     4.1.	 Examples of Water-Related Investments Aimed at Reversing
           the Water Insecurity and Fragility Cycle	                                       49
     A.1.	 World Bank Harmonized List of Fragile Situations, Fiscal Year 2017	             53




iv   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
Foreword

Water crises and water-related risks are perceived as the most pressing global concerns of
the coming 10 years, according to the World Economic Forum survey of nearly 750
experts. In the nearer term, however, global concerns are dominated by issues relating to
fragility and conflict.
  This report is about the dynamic between these two sets of very real and very urgent
risks—water management and the management of conflict and violence.
  In some cases, water can play directly into the dynamic of fragility, acting as a ‘risk mul-
tiplier’ that can compound or trigger simmering tensions. In some cases, the relationship
between water and fragility can be less direct but still very powerfully aligned. In many
cases, either the interplay between water and fragility can contribute to a vicious cycle
that deepens fragility—or to a virtuous cycle that promotes stability.
  This report is a first step in informing responses both in times of crisis and in times of
development opportunity. It covers a wide range of possible entry points: from water ser-
vices, infrastructure needed to manage flood and drought and the management of water
resources. While in the medium to long-term infrastructure is key to all three types of
water intervention an emerging theme in this report is that countries and their develop-
ment partners need to invest more in the data, information and institutions that manage
this infrastructure. Better knowledge and institutional capacity is the first and fastest
way of addressing the water-insecurity-fragility cycle.
  Today we see an historic number of displaced and conflict-affected people. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported over 65 million people were displaced
at the end of 2015. By 2030, we project that about half of the world’s poor will live in frag-
ile or conflict-affected states. In that same timeframe, UNEP projects that almost half of
the world’s population will face severe water stress. Unfortunately, many of the most
fragile countries are also those with the greatest water stress.
  In view of these troubling trends, understanding the dynamics between water and fra-
gility is essential. We welcome this report as an important step toward better understand-
ing the increasingly important role of water management in fragile contexts.




Guangzhe Chen	                                  Saroj Kumar Jha
Senior Director, Water Global Practice	         Senior Director, Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
The World Bank	                                 The World Bank




Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                    v
Acknowledgments

This report was written by a team led by Claudia Sadoff and composed of Edoardo
Borgomeo, Dominick de Waal, and Sandy Ruckstuhl.
  The team is grateful to peer reviewers Deo-Marcel Niyungeko, Steven Schonberger,
Kanthan Shankar, Radhika Srinivasan and Amal Talbi. Insightful comments and sugges-
tions were received from, Erwin De Nys, Christina Leb, Nadia Piffaretti, Jacqueline Tront,
Veronique Verdeil and participants in the review meetings. Professor Nadia Al-Mudaffar
Fawzi and Jerry Delli Priscoli provided valuable inputs on an earlier version of this report.
  Guidance in the development of this report was provided by Jennifer Sara, Guangzhe
Chen, and Saroj Jha.
  The views and opinions expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not
reflect the position of the World Bank or those of the executive directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent.
  The World Bank’s Water Global Practice publishing unit supported the editing of the
report, and thanks are due to Erin Barrett, Nancy Morrison, and Pascal Saura. The team
acknowledges Francis Gagnon of Voilá Information Design for providing skillful informa-
tion design advice.




Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                              vii
Abbreviations

AfDB	           African Development Bank
FY	             fiscal year
IOM	            International Organization for Migration
OECD	           Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
UN	             United Nations
UNHCR	          United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICEF	         United Nations Children’s Fund
WASH	           water, sanitation, and hygiene
WSP	            Water and Sanitation Program (World Bank)


All dollar amounts are in U.S. dollars.




Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts            ix
Summary

Water insecurity—ranging from chronic water scarcity to lack of access to safe drinking
water and sanitation services, to hydrological uncertainty and extremes (floods and
droughts)—can cause severe disruptions and compound fragilities in social, economic,
and environmental systems. Untangling the role of water insecurity in contributing to
fragility is difficult, yet it is becoming a fundamental question for water policy worldwide
given the scale of the fragility challenge.
  The challenge is made more urgent by the rising proportion of the world’s poor living in
fragile contexts; by 2030, half of the world’s poor are expected to live in fragile conditions,
rising from less than 20 percent today. The reality of climate change also aggravates the
problem.
  This report explores the dynamics between water insecurity and fragility. It suggests
that water security is more difficult to achieve in fragile contexts because of a range of
factors, including weak institutions and information systems, strained human and finan-
cial resources, and degraded infrastructure. At the same time, failure to achieve water
security is potentially more damaging in fragile contexts, where populations are particu-
larly vulnerable to the direct impacts of water insecurity, and where water insecurity can
intensify perceptions that the government is unwilling to or unable to meet the needs of
its citizens—thereby weakening the social compact between the government and citizen
groups and acting as a destabilizing force and risk multiplier.
  This report focuses on three main mechanisms by which water insecurity and fragility inter-
act: (1) failure to provide citizens with basic water services; (2) failure to protect citizens from
water-related disasters; and (3) failure to preserve surface, ground and transboundary water
resources. These failures can give rise to a vicious cycle of water insecurity and fragility.
  Evidence suggests that carefully designed investments in water security can contribute
to reversing the vicious cycle, promoting stability and an escape from fragility. In partic-
ular, investments that deliver basic services and preserve access to sustainable water
resources are needed for communities in fragile and conflict-affected states – both as an
urgent development priority and as a tangible demonstration of governments’ ability and
willingness to meet the needs of its citizens.
  Equally important, investments in water security can provide a measure of resilience
against water-related disasters and water crises, mitigating potential trigger events and
preventing countries from sliding further into fragility.
  This report frames the challenge, draws on a growing body of evidence to explore the
dynamics of water insecurity and fragility, and helps to identify and inform responses in
times of crisis and shocks, as well as times of development opportunity. It argues that in some
cases water management and the delivery of water services can be an integral part of the
dynamics of fragility, and should therefore be carefully considered and appropriately priori-
tized in efforts to strengthen communities, economies and ecosystems in fragile contexts.


Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                     1
                               © Arne Hoel/World Bank.




Chapter 1                      The Scale of the Water Insecurity
                               and Fragility Challenge

                               Water challenges—ranging from chronic water scarcity to lack of access to safe drinking
                               water and sanitation services, to hydrological uncertainty and extremes (floods and
                               droughts)—are perceived as some of the greatest threats to global prosperity and stability.
                               Many of these challenges are expected to intensify as climate change unfolds and popula-
                               tion continues to grow.
                                 Today, more than 40 percent of the world’s population lives in water-scarce areas
                               (UN  Water 2014), with roughly one-quarter of global GDP exposed to water scarcity
                               (Veolia Water 2010). Recent estimates suggest that water scarcity induced by climate
                               change, if unmanaged, could lead to a 6–14 percent decline in growth rates in some
                               regions of the world (World Bank 2016a). But physical water scarcity is not the only
                               water-related risk. Inadequate water supply and sanitation services are estimated to
                               have resulted in global economic losses of around $260 billion in 2010 (Hutton 2012).
                               Losses from flood damage, solely from property damage, are estimated at $120 billion
                               per year (Sadoff et al. 2015).
Water crises—from chronic
                                 Recognition is growing of the role that water crises can play in aggravating fragility
water scarcity to lack of
                               and conflict. Popular media and scholars have pointed to water challenges, especially
access to adequate water
supply and sanitation to       in the form of water scarcity and drought, as possible causes of conflicts between coun-

hydrological extremes—can      tries and territories and large-scale mass migration (Sachs 2007). The World Bank has
aggravate challenges related                    economic growth is impaired by rainfall, episodes of droughts and
                               found that where ­
to fragility and conflict      floods have generated waves of migration and spikes in violence within countries


                               Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                            3
                                                                          (World Bank, 2016a). Water’s potential as a source conflict, but also as an instrument of
                                                                          cooperation, has long been recognized by the international community (Subramanian
                                                                          et al. 2012; Sadoff and Grey 2002).
                                                                            Fragility, conflict, and violence disrupt development and pose a significant challenge to
     Roughly half of the world’s                                          efforts to eradicate poverty. The gap in poverty rates between fragile and nonfragile coun-
     poor will live in fragile                                            tries is widening (Figure 1.1). Looking forward, the World Bank estimates that roughly
     contexts by 2030                                                     half of the world’s poor will live in fragile contexts by 2030 (World Bank 2011), rising from
                                                                          less than 20 percent today.
                                                                                                                                         nonfragile states in meeting
                                                                            Fragile states achieved roughly half the rate of progress of ­
                                                                          the water-related Millennium Development Goals. Only 28 percent of fragile states met
                                                                              target for access to safe drinking water, compared to 60 percent for nonfragile states
                                                                          the ­
                                                                          (OECD 2015). Fragile states have also made slower progress toward meeting the basic san-
                                                                          itation targets, with only 18 percent of fragile states achieving the target, compared to
                                                                                  one-third of nonfragile states (OECD 2015).
                                                                          roughly ­
                                                                            The World Economic Forum’s 2016 annual survey on perceived global risks demon-
                                                                          strates the scale of the fragility challenge. Four of the top five most immediate global




     Figure 1.1.                                   The Widening Poverty Gap between Countries Affected by Violence and Countries Not Affected


                                              65




                                              60
(% of population living below $ 1.25 a day)




                                              55
           Poverty headcount




                                              50




                                              45




                                              40




                                              35
                                               81




                                                                84




                                                                               7




                                                                                              0




                                                                                                              3




                                                                                                                            96




                                                                                                                                             99




                                                                                                                                                             02




                                                                                                                                                                             05
                                                                               8




                                                                                                              9
                                                                                               9
                                              19




                                                                            19




                                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                             19




                                                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                                           19
                                                                                            19




                                                     Countries a ected by major violence      Countries a ected by minor violence         Countries with negligible or no violence

     Source: World Bank, World Development Report 2011.



     4                                                                    Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                            risks relate to fragility, specifically: involuntary migration, state collapse or crisis,
Issues relating to fragility                interstate conflict, and failure of national governance. These are displayed in the top
dominate the list of immediate              panel in Figure 1.2.
global risks, and issues relating
                                               When asked to identify the greatest risks to economies and societies for the next
to water management dominate
                                            ten  years, global leaders from multiple sectors identified water crises as the most
the list of greatest global risks
                                            ­prominent risk,1 as shown in the bottom panel in figure 1.2. Four out of the top five
for the coming decade
                                            global risks (water crises, failure of climate change adaptation and mitigation, extreme
                                                                     c rises) are directly related to water management and
                                            weather events, and food ­
                                            water-related risks. The fifth global risk, profound social instability, is a common
                                            characteristic of fragile states.
                                               Issues relating to fragility dominate the list of immediate global risks, and issues relat-
                                            ing to water management dominate the list of greatest global risks for the coming decade.
                                            The evidence in this report suggests that the two are interrelated and should be consid-
                                            ered simultaneously, rather than in sequence. The prevalence of both near-term and




 Figure 1.2.    Top Five Global Risks of Highest Concern for the Next 18 Months and 10 Years




                   Top 5                  Global risks of highest concern
                   Share of respondents (global leaders)

                                                                                  Risk related to              Fragility          Water

                                  FOR THE NEXT 18 MONTHS                          0            10             20            30            40           50%

                           Large-scale involuntary migration
                                            State collapse or crisis
                                                  Interstate conflict
                      Unemployment or underemployment
                                Failure of national governance

                                     FOR THE NEXT 10 YEARS

                                                           Water crises
 Failure of climate change mitigation and adaptation
                                        Extreme weather events
                                                             Food crisis
                                      Profound social instability

 Source: World Economic Forum, Global Risks Report 2016.
 Note: Based on a perception survey of leaders from business, government, academia, and nongovernmental and international organizations surveyed by the World
 Economic Forum.



                                            Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                                       5
                                  medium-term risks related to water and fragility underscores the importance of exploring
This report attempts to           and better understanding the interactions between water and fragility and the challenges
advance the discussion on            pursuing water security in fragile contexts.
                                  of ­
water and fragility risks and       Untangling the role of water in contributing to fragility is difficult, yet it is becoming a
to promote action. It presents
                                  fundamental question for water policy worldwide. Recognizing the importance of water
                                  ­
a typology of policy failures
                                  management in poor and fragile states, this report seeks to frame the challenge, draw on a
that drive water insecurity
                                  growing body of evidence to explore the dynamics of water insecurity and fragility, and
and describes how these
                                  help to identify and inform responses.
manifestations of water
                                    This report attempts to advance the discussion on water and fragility risks and to
insecurity can act as
destabilizing forces in fragile   ­
                                  promote action. It presents a typology of policy failures that drive water insecurity and

contexts                          describes how these manifestations of water insecurity can act as destabilizing forces in
                                  fragile contexts. By focusing on policy failures in water management, this report differs
                                                               conflict and fragility and helps to identify the policy choices
                                  from previous work on water, ­
                                                           multiple interactions between water and fragility.
                                  available to address the ­

                                  Note
                                  1. Here and throughout the report, risk is defined as an uncertain condition or event that can cause significant negative
                                  impacts and losses, if it occurs.




                                  References
                                  Hutton, G. 2012. “Global Costs and Benefits of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Interventions to Reach the MDG
                                  Target and Universal Coverage.” WHO/HSE/WSH/12.01, Geneva.

                                  OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2015. “States of Fragility 2015: Meeting Post-2015
                                  Ambitions.” OECD, Paris.

                                  Sachs, J. 2007. “Climate Change Refugees.” Scientific American 296 (6). https://goo.gl/XqPdDU.

                                  Sadoff, C. W. and D. Grey. 2002. “Beyond the River: the Benefits of Cooperation on International Rivers.” Water Policy, Vol.
                                  4 (5) pp. 389–403.

                                  Sadoff, C. W., J. W. Hall, D. Grey, J. C. J. H. Aerts, M. Ait-Kadi, C. Brown, A. Cox, S. Dadson, D. Garrick, J.  Kelman,
                                  P. McCornick, C. Ringler, M. Rosegrant, D. Whittington, and D. Wiberg. 2015. Securing Water, Sustaining Growth: Report
                                  of the GWP/OECD Task Force on Water Security and Sustainable Growth. University of Oxford.

                                  Subramanian, A., B. Brown, and A. Wolf. 2012. Reaching Across the Waters: Facing the Risks of Cooperation in International
                                  Waters. Washington DC: The World Bank.

                                  UN Water (United Nations Water). 2014. “Water Scarcity Factsheet.” https://goo.gl/QApzfs.

                                  Veolia Water. 2010. “Finding the Blue Path for a Sustainable Economy. A White Report by Veolia Water.” Veolia Water North
                                  America, Chicago. https://goo.gl/iJhMcu.

                                  World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2011. Conflict, Security and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                  ———. 2016a. “High and Dry: Climate Change, Water, and the Economy.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                  ———. 2016b. “Forced Displacement by the Boko Haram Conflict in the Lake Chad Region”. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

                                  World Economic Forum. 2016. The Global Risks Report 2016, 11th edition. Geneva: World Economic Forum.




6                                 Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
            © Sofie Tesson/Taimani Films/World Bank.




Chapter 2   The Vicious Cycle of Water
            Insecurity and Fragility
            Water Security
            Water security can be thought of as the goal of water management. The goals of water
            management can be broadly grouped into two categories: (1) management of water to
            harness its productive benefits and promote human well-being, livelihoods, and socioeco-
            nomic development; and (2) management of water to protect societies, economies, and
            ecosystems from the destructive impacts of water such as water-borne diseases, floods,
            and droughts (Grey and Sadoff 2007; Grey et al. 2013).
              Definitions of water security generally recognize the need to manage water-related
            risks in addition to concerns over the availability of physical resources. Water security
            has  been defined as “the availability of an acceptable quantity and quality of water
            for  health, livelihoods, ecosystems and production, coupled with an acceptable level of
            ­water-­related risks to people, environments and economies” (Grey and Sadoff 2007). More
            recently, UN-Water developed a definition of water security that explicitly captures
            interactions with wider social, economic, political, and environmental systems, as
            ­
            “the capacity of a population to safeguard sustainable access to adequate quantities of
            acceptable quality water for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-­economic
            development, for ensuring protection against water-borne pollution and water-related
            disasters, and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of peace and political stability”
            ­
            (UN-Water 2013).




            Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                           7
                                    Framing the water challenge in terms of water security suggests a dynamic construct
Water security is a dynamic       that goes beyond single-issue indicators such as water scarcity, pollution, or access to
policy goal that goes beyond      water and sanitation to think more broadly about society’s expectations, choices, and
single-issue indicators such as   achievements with respect to water. It is a dynamic policy goal, which changes as
water scarcity, pollution, or
                                  society’s values and economic well-being evolve, and as exposure to and societies’
                                  ­
access to water and sanitation,
                                  ­
                                  tolerance of water-related risks change (Sadoff et al. 2015). Water security differs
to think more broadly about
                                  from  concepts of food security or energy security because the challenge is not only
society’s expectations, choices
                                  one of securing adequate resource provision with equitable benefits, but also of miti-
and achievements with respect
to water                          gating the hazards that water presents to certain populations where it is not well
                                  managed.
                                    Water insecurity materializes when water becomes a concern to society, threatening
                                  human and environmental well-being and compromising opportunities for socioeco-
                                  nomic development. Water insecurity is often the result of a combination of adverse
                                  hydrological, climatological, and environmental factors, insufficient information and
                                  institutional capacity, inadequate infrastructure and maintenance, and ineffective ser-
                                  vice delivery. It is important to recognize that it may be impossible or too costly to elim-
                                  inate all water-related risks, and that communities and societies may define policy goals
                                  around tolerable levels of water-related risk (Hall and Borgomeo 2013; Grey et al. 2013).
                                  These are important public policy choices. To fully inform these risk management deci-
                                  sions, it is important to understand the range of associated risks and resilience capaci-
                                  ties, including those related to fragility.



                                  Fragility
                                  The World Bank’s World Development Report 2011 on Conflict, Security, and Development
                                  defined fragility as “periods when states or institutions lack the capacity, accountability, or
                                  legitimacy to mediate relations between citizen groups and between citizens and the state,
                                  making them vulnerable to violence.”
                                    More recently, the World Bank has developed a risk-based view of fragility, recognizing
                                  that fragility results from an accumulation and combination of risk factors. Fragile con-
                                  texts have a heightened risk of conflict, violence, protracted political crises, and chronic
                                  underdevelopment—combined with insufficient capacity by the state, system, and/or
                                  communities to manage, absorb, and mitigate these risks.
                                    This risk-based approach acknowledges that fragility: (1) has multiple dimensions that
                                  are not limited to state institutions; (2) spreads beyond low-income countries and national
                                  borders; and (3) is associated with patterns of risks that need to be identified and addressed
                                  to be more effective at preventing violent conflict.
                                    Definitions of fragility from other international organizations adopt a similar risk lens,
                                  which sees fragility as a situation when governments and institutions fail to deliver core
                                  functions and are unable to manage internal and external stresses (AfDB 2014a; Bazilian


8                                 Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                   and Chattopadhyay 2016). The African Development Bank, for example, defines fragile
                                   situations as a “condition of elevated risk of institutional breakdown, societal collapse or
                                   violent conflict that can affect entire countries or areas within a country” (AfDB 2014b). This
                                   view of fragility recognizes that in some cases, where institutions might otherwise have
                                   adequate capacity to deliver services and cope with stresses, they may be caught in
                                   broader contexts of fragility or geopolitical instability. These definitions echo influential
                                   work and research in development economics that emphasizes the crucial role of institu-
                                   tional practices in economic development and the success of inclusive development
                                   efforts (North 1990; Acemoglu and Robinson 2012).
                                     In settings where governance is poor, fragile contexts are characterized by a range of
                                   issues that serve as further drivers of fragility. In the social sphere, fragile contexts are
                                   often characterized by migration, lack of employment opportunities, inequality in
                                   access to basic services, and social exclusion. In the economic and financial realms,
                                   issues such as the lack of economic diversification, reliance on subsistence-level live-
                                   lihoods, reliance on revenues from natural resources, large fiscal deficits, and income
                                   inequality can create fragility.
                                     Political factors characterizing fragile contexts include limited participation or repre-
                                   sentation of particular groups in political life, legacies of violence, power capture by elites
                                      individuals, and corruption.
                                   or ­
                                     Environmental factors characterizing fragile contexts include scarce natural resources,
                                   land degradation, unsustainable resource extraction, or geographic isolation. Furthermore,
                                   some environmental dimensions, such as climate change and extreme weather events,
                                   can have unpredictable compounding effects that worsen fragile contexts.
                                     With these drivers in place, when institutions insufficiently and ineffectively respond
                                   to escalating risks of any kind, the ability of affected populations to cope with and build
                                   resilience to risks can be challenged. Consequently, affected populations can become
                                   aggrieved and social relationships can be strained. As these stresses escalate, governance
                                   systems may be undermined as the affected populations question the legitimacy of
                                   institutions.

                                   The Dynamics of Water Insecurity and Fragility
Water security is more difficult
                                   Water security is more difficult to achieve in fragile contexts—and the failure to achieve
to achieve in fragile contexts,
and failure to achieve water
                                   water security has greater consequences in fragile contexts. This reciprocal relationship

security has greater               is summarized in figure 2.1. The figure depicts the interaction of water insecurity and
consequences in fragile contexts   fragility as a vicious cycle: as water security becomes more difficult to achieve because of
                                   fragility, failure to achieve it results in greater social, political, and economic costs and
                                   consequences, leading to increased fragility.
                                     A wide range of factors make it more difficult to achieve water security in fragile con-
                                   texts, including constrained human and financial resources, weakened and overwhelmed
                                   institutions, degraded information and infrastructure systems, and obstacles to physical


                                   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                9
Figure 2.1.   The Vicious Cycle of Water Insecurity and Fragility


                                               Water insecurity




 Aggravates                                                                                        Leads to greater
 challenges                                                                                        water-related
   of water                                                                                        damages and
management                                                                                         weakened social
                                                                                                   compact




                                            Compounds fragility

                                   security and access. In some fragile contexts characterized by violent conflict, infrastruc-
                                   ture may be seriously degraded and institutions may be weakened to the point where gov-
                                   ernments are unable to provide basic water and sanitation services. Similarly, in contexts
                                   characterized by extreme environmental and climate-related fragility, governments may
                                   be incapable of managing major water-related hazards, resulting in social disruptions,
                                   migration, and losses of life and livelihoods.
                                     The impacts of water insecurity can be more damaging because certain populations can be
                                   more vulnerable in fragile contexts. Just as government systems tend to be weakened in frag-
                                                                  community-­
                                   ile states, social systems and ­         level coping mechanisms can be overwhelmed.
                                     As the impacts of water insecurity materialize, they can have negative and differential
                                   impacts on the well-being and livelihoods of populations and economies within nations.
                                   As a result, government credibility may be undermined and the social compact with some
                                                                                                    population, it can act
                                   groups can be weakened. When water insecurity repeatedly affects ­
                                   as a risk multiplier, fueling perceptions of institutions and governments “not doing
                                   enough,” exacerbating existing grievances (such as perceptions of marginalization or of
                                   resource mismanagement), creating new risks (including displacement or epidemics) and


10                                 Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                     generating inequities (notably, poorly designed and inequitable responses to water-­
                                     related disasters).
                                       The legitimacy of governance systems is often challenged in fragile contexts. Water
                                     insecurity can serve as a compounding factor in these cases, placing additional burdens
                                     on institutions that are already weakened, further undermining government credibility,
                                     eroding the social compact between affected populations and their governments, and in
                                     turn, perpetuating a vicious downward spiral. Reversing the water insecurity and fragility
                                     cycle requires carefully designed and implemented interventions that target both water
                                     insecurity and drivers of fragility.
                                       The social compact is a key element of this framing. It is broadly interpreted as the rela-
The social compact starts to         tionship between members of society and the state that grants legitimacy to states’
deteriorate when institutions        actions and policies. Widely applied to describe western styles of government, the social
are no longer perceived as
                                     compact model is also useful to describe situations where the state or institutions provide
legitimate and credible because
                                     extended benefits, subsidized services, and guarantees for public employment in return
of their inability, unwillingness,
                                     for support (Yousef 2004).
or general neglect to support
                                       The social compact starts to deteriorate when institutions are no longer perceived as
inclusive and equitable policies,
provide functional services, and     legitimate and credible because of their inability, unwillingness, or general neglect to

broadly meet the public’s            support inclusive and equitable policies, provide functional services, and broadly
implicit or explicit needs and       meet the public’s implicit or explicit needs and expectations. In relation to water,
expectations                         these expectations may include reliable and affordable water supplies, as well as pro-
                                     tection from droughts and floods, and from appropriation of river waters by upstream
                                     users. When water shortages arise and governments fail to provide adequate supply
                                     and access, affected populations can express their discontent, sometimes violently.
                                     For example, riots broke out in Algeria in 2002 (BBC News 2002) and in Bolivia (Cuiza
                                     2016) over water shortages. In 2016, river use disputes between the Indian states of
                                     Karnataka and Tamil Nadu resulted in rioting in Karnataka’s capital city of Bangalore
                                     (Reuters 2016).
                                       Moreover, certain groups within a society may be perceived as receiving preferential
                                     treatment: for example, by experiencing better water services or protection from water-­
                                     related disasters. In Indonesia, for example, greater investments in disaster risk reduc-
                                     tion have taken place in the wealthier and more politically represented regions of
                                     Western Sumatra and Central Java (Williams 2011). When differential investments are
                                     made, whether for economic or social or political reasons, this can strengthen percep-
                                     tions inequity and exclusion. When government is associated with these investments,
                                     and in locations where these imbalances build on historical grievances, this can contrib-
                                     ute to further deterioration of the social compact.
                                       This framing offers insights into the dynamic interactions between water and fragility.
                                     Policy work on fragility also recognizes the reinforcing negative feedback between
                                     increasing fragility and deteriorating services, and emphasizes that factors other than
                                     failure to deliver basic services contribute to undermining the social compact and trust in


                                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                             11
                                  governments, such as historical and political influences and legacies of violence (OECD
                                  2008; Baird 2010; World Bank, 2017).
                                    Although figure 2.1 is helpful in conceptualizing the interactions between water insecu-
                                  rity and fragility, it does not present the mechanism by which water insecurity contrib-
                                  utes to fragility and vice versa. There are multiple mechanisms and they are not necessarily
                                  direct.
                                    Starting from the seminal work of Homer-Dixon on environmental security and the
                                  links between environment and conflict (Homer-Dixon 1994), the most commonly cited
                                  mechanism linking water and fragility is water scarcity. A large number of scholars have
                                  concurred in this characterization, citing water scarcity as a source of potential conflict
                                  especially in areas where water resources are transboundary (IPCC 2001, 950). More
                                  recently, water scarcity induced by climate change has been cited as a contributing factor
                                  to the Syrian civil war (Gleick 2014; Kelley et al. 2015).
                                    Scholars have also highlighted the lack of empirical support to justify the hypothesis
                                  that resource scarcity leads to conflict (Theisen 2008; Koubi et al. 2013). To the contrary,
                                  some situations of scarcity have driven significant institutional and technological
                                            suggesting that resource conflicts may also lead to the formation of novel
                                  advances— ­
                                  institutional arrangements to manage scarcity.
                                    The hypothesis that water scarcity fans violent conflict is just one of the possible
                                  channels of interaction between water insecurity and fragility. Thinking about the prob-
                                  lem in terms of water security allows us to employ a much broader framing, which
                                  encompasses water-related disasters (flooding, drought, and pollution incidents) but
                                  also water services (such as quality, affordability, and reliability of water delivered to
                                  citizens) and the sustainable management of water resources. In other words, framing
                                  the challenge in terms of water security allows us to examine multiple channels by
                                  which water insecurity interacts with fragility.
                                    The multiple channels of interactions between water insecurity and fragility are
Given that the impacts of water   described as policy failures. Given that the impacts of water insecurity are mediated by
insecurity are mediated by
                                  policy choices, focusing on policy failures helps to understand how institutions can
policy choices, focusing on
                                  reverse or perpetuate the vicious cycle. This report identifies three types of policy failure
policy failures helps to
                                  that give rise to the water insecurity and fragility cycle:
understand how institutions can
                                  1.	 Failure to provide water services
reverse or perpetuate the
vicious cycle                     2.	Failure to protect against water-related disasters

                                  3.	Failure to preserve surface, ground and transboundary water resources.

                                    Failure to provide water services takes place when individuals lack access to water sup-
                                  ply and sanitation services that meet a series of standards, including reliability, quality,
                                  and affordability. This failure is often due to weak governance arrangements, insufficient
                                  investment, and degraded infrastructure, resulting in inadequate and/or unequal access.
                                  Poor security in especially fragile locations can worsen these problems, and consequently


 12                               Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                   can increase vulnerabilities of populations in those locations. A significant burden in this
                                   area often falls on women, who remain largely responsible for domestic water supply and
                                   family health issues.
                                     In some instances, nongovernmental providers such as the private sector or nongovern-
                                   mental organizations (NGOs) might deliver services. In these cases, government over-
                                   sight of nongovernmental actors may be essential to guarantee water services. This can
                                   be particularly challenging in fragile contexts, especially in contexts where the service
                                   providers may be in opposition to government.
                                     Failures to protect against water-related disasters occur when institutions’ prepared-
                                   ness, response, and relief efforts following a disaster are deemed insufficient by citizens
                                   and foster dissatisfaction toward the government, often strengthening feelings of
                                   exclusion. Failure to protect against water-related disasters may be the result of institu-
                                   tions’ failure to provide information on disaster preparedness or early warning, to com-
                                   prehensively develop disaster preparedness plans, to prevent settlements in exposed
                                   areas, or to gain access to remote areas. Households and their members (men, women,
                                   and children) face different vulnerabilities depending upon their social and economic
                                   circumstances; disaster impacts and recovery options can vary widely. Therefore, mit-
                                   igating risks of negative feedback to the water insecurity–fragility cycle requires build-
                                   ing on a nuanced understanding of these affected populations and their social compact
                                   with government.
                                     Failure to preserve surface, ground, and transboundary water resources is a third mech-
                                   anism linking water insecurity with fragility. Governments are often perceived as being
                                   responsible for guaranteeing the adequacy of water resources for their populations, and
                                   for preserving healthy aquatic ecosystems. Failure to preserve water resources may result
                                   from inadequate demand management; a lack of planning, investment, and maintenance
                                   of water infrastructure; or from a failure in institutional and regulatory arrangements to
                                   manage demand (particularly of groundwater), allocate scarce water resources, and pro-
                                   tect water quality. This type of failure may also occur if parties who share transboundary
                                   rivers or aquifers (riparians) develop or use significant amounts of water without cooper-
                                   ative agreements. It can sometimes be challenging to conceive of the ground-level
                                   ­
                                   implications of the institutions and governance processes that manage transboundary
                                   waters. Nonetheless, their functions and the data they rely on for decision making
                                   require meeting standards of inclusivity and representation in order to yield sustainable
                                   outcomes and to benefit users of all types across the basin.
                                     Although these mechanisms are framed from the perspective of water security, they are
                                   reciprocal and mutually reinforcing in the cycle previously described. Fragility, conflict, and
When multiple failures to
                                   violence can be the cause of these failures, and these failures can exacerbate fragility, con-
address water insecurity occur
over a long period of time, they   flict, and violence. For example, the ongoing armed conflict in the Republic of Yemen has
act as risk multipliers that       significantly damaged the country’s water supply and irrigation infrastructure and has
compound fragility                 severely eroded institutional capacity for water management and service delivery across


                                   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                               13
                                 both urban and rural areas. But this dramatic conflict-related shock comes on top of a sys-
                                 temic water resource crisis that has built up over the past three decades, which itself has
                                 been a driver of conflict. This underscores the complex dynamic arising when multiple fail-
                                 ures to address water insecurity occur over a long period of time, acting as risk multipliers
                                 that compound fragility.
                                   The impacts of climate change are likely to transmit either directly or indirectly through
                                 all three mechanisms. Climate change can reduce the availability and quality of  water
                                 resources, undermining governments’ efforts to deliver services (Barnett and  Adger
                                                                                                      related disasters:
                                 2007). Climate change is already influencing the occurrence of water-­
                                 for instance, by increasing the frequency of climate extremes such as El Niño Southern
                                 Oscillation (Stocker et al. 2013; Power et al. 2013; Cai et al. 2015). In some areas of the
                                 world, climate change may bring about dramatic shifts in environmental conditions,
                                 reducing water availability and making it more difficult for governments to preserve ade-
                                                                 ­ itizens. For example, climate change’s impacts on snow
                                 quate water resources for their c
                                 and glacial melt processes in the Tibetan plateau (Asia’s water tower) have the potential
                                 to severely impact water security in the five major river  basins of Southeast Asia, in
                                 particular the Indus and Brahmaputra basins (Immerzeel et al. 2010).
                                 ­
The most challenging
                                   Invariably, as climate change occurs, the most vulnerable and impoverished communi-
situations are likely to occur
                                 ties will confront the greatest risks to their property and livelihoods. Where resilience is
in areas under fragile
                                 weak and government involvement is insufficient, the social compact between affected
contexts that are chronically
                                 groups and authorities could be in jeopardy.
water insecure, where water-
related shocks or disruptions      The most challenging situations are likely to occur in areas under fragile contexts that

of water supplies overwhelm      are chronically water insecure, where water-related shocks (such as drought or floods) or
government’s capacity for        disruptions of water supplies (such as infrastructure damage) overwhelm government’s
response and resilience          capacity for response and resilience.



                                 References
                                 Acemoglu, D. and J. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty. New York: Crown
                                 Business.

                                 AfDB (African Development Bank). 2014a. From Fragility to Resilience: Managing Natural Resources in Fragile States in
                                 Africa. Tunis: African Development Bank Group.

                                 ———. 2014b. Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa: The African Development Bank Group Strategy
                                 ­2014–2019. https://goo.gl/n4Qtpm.

                                 Baird, M. 2010. “Service Delivery in Fragile and Conflict-affected States.” Background Report for the World Development
                                 Report. World Bank, Washington DC.

                                 Barnett, J., and W. N. Adger. 2007. “Climate Change, Human Security and Violent Conflict.” Political Geography 26 (6):
                                 639–55.

                                 Bazilian, M., and D. Chattopadhyay. 2016. “Considering Power System Planning in Fragile and Conflict States.” Energy for
                                 Sustainable Development 32: 110–20.

                                 BBC News (British Broadcasting System News). 2002. “Algerians Riot over Water Shortages” (accessed June 30, 2016),
                                 https://goo.gl/c2p4Tp.




14                               Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
Cai, W., G. Wang, A. Santoso, M. J. McPhaden, L. Wu, F.-F. Jin, A. Timmermann, M. Collins, G. Vecchi, M. Lengaigne,
M. H. England, D. Dommenget, K. Takahashi, and E. Guilyardi. 2015. “Increased Frequency of Extreme La Nina Events
under Greenhouse Warming.” Nature Climate Change 5: 132–37.

Cuiza, Paulo. 2016. “Gobierno apuesta a cisternas para attender la falta de agua en La Paz y los vecinos vuelven a marchar,”
La Razón Digital, November 23.

Gleick, P. H. 2014. “Water, Drought, Climate Change, and Conflict in Syria.” Weather, Climate and Society 6 (3): 331–40.

Grey, D., D. Garrick, D. Blackmore, J. Kleman, M. Muller, and C. Sadoff. 2013. “Water Security in One Blue Planet: Twenty-
first Century Policy Challenges for Science.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 371 (2002): 20120406.

Grey, D., and C. W. Sadoff. 2007. “Sink or Swim? Water Security for Growth and Development.” Water Policy 9: 545–71.

Hall, J., and E. Borgomeo. 2013. “Risk-based Principles for Defining and Managing Water Security.” Philosophical
Transcriptions of the Royal Society A 371 (2002): 20120407.

Homer-Dixon, T. F. 1994. “Environmental Scarcities and Violent Conflict: Evidence from Cases.” International Security
19 (1): 5–40.

Immerzeel, W. W., L. P. H. van Beek, and M. F. P. Bierkens. 2010. “Climate Change Will Affect the Asian Water Towers.”
Science 328 (5984): 1382–85.

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2001. Third Assessment Report: Climate Change 2001: Working Group 2:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Kelley, C. P., S. Mohtadi, M. A. Cane, R. Seager, and Y. Kushnir. 2015. “Climate Change in the Fertile Crescent and
Implications of the Recent Syrian Drought.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (11): 3241–46.

Koubi, V., G. Spilker, T. Bohmelt, and T. Bernauer. 2013. “Do Natural Resources Matter for Interstate and Intrastate Armed
Conflict?” Journal of Peace Research 51 (2): 227–43. doi: 10.1177/0022343313493455.

North, D. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York: Cambridge University Press.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2008. “Service Delivery in Fragile Situations: Key
Concepts, Findings and Lessons.” OECD/DAC Discussion Report, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
Paris.

Power, S., F. Delage, C. Chung, G. Kociuba, and K. Keay. 2013. “Robust Twenty-first Century Projections of El Niño and
Related Precipitation Variability.” Nature 502: 541–45.

Reuters. 2016. “One Killed in Riots in Indian IT Hub over River Water Dispute” (accessed September 15, 2016), https://goo​
.gl​/­sAsvnD.

Sadoff, C. W., J. W. Hall, D. Grey, J. C. J. H. Aerts, M. Ait-Kadi, C. Brown, A. Cox, S. Dadson, D. Garrick, J.  Kelman,
P. McCornick, C. Ringler, M. Rosegrant, D. Whittington, and D. Wiberg. 2015. Securing Water, Sustaining Growth: Report of
the GWP/OECD Task Force on Water Security and Sustainable Growth. University of Oxford.

Stocker, T. F., D. Qin, G-K Plattner, M. M. B. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. M. Midgley,
eds. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Working Group I Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Summary for Policymakers (IPCC).

Theisen, O. M. 2008. “Blood and Soil? Resource Scarcity and Internal Armed Conflict Revisited.” Journal of Peace Research
45 (6): 801–18. doi: 10.1177/0022343308096157.

UN Water (United Nations Water). 2013. “Water Security and the Global Water Agenda.” Analytical Brief, United Nations
University, Institute for Water, Environment, and Health, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Williams, G. 2011. “Study on Disaster Risk Reduction, Decentralization and Political Economy: The Political Economy of
Disaster Risk Reduction.” Background report for the Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UN/ISDR, Geneva.

World Bank. 2017. World Development Report 2017. Governance and the Law. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Yousef, Tarik M. 2004. “Development, Growth and Policy Reform in the Middle East and North Africa since 1950.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 18 (3): 91–115.




Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                                              15
                                     © Dominick de Waal/World Bank.




Chapter 3                            Interactions between Water Insecurity
                                     and Fragility

                                     Caution is needed when assessing linkages between water and fragile situations, such as
                                     migration and conflict, because there are no “easy” answers (Jägerskog and Swain 2016).
                                     The evidence presented in this chapter on the linkages between fragility and water inse-
                                     curity is therefore not meant to provide definitive explanations for complex environmen-
                                     tal and social processes, but rather to highlight interactions that should be considered by
                                     practitioners and researchers working on these issues.


                                     Failure to Provide Water Services
                                     Fragility and Access to Water Supply and Sanitation
                                     Provision of basic services can enhance social and economic opportunities, helping to
Fragility, especially in the form    stabilize fragile contexts and contributing to peace-building efforts (Devictor 2016). On
of violent conflict, significantly   the other hand, fragility, especially in the form of violent conflict, significantly reduces
reduces and weakens
                                     and weakens governments’ ability to meet basic service requirements. This chapter pres-
governments’ ability to meet
                                     ents some examples to illustrate how failure to provide water services can contribute to
basic service requirements
                                     fragility, and how fragility makes it more difficult for institutions to provide basic water
                                     services.
                                       Fragile states have made much slower progress toward meeting the water-related
                                     Millennium Development Goals than nonfragile states (OECD 2015). This lack of progress
                                     is captured in figure 3.1, which shows the relationship between fragility and access to



                                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                            17
    Figure 3.1.               Fragility and Access to Improved Sanitation and Drinking Water Sources


                                   a. Access to improved sanitation falls as                                              b. Access to improved drinking water sources falls as
                                              fragility increases                                                                          fragility increases
                        100                                                                                         100

                        90                                                                                          90

                        80                                                                                          80

                        70                                                                                          70
Percent of population




                                                                                            Percent of population
                        60                                                                                          60

                        50                                                                                          50

                        40                                                                                          40

                        30                                                                                          30

                        20                                                                                          20

                         10                                                                                          10

                          0       20        40       60        80         100         120                             0        20        40       60        80       100          120
                                              Fragile state index                                                                          Fragile state index

    Source: World Bank using data from WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme and The Fund for Peace.
    Note: The Fragile States Index is constructed so that higher scores indicate greater instability. Countries in the 2017 World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile Situations
    are shown in orange. Iraq, Libya, and Syrian Arab Republic are not included because of the lack of up-to-date statistics on access.




                                                     improved drinking water sources and sanitation facilities. Access statistics are plotted
                                                     against the Fragile States Index published by the Fund for Peace.1 Countries in the 2015
                                                     World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile Situations are shown as orange dots (see full list
                                                     in appendix A). Access statistics drop markedly as the fragility index increases. This cor-
                                                     relation does not confirm a causal relationship (that is, it does not suggest whether a lack
                                                     of water services causes fragility, or whether fragility causes a lack of water services), but
                                                     it does indicate a strong interrelationship.
                                                       A significant divergence in performance between fragile and nonfragile states can also
                                                     be observed in progress toward water supply coverage across different country groupings
                                                     in Africa (figure 3.2). Between 1990 and 2008, the biggest improvements in water supply
                                                     coverage occurred in low-income stable countries, compared to low-income fragile coun-
                                                     ­
                                                     tries, where the percentage of urban water supply coverage decreased (panel b in
                                                     figure 3.2). Low-income stable countries in Africa have made greater improvements in
                                                     ­
                                                     reducing open defecation, achieving a 14 percent reduction between 1990 and 2008 com-
                                                     pared to 7 percent in fragile low-income countries, according to the World Bank Water and
                                                     Sanitation Program (WSP) (WSP 2011). Furthermore, these same data reveal that resource-
                                                     rich countries,2 most of which are fragile or conflict affected, have been slower at extend-
                                                     ing services than low-income stable countries. This latter evidence illustrates that even
                                                     where fragile states manage to tap into additional funding from natural resources, this
                                                     does not easily translate into improvements in water service delivery.


    18                                               Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
 Figure 3.2.     Progress in Water Supply Coverage across Different Country Groupings in Africa, 1990–2008


                                 a. Rural water supply                                                             b. Urban water supply

          20                                                                                    8
          18
                                                                                                6
          16
          14
                                                                                                4
Percent




          12




                                                                                      Percent
          10                                                                                    2
          8
                                                                                                0
          6
           4
                                                                                                –2
           2
          0                                                                                     –4
               LIC fragile        LIC non-           Resource-         South Africa                  LIC fragile   LIC non-     Resource-   South Africa
                                   fragile              rich                                                        fragile        rich

 Source: WSP 2011.
 Note: LIC = lower-income countries, according to the World Bank’s classification.




                                                 Incidence of water-borne disease and mortality is highest in fragile situations, as would
                                              be expected as a consequence of inadequate access to water supply and sanitation
                                              ­
                                              services. Data from the World Health Organization (WHO) shows that the burden of
                                              water-borne diseases is much greater in fragile contexts. This relationship is shown in
                                              panel a of figure 3.3, which plots mortality attributed to unsafe water, sanitation, and
                                              hygiene3 against the Fragile States Index.
                                                 Childhood stunting is also most pronounced in fragile contexts. Poor sanitation is the
                                              ­second leading cause of child stunting worldwide (Danaei et al. 2016). Childhood stunting
                                              has permanent negative consequences that prevent children from reaching their full
                                              developmental potential, including diminished brain development and increased risks
                                              ­
                                                  nutrition-related chronic diseases such as diabetes and hypertension. As shown in
                                              of  ­
                                              panel b of figure 3.3, the incidence of stunting is greater in fragile contexts, reflecting the
 The impacts of inadequate                    lack of access to improved water and sanitation services.
 access to water supply and
 sanitation are more pronounced
                                              Water Service Delivery in Fragile Contexts
 in fragile contexts                          Governments of countries affected by fragility, conflict, and violence often face a chaotic
                                              mix of damaged infrastructure, alternative service delivery arrangements, dilapidated
                                              utilities, and externally driven support to water service provision. In fragile postconflict
                                              ­
                                              situations, government institutions often fail to meet donors’ accountability require-
                                              ­
                                              ments for implementing aid. This combination of water insecurity and fragility has
                                              several consequences for water service delivery.
                                              ­


                                              Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                            19
   Figure 3.3.                                       Fragility and Burden of Water-Borne Diseases and Prevalence of Stunting in Children under 5 Years


                                                           a. Burden of water-borne diseases rises as                                                        b. Prevalence of stunting in children under 5 years rises as
                                                                       fragility increases                                                                                       fragility increases
                                               100                                                                                                     100
Mortality and burden of disease attributable




                                               90                                                                                                      90




                                                                                                              Prevalence of stunting, height for age
     to water, sanitation, and hygiene




                                               80                                                                                                      80
         (per 100,000 population)




                                                                                                                     (% of children under 5)
                                               70                                                                                                      70
                                               60                                                                                                      60
                                               50                                                                                                      50
                                               40                                                                                                      40
                                               30                                                                                                      30
                                               20                                                                                                      20

                                                10                                                                                                      10


                                                0           20       40       60        80      100     120                                             0             20       40        60       80       100       120
                                                                      Fragile state index                                                                                       Fragile state index

   Source: World Bank, using data on the burden of water-borne diseases from the World Health Organization and data on the prevalence of stunting from the World Bank.
   Rankings for the 2016 Fragile State Index are from The Fund for Peace.
   Note: The Fragile States Index is constructed so that higher scores indicate greater instability. Countries in the 2017 World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile Situations
   are shown in orange.




                                                                             A first consequence is that a large share of external financing is channeled through non-
                                                                           state actors, including the United Nations system and international NGOs (WSP 2016).
                                                                           Although this can help deliver humanitarian aid and relief, it can also contribute to under-
                                                                           mining governments’ ability and credibility to deliver services, reinforcing the vicious
                                                                           cycle depicted in figure 2.1.
                                                                                                                                  ­ evelopment of core government
                                                                             Channeling aid through nonstate actors can delay the d
   Channeling aid through nonstate                                         service delivery functions. This was the case in Liberia, where decades of civil war
                        development
   actors can delay the ­                                                  destroyed both water infrastructure and the institutions required for planning and coordi-
   of core government service
                                                                           nating water sector interventions (de Waal and Hirn 2015). In this initial postwar cycle of
   delivery functions
                                                                           water insecurity and fragility, donors opted not to invest in state-led service delivery inter-
                                                                           ventions, instead relying on nonstate actors to implement and manage delivery of water,
                                                                           sanitation and hygiene services (WSP 2016). In the short term, these interventions were a
                                                                           vital humanitarian response to restore a basic level of service and to deliver a peace divi-
                                                                           dend. However, targeting, quality, and sustainability of infrastructure delivered this way
                                                                           was poor, particularly in the case of hand-pumps in rural areas. In the longer term, this
                                                                           model of service delivery by nonstate actors limited growth in the government’s capacity
                                                                           both to deliver water services itself and to oversee the delivery by nonstate actors.
                                                                             A second consequence of the water insecurity-fragility cycle is the widespread emer-
                                                                           gence of alternative service providers, particularly in urban areas. Where state-mandated


   20                                                                      Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                     institutions fail to deliver services, alternative providers will emerge or will step in. For
                                     example, in the oil-rich city of Port Harcourt, Nigeria, where the Water Board has been in
                                     crisis ever since the military administration assumed power in the 1990s, 99 percent of
                                     households now depend on privately drilled, nonutility sources of water. Similarly, alter-
                                     native providers have become mainstream in Mogadishu, Somalia, where private bore-
                                     holes and networks have emerged to serve over 1 million people and have entirely
                                     substituted for the municipal water supply system that was destroyed. The alternatives
                                     that emerge are generally more expensive and supply lower-quality water than state-­
                                     mandated utilities. Moreover, these solutions lead to unregulated water use and
                                     overexploitation, which often triggers a failure to preserve surface and groundwater
                                     ­
                                     resources, as discussed.
                                       In some situations, opposition or militant organizations step in to provide services.
                                     These groups may have additional intentions to capitalize on perceptions of exclusion
                                     and grievance, and through that, to actively undermine governments’ authority or gain
                                               control over territories. For instance, in the early 2000s in Lebanon, Hezbollah’s
                                     effective ­
Governments of countries                     sector delivered water to about 45 percent of the residents of the southern sub-
                                     service ­
affected by fragility, conflict,     urbs of Beirut, meeting basic community needs in the absence of the Lebanese state
and violence often face a chaotic    (Flanigan and Abdel-Samad 2009). Similarly, the Sadrist movement in Iraq and the
mix of damaged infrastructure,
                                     Muslim Brotherhood in the Arab Republic of Egypt have employed provision of water and
alternative service delivery
                                     other basic services to contest and compete against existing authorities (Godwin 2012;
arrangements, dilapidated
                                     Brooke 2015).
utilities, and externally driven
                                       More recently, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has attempted to use basic
support to water service provision
                                     service provision as a strategy to maintain its grip on power. This strategy has had limited
                                     success, given that most skilled technicians have fled Islamic State lands and that the
                                     group’s government and financial planning abilities are poor (Byman 2016). A potentially
                                     more troubling strategy is where opposition groups may intentionally withhold or disrupt
                                     access to water, using ‘water as a weapon’. Some argue that ISIL seeks to manipulate
                                     access to water to do harm (DuBois King 2015; von Lossw 2016) or to strategically control
                                     civilian population movements (Tawfeeq and Abdelaziz 2016) in order to gain military
                                     advantage.
                                       A third consequence of the water insecurity and fragility cycle is damage to the infra-
                                     structure required to deliver water services. In fragile and postconflict situations, dam-
                                     aged or absent water infrastructure and weakened institutional capacity constrain the
                                     ability of ­
                                                government actors to deliver water services: for instance, by inhibiting their
                                                prevent the spread of water-borne diseases. Iraq is an example of how fragil-
                                     ability to ­
                                     ity and conflict can destroy water infrastructure, reversing progress in water security
                                     and limiting the government’s ability to provide water services. Three decades of war,
                                     internal conflict, and sanctions have undermined Iraq’s water systems (IAU 2011). In
                                     the 1980s, Iraq was reported to have some of the best health indicators among the
                                     nations in the Middle East (Webster 2011), yet today these improvements have been


                                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                             21
                                 reversed due to the collapse of the health system and water and sanitation infrastruc-
                                 ture (Zolnikov 2013). In 2003, the collapse of sanitation infrastructure led to an
                                 increased incidence of water-borne diseases (Library of Congress 2006). Since then,
                                 there have been periodic outbreaks of cholera in the country (in 2007, 2012, and 2015)
                                 (Bagcchi 2016).
                                   It is worth noting as well that impacts of such damage vary, and socially
                                 excluded  groups, women and children, have particular and acute vulnerabilities in
                                       c ircumstances. These groups may disproportionately face risks of physical harm
                                 these ­
                                                       suffer reduced cash flow for purchasing water, and reside in
                                 when acquiring water, ­
                                                    prioritized for reconstruction.
                                 areas that are not ­
                                   Efforts to restore damaged infrastructure are complicated by issues of displacement
                                 because the movement of internally displaced persons and refugees is uncertain, making
                                 long-term infrastructure planning more difficult. In Jordan, the population in the north-
                                 ern border region has doubled in recent years due to the influx of refugees from the Syrian
                                 war. In this impoverished and disenfranchised region of the country, the social compact
                                 that Jordanian residents had with their government was already strained before the war.
                                 Now, the region’s challenges—including gaps in infrastructure and service delivery,
                                 unemployment, a lack of affordable housing—are worsening and causing conflict between
                                 Jordanians and Syrians to simmer.
                                   In the realm of water services, the combined population is heavily dependent on tanker
                                                                                                 ­ illingness-to-pay
                                 trucks. Because of a voucher system among refugees and the high w
                                 among humanitarian aid providers, the cost of tanker water has quadrupled and poor
                                 communities are suffering neglect. Furthermore, as development agencies have consid-
                                 ered options to drill wells in this arid location in order to provide water to the combined
                                 population, Jordanian residents have protested against investments that could encour-
                                 age refugees to remain for the longer term (Ruckstuhl 2014). This case highlights the
                                 complexities of developing inclusive water service systems that account for uncertain
                                 demographics and that do not escalate local conflict between “new” and “old” residents
                                 and increase fragility.
                                   In addition to issues of population movement, security is also a major issue. Poor
     security in a particular
Poor ­                           ­security in a particular location can hinder infrastructure and service delivery operations,
location can hinder                   reinforcing grievances and perceptions of exclusion and neglect within a belea-
                                 thus ­
infrastructure and service
                                 guered community affected by conflict.
delivery operations, thus
                                   As time goes by, it gets harder to rebalance the trade-off between delivering water
­
reinforcing grievances and
                                 supply infrastructure and building institutions that deliver sustainable water supply
                                 ­
perceptions of exclusion and
                                 services. This is due both to the buildup of unmanaged infrastructure delivered by
neglect within a beleaguered
community affected by conflict   external humanitarian actors and a proliferation of alternative service delivery arrange-
                                 ments that fill the void in service delivery. The latter results in the emergence of a
                                 strong private sector, or other interests, which become more entrenched over time and
                                 thus more resistant to the rebuilding of government institutions to provide or oversee


22                               Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
service delivery. Together, these factors raise the threshold of state capacity required
                       services (WSP 2016).
to manage and regulate ­


Service Delivery and State Legitimacy
The potential for basic services to contribute to peace and state-building has been recog-
nized by numerous international organizations and donors (OECD 2008; Baird 2010;
World Bank 2011; Devictor 2016). Water services, in the form of reliable access to water
supply and sanitation, have been identified as potential contributors to stabilization and
state-building (OECD 2008). Case studies confirm the potential role of services in rein-
stating the social compact, increasing state legitimacy in fragile contexts, and contribut-
ing to stability (Weinthal, Troell, and Nakayama 2011; Burt and Keiru 2011).
  Yet the linkages between basic service delivery and state-building are under-researched
and far from straight forward (Mason 2012). Mcloughlin (2015) argues that: “Received wis-
dom holds that the provision of vital public services necessarily improves the legitimacy of a
fragile or conflict-affected state. In practice, however, the relationship between a state’s per-
formance in delivering services and its degree of legitimacy is nonlinear. Specifically, this
relationship is conditioned by expectations of what the state should provide, subjective
assessments of impartiality and distributive justice, the relational aspects of provision, how
easy it is to attribute (credit or blame) performance to the state, and the characteristics of the
service.”
  The characteristics of service delivery refers to how different types of services trigger
­
public awareness and translate into public opinion on state legitimacy through different
pathways. Public opinion on state legitimacy depends on the way people collectively
experience services: the visibility of services (including infrastructure such as roads,
water, and electricity); whether they can be measured objectively (such as recording how
often a light is turned on on versus judging whether a child is getting a good education);
and whether they are experienced homogenously by people living in a geographic area
(as for electricity and water) or heterogeneously (such as individual encounters with
doctors or health extension workers) (Guerrero 2011).
­
  Beyond how people experience services, whether they attribute the deterioration or
improvement of services to state actors is a critical intervening step in establishing a link
between service delivery and state legitimacy. Who people perceive to be delivering the
­
services matters. A study by the international NGO Tearfund examining the links between
provision of water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services and state-building in South
Sudan found that, while communities had high expectations of their government in the
period following independence, they continued to identify NGOs as the parties directly
responsible for service delivery, even though the local government was involved in site
selection and program reporting (Kooy and Wild 2012). Understanding the impact of modal-
ities of service provision (for instance, whether community managed or top-down) on sta-
bility and conflict dynamics is important (Kooy, Wild, and Mason 2015; World Bank 2017).


Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                  23
                                        Conversely, other research finds that citizens can incorrectly attribute government
The type of service, who delivers     services to nonstate actors in situations where both provide services and where nonstate
                                      ­
it, and how it is delivered are all   actors were more effective at branding their services (McLoughlin 2015). In a study on a
key determinants of the
                                      water project financed by the World Bank in Zimbabwe, the Beitbridge Emergency Water
relationship between service
                                      Supply and Sanitation Project, 75 percent of residents who attributed the service improve-
delivery and state legitimacy
                                      ment to the town council had an improved opinion of them (WSP 2014). But only 11 per-
                                      cent of residents were able to make any link between the improvements and the council.
                                      This was a missed opportunity to realize a “double dividend” in the form of both improved
                                      services and improved resident perceptions of the town council.
                                        The limited empirical evidence suggests that though intuitively compelling, the link
                                      between service delivery and state legitimacy is neither automatic nor simple. Rather it
                                      depends on a combination of the technical characteristics of specific types of service pro-
                                      vision and is subject to social interpretation specific to the context. It is also two way, with
                                      good service delivery potentially resulting in credit, but poor service delivery—including
                                      perceptions of corruption and mismanagement—resulting in blame and erosion of
                                      legitimacy. In other words, the type of service, who delivers it, and how it is delivered are
                                      ­
                                      all key determinants of the relationship between service delivery and state legitimacy.
                                        For example, in Mostar during the Bosnian war, the city’s water utility was split. What
                                      had once been a unified service provider for all city residents became two ethnically seg-
                                      regated entities in the midst of conflict. Then, as part of postwar reconstruction effort,
As part of postwar                    with support through the World Bank’s Mostar Water Supply and Sanitation Project
reconstruction effort, with           (2000–04), Mostar’s utility was reintegrated and began providing unified water and sew-
support through the World                                  residents of all ethnicities. This was an extremely complex task logis-
                                      age services to city ­
Bank’s Mostar Water Supply and
                                      tically, administratively and politically; however, it became the first example of service
Sanitation Project (2000–04),
                                      reintegration—and institutional reconciliation—in a city where government and civilians
Mostar’s utility was reintegrated
                                      had been deeply divided by ethnic violence. With this reform, the water service provider
and began providing unified
                                      became a model for inclusiveness and the establishment of a new social compact (World
water and sewage services to
city residents of all ethnicities     Bank 2005).
                                        It should be noted that perceptions of legitimacy can vary across a population. Though
                                      some groups may be satisfied with their government and ex post analysis may show
                                      improved relations and a strengthened social compact as a consequence of investment,
                                      this may not be true for all. Those who benefit from an investment may see authorities as
                                      more legitimate, while vulnerable, disenfranchised, and marginalized groups who have
                                          benefited or who perceive inequitable outcomes may perceive the opposite.
                                      not ­
                                        Failure to provide water services can undermine institutional legitimacy even in con-
                                      texts not directly affected by fragility, conflict, and violence. The episode of lead contam-
                                      ination of drinking water in the city of Flint, Michigan, in the United States provides such
                                      an example. Flint’s drinking water was contaminated following a decision to change the
                                      city’s water source as a cost-saving measure (Bellinger 2016). The failure to apply corro-
                                      sion inhibitors (required by U.S. environmental legislation) to the new water supplies


24                                    Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                   resulted in lead being leached from pipes into the distribution system, causing serious
                                   contamination and a public health hazard. The episode undermined citizens’ confidence
                                   in the agencies responsible for regulating and providing water supplies. A recent survey
                                   found that only 47 percent of U.S. citizens were confident that their tap water was safe for
                                   consumption, with more than half citing Flint’s water crisis as a sign of a more wide-
                                   spread problem (AP-GfK 2016).


                                   Failure to Protect from Water-Related Disasters
                                   Water-related disasters can act as risk multipliers in fragile contexts, contributing to con-
Water-related disasters can act    flict, violence, or migration. Drought is often cited as a main contributor to humanitarian
as risk multipliers in fragile     crises, but flooding and hurricanes can equally pose challenges to stability and develop-
contexts, contributing to
                                   ment in fragile contexts. From 2005 to 2009 alone, more than 50 percent of the popula-
conflict, violence, or migration
                                   tion affected by natural disasters (including drought, floods, hurricanes, and earthquakes)
                                   lived in fragile contexts (Harris, Keen, and Mitchell 2013).
                                     The contribution of water-related disasters to fragility depends largely on the response
                                   of government institutions following a disaster and also on their involvement in preven-
                                   tion and preparedness. The 2010 and 2011 floods in Pakistan, Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar
                                   in 2008, Hurricane Katrina in the U.S. Gulf coast in 2005, and the 2012 drought in Northern
                                   Mali present interesting cases demonstrating the mechanisms by which water-related
                                             contribute to the vicious cycle of water insecurity and fragility.
                                   disasters ­
                                     The 2010 floods in Pakistan affected roughly 20 million people, caused widespread
                                   ­
                                   damage (estimated at more than $40 billion) and nearly 2,000 casualties (Webster,
                                   Toma, and Kim 2011). Government and foreign aid failed to reach many remote areas of
                                   the country. The absence of a government response in remote flood-affected areas
                                   strengthened perceptions of marginalization in those communities and opened the
                                   space for militant groups such as the Taliban to provide basic relief services. The scale
                                   of the floods also meant that a stretched government had fewer resources to engage in
                                   operations to contain militant groups, which exploited the flood-related disruption to
                                   carry out attacks (Waraich 2010). On a smaller scale, the 2011 Sindh floods in south-
                                   eastern Pakistan resulted in social unrest and protests, motivated by the government’s
                                                           ­ iscrimination in flood relief and assistance operations (Mitra
                                   poor response and class d
                                   and Vivekananda 2015; Rüttinger et al. 2016).
                                     Cyclone Nargis, which devastated Myanmar’s Ayeyarwady Delta in 2008, is another
                                   example of how failures to protect citizens from water-related disasters can fuel griev-
                                   ances toward governments. Cyclone Nargis is the worst natural disaster in Myanmar’s
                                   recorded history. The cyclone and its aftermath killed over 140,000 people, affected
                                   about 2.4 million people, and caused widespread destruction (Fritz et al. 2009). The
                                          military junta’s response to Nargis was slow and inadequate. Government
                                   ruling ­
                                   officials initially played down the impact of the disaster and refused to accept foreign
                                   ­
                                   aid donations or allow foreign aid workers to enter the country (Özerdem 2010).


                                   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                             25
     Observers have suggested that the junta’s refusal to accept international aid was partly
                                                            ­ ncapable of managing the emer-
     due to fears of losing legitimacy if they were seen as i
     gency, as well as concerns about foreign powers interfering with internal politics and
     supporting opponents to the regime who were concentrated in the region affected by
     the cyclone (Selth 2008). The regime’s apparent inability and/or unwillingness to pro-
     tect the population was seen as a turning point in the dissolution of the military junta
     and the series of democratic reforms that followed.
       Even in nonfragile developed countries, water-related disasters can overwhelm institu-
     tions and cause severe social disruptions and loss of confidence in government. In August
     2005, Hurricane Katrina hit the U.S. city of New Orleans, causing flooding that killed more
     than 1,800 people, displaced 1.5 million people for an extended period of time, and left
     $100  billion in total property damage (Delli Priscoli and Stakhiv 2015). Although the
     arrival of the storm had been forecast and ample warning given, government agencies
     were largely unprepared. Following the event, institutions failed to establish clear lines of
     authority to coordinate interventions, compromising relief and rescue operations and
     leading to preventable deaths and suffering. In the aftermath of Katrina and in response
     to national and international criticism, the U.S. House of Representatives created a Select
     Bipartisan Committee to Investigate the Preparation for and Response to Hurricane
     Katrina. The Committee recognized institutional failures of local, state, and federal
     governments and  invited Congress to accept some blame for the insufficient response
     ­
     (U.S. House of Representatives 2006). In the words of the Committee report, this failure
     to protect from water-related disasters was “an abdication of the most solemn obligation to
     provide for the common welfare” (U.S. House of Representatives 2006).
       At the other end of the hydrological spectrum, droughts also have the potential to act as
     risk multipliers in fragile contexts. Drought has been identified as an important element
     in the “toxic cocktail” that led to instability and conflict in northern Mali (Lewis 2012). In
     early 2012, conflict erupted in northern Mali between separatist forces (MNLA, Mouvement
     National de Libération de l’Azawad) and government forces. Separatist movements in
     northern Mali gained support following droughts in the 1970s and 1980s, when the loss of
     traditional livelihoods undermined the social fabric, adding to social instability and per-
     ceptions of marginalization (Stewart 2013). The 2012 drought and the lack of effective
     national and international responses have been linked to strengthened support for sepa-
     ratist movements in northern Mali which, combined with other factors such as the return
     of fighters from Libya, led to full-scale military confrontation in early 2012 (Lecocq and
     Belalimat 2012). Reports from northern Mali suggest that the roots of instability still must
     be addressed, with communities in northern Mali reportedly pointing toward the central
     government’s neglect, as well as water and food insecurity, as reasons contributing to the
     spread of jihadist movements and rebels in the region (Arsenault 2015).
       Climate change, population growth, and urbanization trends may exacerbate interac-
     tions between water-related disasters and fragility. More frequent and severe extreme


26   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                      weather events due to climate change increase the destructive power of these disasters.
Trends in climate change,             At the same time, high rates of population growth and urbanization, especially in coastal
population growth, and                cities in Asia and Africa, will significantly increase exposure to water-related disasters
urbanization mean that more
                                      (Neumann et al. 2015). In concert, these trends mean that more people will be living in
people will be living in harm’s way
                                      harm’s way and that disasters will become more harmful. These developments call for
and that disasters will become
                                      greater efforts to build resilient communities and prevent water-related disasters from
more harmful. Greater efforts
                                      aggravating or triggering fragility.
are needed to build resilient
communities and prevent
water-related disasters from          Failure to Preserve Surface, Ground, and Transboundary
aggravating or triggering fragility   Water Resources
                                      Water security underscores the importance of ensuring adequate quantities and quality
                                      of water resources. This requires, among other factors, demand management to motivate
                                      conservation and water use efficiency; water resources planning, development, and
                                      management; effective and equitable allocation; monitoring and enforcement to manage
                                      ­
                                      overexploitation and pollution; and cooperative management of both domestic and inter-
                                      national shared waters.
                                        Failure to preserve surface, ground, and transboundary water resources occurs where
                                      government institutions fail to enforce regulation to avoid the depletion of aquifer sys-
                                      ­
                                      tems or the large-scale contamination of water bodies. Similarly, weak institutions may
                                      fail to mediate conflicts over scarce water resources that could promote cooperation
                                      domestically between user groups, as well as between nations over transboundary water
                                      resources.

                                      Failure to Preserve Surface and Ground Water Resources
                                      The Republic of Yemen offers a tragic example of the water insecurity and fragility cycle
                                      related to the failure to preserve adequate and sustainable surface and groundwater water
                                      resources. The Republic of Yemen’s water crisis, dubbed the “forgotten conflict” in the
                                      press,4 is severely undermining livelihoods and perpetuating social violence and conflict.
                                      In a context of fragility characterized by legacies of past and ongoing violence, partisan and
                                      fragmented state governance, elite capture, and proliferation of small arms, water disputes
                                      have acted as a trigger for local conflict and collective violence (Hales 2010). According
                                      to estimates from the government of Yemen, violence resulting from disputes over access
                                      to land and water caused more than 4,000 deaths a year before the 2015 conflict. Water
                                      shortages have also led to protests (Aden in 2009) and conflicts between rural and urban
                                      users (Hales 2010).
                                        Efforts to preserve the Republic of Yemen’s water resources have been piecemeal and
                                      hindered by strong economic interests, political sensitivities, and weak state authority
                                      ­
                                      (Hales 2010). As in other fragile contexts where elites have used their power to capture
                                      mineral resources and rents, large land-owners and political elites in the Republic of
                                      Yemen have captured scarce water resources and suitable agricultural land to invest in



                                      Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                              27
                                   cash crops, most notably qat (Ward 2014). Qat is a mild stimulant consumed by an esti-
                                   mated one in three Yemenis5 that has no nutritional value and whose cultivation con-
                                   sumes more than half of the country’s water resources (Lichtenhaeler 2010). In a country
                                   where about 50 percent of children under the age of five are stunted and 40 percent are
                                   underweight (World Bank 2015), limiting qat cultivation and reforming agricultural water
                                   use are a priority for food security, poverty reduction, and for preserving adequate, sus-
                                   tainable water resources (World Bank 2007). Yet attempts to curtail further expansion of
                                   qat cultivation and regulate water use in agriculture have been met with resistance due to
                                   strong vested interests (Lichtenhaeler 2010). This failure to preserve water resources is a
                                   critical element in perpetuating water insecurity, contributing to malnutrition and gender
                                   inequality and triggering conflict in the Republic of Yemen.
                                                                                                                              ­ thnic
                                     Failure to preserve surface water resources can also act as a risk multiplier triggering e
                                   violence and conflict. In Kenya, ethnic conflict often ensues over access to water resources.
                                   In 2012, at least 80 people were killed in ethnic violence over water resources between the
                                   Orma and Pokomo people in the drought-prone Tana River County.6 Water was also at the
                                   center of violent conflict between Maasai herdsmen and Kikuyu farmers (Wolf 2007).
                                     Failure to preserve surface waters may also occur where unregulated discharges from
                                   industries or domestic users pollute water resources. High levels of water pollution can
                                   threaten ecosystems and human development, constraining water use for human con-
                                   sumption and agriculture. In the Palar river basin in Tamil Nadu in southern India, pollut-
                                       discharge from tanneries made water unsuitable for irrigation and consumption. This
                                   ant ­
                                   unmanaged pollution crisis led to a drinking water crisis, which in turn caused protests
                                   and disputes between the tanning industry and the irrigators (Wolf 2007).

                                   Failure to Preserve Transboundary Water Resources
                                   Countries are increasingly developing transboundary waters to meet escalating water
                                   demands and to more actively manage and develop these large shared river systems
                                   and aquifers to strengthen resilience to climate change. Growing demand for energy is
                                   also leading to increasing development of hydropower dams in transboundary basins
                                   (Zarfl et al. 2015). These trends suggest that competition will intensify and contention
Competition will intensify and     may grow over the use of transboundary water resources, both in shared rivers and
contention may grow over the       shared groundwater aquifers.
use of transboundary water
                                     Large-scale hydraulic infrastructure is currently being planned or developed in the
resources, both in shared rivers
                                   upstream regions of the Amu Darya, Mekong, Nile, and Tigris-Euphrates Rivers, for
and shared groundwater aquifers
                                   example. All these rivers basins include at least one fragile state. When they are com-
                                   ­
                                   pleted, these infrastructure projects could potentially influence the volume and timing of
                                   river flows in countries downstream. Because none of these rivers has fully inclusive
                                   treaty arrangements, this development creates uncertainties about the availability and
                                   quality of transboundary water resources and potential tensions both within and among
                                   the riparian states sharing those rivers.



28                                 Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                             Central Asia’s Aral Sea illustrates how a failure to preserve transboundary water flows has
                                          compounded environmental fragility, accelerated the deterioration of water  resources,
                                          and engendered regional tensions and fragility (Wolf and Newton 2014). The two main riv-
                                          ers feeding the Aral Sea, the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya, are shared by Afghanistan,
                                          Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan. Before 1991, all
                                          these countries except Afghanistan were part of the Soviet Union and the Soviet authori-
                                          ties coordinated regional water usage. The Soviet Union also made significant investments
                                          in expanding irrigation. Over-exploitation of the water resources feeding the Aral Sea
                                          happened in a regulated environment under the Soviet System. However, as coordinated
                                          ­
                                          management disintegrated over time, the increasing desiccation of the Aral Sea (map 3.1),




Map 3.1.   Landsat Satellite Images Showing the Constant Decline of the Aral Sea from 1977 to 2013


              a. September 1977                                       b. April–June 1986                  c. July–October 1999




           d. July–September 2006                                        e. June 2009                         f. June 2013




Source: UNEP Global Environmental Alert Service (2014) with data from USGS/NASA.



                                          Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                              29
                                which covers just 10 percent of its original area prior to the 1960s (Shi, Wang, and Guo
                                2014), and competing interests in the water resources among riparian countries gave rise to
                                several instances of water-related interstate tensions (Chatterjee et al. 2013).
                                  Competition over transboundary water resources is often cited as a trigger for interstate
                                conflict and violence. However, research indicates that transboundary waters have induced
                                cooperation more often than conflict between nations. Shared waters provide motivation
Shared waters provide
                                for dialogue and cooperation between neighboring states, even in the presence of disputes
motivation for dialogue and
cooperation between             over other issues (Wolf 2007). And while climate change is causing water flows to become

neighboring states, even in     less predictable and extreme events to be more frequent and severe, the need to manage
the presence of disputes over   these risks in transboundary basins can motivate high-level policy dialogue and actions
other issues                    both to strengthen existing agreements and to promote greater cooperation in shared basins
                                (Rüttinger et al. 2016).
                                  In fragile contexts and those with legacies of significant tensions over transboundary
                                waters, investment in cooperative transboundary water management could help to dees-
                                calate tensions, promote stability, and provide resilience to hydrological shocks or river
                                developments that might otherwise act as a trigger for conflict. Cooperative efforts could
                                include sharing information to strengthen disaster risk management and ensure environ-
                                mental flow of or coordinate the operation of dam cascades; establishing institutions
                                such are river basin organization or treaties to ensure transparency and equity in the
                                management of shared basins; and promoting the joint planning, operation, and/or own-
                                ership of infrastructure to optimize the sustainability and productivity of the river system
                                (Delli Priscoli and Wolf 2009; Sadoff and Grey 2005).


                                Multiple Failures to Address Water Insecurity
                                The three failures to address water insecurity described rarely occur in isolation. Fragility
                                and water insecurity often interact in multiple ways. For instance, failure to preserve sur-
                                face and groundwater resources might lead to displacement in urban areas where weak
                                local institutions may fail to provide water services to newcomers, thus combining the
                                first and third mechanisms. This section presents some examples of these multiple inter-
                                actions. The discussion centers on fragile contexts characterized by forced displacement,
                                to illustrate the numerous ways in which forced displacement affects water security
                                and multiple institutional failures to address water security can compound fragility and
                                contribute to population movement.

                                The Impact of Forced Displacement on Water Security
                                In recent years, the number of forcibly displaced people has surged. The United Nations
                                High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reports that 65.3 million people were dis-
                                placed at the end of 2015—the highest number since UNHCR began keeping records
                                (UNHCR 2015). These numbers have significant implications for water security. Displaced
                                people living in camps or host communities often struggle to access basic water supply


30                              Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                                 services, and place sudden significant burdens on both service delivery
                                  and sanitation ­
                                  systems and the underlying water resource in host communities. The United Nations
                                  Children’s Fund (UNICEF) estimates that in refugee camps in Tanzania some residents
                                  live on less than three liters of water per day—far less than the World Health Organization’s
                                  recommended amount of at least 20 liters per capita per day to meet basic hygiene needs
                                  and ensure basic food hygiene (UNICEF 2015).
                                    In addition to the stress that displacement puts on water services and water resources,
                                  displaced populations are often forced to settle in areas that were previously uninhabited
Displaced populations are often   because they are exposed to water-related risks. In Colombia, conflict and lawlessness in
forced to settle in areas that    the rural areas have forced people to migrate to informal settlements in urban areas, in
were previously uninhabited
                                  spots that are often located in floodplains and on unstable slopes where the risk of flood-
because they are exposed to
                                  ing is higher (Williams 2011). A survey of internally displaced people in Colombia found
water-related risks
                                  that flooding was the topmost perceived risk in their new informal settlements. Between
                                  40 and 80 percent of the respondents displaced to large urban centers such as Barranquilla,
                                  Cartagena, Villavicencio, and Florencia identified flooding as the most severe risk affect-
                                  ing their well-being (ICRC and WFP 2007). This fragility-related displacement therefore
                                  increases vulnerability to water-related disasters in urban areas and the consequences to
                                  health and security that follow.
                                    Migration to informal settlements on the edges of urban areas puts additional stress on
                                  the range of urban services, increasing risk of exclusion, competition, and conflict, and
                                  worsening the potential for urban fragility (Zetter and Deikun 2010). Overwhelmed water,
                                  health, and education systems compound the risks that these populations will succumb
                                           related illnesses. Women and girls tend to bear the greatest burdens in these
                                  to water-­
                                  circumstances. Their household responsibilities—such as procuring and transporting
                                  water, caring for the  sick, and meeting family members’ nutritional needs—increase,
                                  reducing the time available to attend school, work in a paid job, or pursue other possibil-
                                                             ­ atterns make females highly vulnerable, especially in circum-
                                  ities to earn money. These p
                                  stances of violence. Rather than participating constructively in a productive economy,
                                  women and girls become increasingly vulnerable and indirectly reinforce conditions of
                                  fragility.
                                    Multiple linkages between displacement, water-related risks, and water-borne dis-
                                  eases can be observed in Sierra Leone’s capital city of Freetown. During and following
                                  the civil war in Sierra Leone, the population of Freetown grew rapidly (map 3.2). The
                                  city, confined to a volcanic peninsula hemmed in by coastline and steep hills, grew from
                                                thousand people in the late 1980s to over 1.5 million people in 2015. This
                                  a few hundred ­
                                  rapid increase in the city’s population—fueled by a combination of forced displacement
                                  and economic migration—has forced many poorer people to settle in marginal areas
                                  along the coastal floodplains and in hillside slums. With negligible investment in storm-
                                  water management and an annual rainfall of 3000mm, these marginal areas are prone to
                                  regular flooding, landslides, and ­
                                                                    conditions conducive to cholera outbreaks (the last


                                  Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                             31
Map 3.2.   Growth of Urban Areas and Loss of Forest Cover in Sierra Leone’s Freetown Forest Reserve between 1986 and 2015


                                    a. 1986                                                              b. 2015




Source: Water and Sanitation Program.




                                         significant one was in 2012). The unmanaged settlement has also led to encroachment
                                         on the main dam that supplies the city. In a  further intensification of the cycle, even
                                                           officially ended, the risk of relapse into conflict remains, at the same
                                         after the war has ­
                                         time that infrastructure and government legitimacy need to be rebuilt. During the tran-
                                         sition out of war, as households experience new vulnerabilities in these settlements and
                                         perceive inequitable benefits from recovery efforts, historical g
                                                                                                         ­ rievances can resurge,
                                         hindering the forging of the new and critically important social compact.
                                              Forcibly displaced migrants pose additional demands on the water resources of host
                                         communities, often creating tensions. The Syrian crisis is an example of how fragility-­
                                         ­
                                         related migration places additional burden on the water resources of host countries,
                                         intensifying some of the water security challenges these countries are already facing.
                                         Following the start of the Syrian civil war in 2011, a stream of forcibly displaced migrants
                                         left the Syrian Arab Republic for neighboring countries, including Jordan, Turkey, and
                                         Lebanon. The case of Lebanon is emblematic. The country’s population is estimated to
                                         have increased by about 30  percent since the start of the war, causing an increase in
                                         water demand, as well as the volume of sewage requiring treatment (Farajalla 2016). The
                                         majority of refugees live in host communities, outside refugee camps, where they place
                                         an unplanned burden on water resources and services. In Lebanon, the Ministry of
                                         Environment estimates that domestic water demand has increased by 43 million m3 to
                                                                      ­ orresponds to an increase in national water demand of
                                         70  million m3 a year, which c
                                         between 8 and 12 percent (Ministry of Environment of Lebanon 2014). The increase in
                                         water demand is exacerbating current stresses on water resources, particularly ground-
                                                                                  ­ efugees has led to an increase of between 8 and
                                         water. On a similar scale, the influx of r


32                                       Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
14  percent of the volume of wastewater generated in Lebanon, placing an unplanned
                                                                 ­ ublic health risks from
burden on limited wastewater treatment facilities and increasing p
contamination (Ministry of Environment of Lebanon 2014).
  In areas already facing water challenges, such as Jordan, forced displacement has led to
accelerated unsustainable exploitation of groundwater and pollution of aquifers (Mercy
Corps 2014). The Jordanian Minister of Water and Irrigation is reported to have said in
2013: “We live in a chronic water problem. And we are now at the edge of moving from a
chronic water problem into a water crisis. The element that will trigger this movement is the
number of Syrian refugees” (Francis 2015). As water prices are rising and supply systems
are straining to meet increased demand, tensions within and between Jordanian resi-
                 ­ efugees are rising. This is an immediate example of how fragility-­related
dents and Syrian r
displacement tests the ability of governments to achieve water security—particularly to
provide water services and to preserve surface water and groundwater resources.
  This example also highlights important questions about water supply and water man-
agement in and around refugee camps, where governments often delegate authority to
the UNHCR. This creates a complex governance environment characterized by confused
perceptions within host communities regarding systems of authority. Zaatari refugee
camp in northern Jordan is the second largest camp in the world and has become the
fourth largest city in Jordan. Water supply for the camp and surrounding Jordanian com-
munities is drawn primarily from a shared underlying groundwater aquifer. Water
resource issues, much like the local economy, transcend the borders of the camp. Under
these circumstances, as the government seeks to maintain a social compact with its citi-
zens, the activities of international aid agencies working to provide water for refugee
camps can have a notable impact on the water security of surrounding communities,
potentially aggravating fragility dynamics.


The Impact of Water Insecurity on Forced Displacement
The preceding examples illustrate how fragility-driven displacement can aggravate water
insecurity, but the opposite can also occur, where water insecurity can drive displace-
ment and compound fragility.
  Scholars and commentators have observed that the Syrian government’s failure to
address water insecurity before and during the 2011 drought acted as a “risk multiplier”
in the civil war. Poor water and agricultural management practices in Syria, including
ageing and inefficient irrigation systems and excessive abstraction of groundwater,
were largely left unaddressed by the government (de Châtel 2014) and led to a failure to
preserve adequate availability of water resources. The inability and unwillingness to
develop and implement agricultural and water policies to sustainably manage water
resources greatly exacerbate Syria’s vulnerability to water-related shocks (Sowers,
Waterbury, and Woertz 2013). When the drought hit this weakened system in 2011, the
negative impacts on rural livelihoods and agricultural production were significant.


Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                             33
Figure 3.4. Main Reasons for Movement among 141,480                                                                        ­ rotect
                                                                             A very poor government response (a failure to p
Somalis Displaced between July and September 2011
                                                                             from a water-related disaster)—characterized by
                                                                             attempts to downplay the severity of the drought and
          Drought                                                            the subsequent humanitarian crisis—greatly increased
         Insecurity                                                          the impact of the drought on rural livelihoods and
                                                                             contributed to migration from rural areas to urban
        Relocation
                                                                             centers (Gleick 2014). Rural migrants in urban
Lack of Livelihood
                                                                             environments faced poor services and lack of
                                                                             ­
     Forced return                                                           ­
                                                                             opportunities. These conditions fanned sentiments of
      Clan conflict                                                          disaffection and exclusion, and combined with other
                                                                             factors such as corruption, inequality and legacies of
           Eviction
                                                                             ­
                                                                             violence, fueled grievance and unrest toward the
                      0   10      20   30    40     50      60   70   80
                                                                             Assad regime, which then escalated into a full-scale
                                   Percent of respondents
                                                                             civil war.
Source: UNHCR 2011.                                                            When institutions are unable to preserve water
                                                                             resources and provide water services, water-related
                                       disasters can trigger movements of people. Population movements triggered by water
                                       insecurity—especially drought—have occurred in many parts of the world where gov-
                                       ernments were unable to adequately plan for hydrological variability and allocate water
                                       resources (Gemenne, Zickgraf, and Ionesco 2015). In Somalia, for example, a review of
                                       the shocks inducing displacement found drought to be one of the most commonly
                                       occurring factors alongside violence and insecurity (Bryld, Kamau, and Sinigallia 2014).
                                       The 2011 drought triggered a spike in the numbers of displaced Somalis, both refugees
                                       and internally displaced (Hammond 2014), with more than 70 percent of displaced peo-
                                       ple citing drought as the main reason driving them from their homes (UNHCR 2011), as
                                       shown in figure 3.4. Many of these other drivers of migration, such as insecurity, clan
                                       conflict, lack of livelihood, forced return, and eviction, could become more potent
                                       under drought conditions, demonstrating again the interconnectedness within the
                                       water insecurity and fragility cycle.
                                         Forced displacement in Iraq provides another example of how in fragile contexts char-
                                       acterized by natural resource scarcity and sectarian politics and marginalization, multi-
                                                                                                                       ­ erceptions
                                       ple failures to address water security can lead to forced displacement, fueling p
                                       of social exclusion and further instability. Recent research by the International
                                       Organization for Migration (IOM) suggests that water insecurity has been a factor in driv-
                                                                                                               ­ onducted an
                                       ing recent population displacement in Iraq (IOM 2012). In 2010, the IOM c
In many governorates of Iraq,
                                       assessment to measure the impact that water insecurity—defined as physical lack of
especially those located in the
south, a very large proportion of      water, salinity, and poor water quality—has had on 27,830 vulnerable families in Iraq.

internally displaced persons           The research found that in many governorates of Iraq, especially those located in the
cited water insecurity as the          south, a very large proporiton of internally displaced persons cited water insecurity as
main reason for displacement           the main reason for displacement (map 3.3, panel ) and also the main reason preventing


34                                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                them from returning to their home (map 3.3, panel b), ahead of other factors included in
                                the survey such as conflict, ethnic discrimination, or unemployment.
                                  The concentration of water-related displacement in the southern governorates reflects
                                the ongoing desiccation of the Iraqi marshes due to a long history of upstream diversions,
                                dam building, and uncoordinated and fragmented planning in the Tigris and Euphrates
                                basin (UNEP 2001). In this case, the failure to preserve surface water resources combines
                                a failure to reach transboundary water management agreements with upstream Syria and
                                Turkey, along with intentional domestic water diversions in the 1980s and 1990s aimed at
                                weakening opponents to Saddam’s regime. The failure to preserve water resources in the
                                Iraqi Marshes is not only driving displacement, reinforcing local perceptions of marginal-
                                ization and exclusion, and perpetuating fragility, it is also causing losses in biodiversity
                                and in the cultural knowledge of the Marsh Arabs (Fawzi et al. 2016).




Map 3.3. Percentage of Internally Displaced Persons in Iraq Citing Water Scarcity as the Main Reason for Displacement and
for Preventing their Return to their Place of Origin


                                                 a. Main reason for displacement




                                                                                                        map continues next page



                                Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                               35
Map 3.3.   continued

                            b. Main reason preventing their return to place of origin




Source: IOM 2012.




                         Before the recent upsurge of violence in Iraq, international organizations strategically
                       invested in marshland communities with the objective of improving services and restor-
                       ing environmental resources to enable recovery, development, and return. These efforts
                       were conducted in partnership with local authorities with the expectation of rebuilding
                       trust and encouraging the social compact between government entities and civilians.
                       Some achieved notable successes, including an increase in water supply to 25,000 people
                       (Aoki, Al-Lami, and Kugaprasatham 2011; Weinthal, Troell, and Nakayama 2013). This
                       case illustrates how strategic investment by external parties can aim to improve govern-
                       ment-citizen relations, intentionally intervening on the water security and fragility
                       dynamic.
                         Examples of water insecurity contributing to population displacement abound, both
                       recently and historically. There are also many examples of human settlement affected by
                       water risks and opportunities (Delli Priscoli 1998; Grey and Cooke 1977). In Ethiopia,


36                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
men’s labor migration markedly increases following drought (Gray and Mueller, 2012). A
similar pattern was observed in Niger, where young men between the age of 25 and 35
regularly move to urban centers in response to drought (Afifi, 2011). In Burkina Faso, peo-
ple living in drier areas were found to be more likely to migrate than people living in areas
with higher rainfall availability (Henry, Schoemaker, and Beauchemin 2004). In Brazil,
large movements of migrants from the arid north-east occurred from 1995 to 2000 in
response to drought events in the 1990s (Fusco 2012).
  The shrinking of Lake Chad has forced ethnically diverse pastoralist communities from
the Republic of Niger and other riparian countries to move further south (World Bank
2016b). This water-related displacement has heightened conflict over scarce resources
among ethnic groups, many of which are armed. In fragile contexts where armed and
­              operate, these tensions could trigger further conflicts among riparians in
violent groups ­
the Lake Chad region.
  Water-related population movement is often difficult to assess because the impacts of
slow onset water-related disasters, such as drought, on livelihoods are often delayed, and
have many causes, and because multiple drivers affect the decision to move (Ginnetti and
Franck 2014). The evidence presented here does not suggest that drought or water inse-
curity cause population movement; rather it suggests that water-related factors can act as
a risk multiplier for population movement, especially in fragile contexts where resilience
                                               related disasters, cannot be prevented.
mechanisms are weak. Drought, like other water-­
However, investments in drought preparedness, creation of early warning systems, and
diversification of water supply and livelihood sources can protect populations and econ-
omies from the harmful consequences of these disasters.
  Both the frequency and intensity of droughts and floods are expected to grow. Emphasis
must therefore be placed on mitigating water-related risks and building resilient commu-
nities—particularly in fragile contexts where the vulnerabilities of certain demographic
groups are acute, governance challenges persist, and the risk of broader insecurity,
­
conflict, and violence remains.


Notes
1. The Fragile States Index is an annual ranking of 178 nations based on their levels of stability and the pressures they face.
The Index is based on The Fund for Peace’s proprietary analytical platform, the Conflict Assessment System Tool (CAST).
Based on comprehensive social science methodology, data from three primary sources are triangulated and subjected to
­
critical review to obtained final score for the tmFragile States Index (The Fund for Peace 2016).

2. Resource-rich countries (Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Nigeria, Sudan, and Zambia) were defined as countries with more
than 10 percent of GDP from natural resource rents from oil, mining, and the like.

3. World Health Organization data from 2012 on burden of disease were calculated by first combining information on the
increased (or relative) risk of a disease resulting from exposure with information on how widespread the exposure is in the
population (in this case, the percentage of the population with exposure to unsafe water, sanitation, and lack of hygiene).

4. https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/02/water-scarcity-yemen-conflict.

5. http://www.newsweek.com/2015/01/30/al-qaida-plans-its-next-move-yemen-300782.html.

6. http://www.ipsnews.net/2012/09/kenyas-water-wars-kill-scores/.



Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                                               37
     References
     Afifi, T. (2011) Economic or environmental migration? The push factors in Niger; in: International Migration, vol 49, nr 1,
     pp e95–e124.

     Aoki, C., A. Al-Lami, and S. Kugaprasatham. 2011. “Lessons Learned from Environmental Management of the Iraqi
     Marshlands in the Post-conflict Period.” Water International 36 (2): 197–206.

     AP-GfK (Associated Press-GfK Public Affairs and Corporate Communications). 2016. “AP-GfK Poll: About Half of Americans
     Confident in Tap Water” (accessed July 1, 2016), https://goo.gl/3moJhm.

     Arsenault, C. 2015. “Drought, Expanding Deserts and Food for Jihad Drive Mali’s Conflict.” Reuters (accessed June 15,
     2016), https://goo.gl/2yxpjP.

     Bagcchi, S. 2016. “Cholera in Iraq Strains the Fragile State.” The Lancet, Infectious Diseases 16 (1): 24–25.

     Baird, M. 2010. “Service Delivery in Fragile and Conflict-affected States.” Background Report for the World Development
     Report. World Bank, Washington DC.

     Bellinger, D. C. 2016. “Lead Contamination in Flint—An Abject Failure to Protect Public Health.” New England Journal of
     Medicine 374 (12): 1101–03.

     Brooke, S. 2015. “The Muslim Brotherhood’s Social Outreach after the Egyptian Coup.” Working Paper, Brookings
     Institution, Washington, DC.

     Bryld, Erik, Christine Kamau, and Dina Sinigallia. 2014. “Analysis of Displacement in Somalia.” World Bank Group, Washington,
     DC.

     Burt, M., and B. J. Keiru. 2011. “Strengthening Post-conflict Peacebuilding through Community Water-Resource
     Management: Case Studies from Democratic Republic of Congo, Afghanistan and Liberia.” Water International 36 (2):
     232–41.

     Byman, D. 2016. “Understanding the Islamic State–A Review Essay.” International Security 40 (4): 127–65. doi:10.1162​
     /­ISEC_r_00235.

     Chatterjee, P., H. Gugarats, E. Caner, M. Du Jardin, A. Goss, and H. K. Sahnai. 2013. “Case Study 4: The Aral Sea Basin. In
     Bridges over Water, edited by A. Dinar, S. Dinar, S. McCaffrey, and D. McKinney, 2nd ed., 339–62. Singapore: World Scientific.

     Danaei, G., K. G. Andrews, C. R. Sudfeld, G. Fink, D. C. McCoy, E. Peet, A. Sania, M. C. Smith Fawzi, M. Ezzati, and
     W. W. Fawzi. 2016. “Risk Factors for Childhood Stunting in 137 Developing Countries: A Comparative Risk Assessment
     Analysis at Global, Regional and Country Levels.” PLOS Medicine. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002164.

     de Châtel, F. 2014. The Role of Drought and Climate Change in the Syrian Uprising: Untangling the Triggers of the
     Revolution. Middle Eastern Studies 50 (4): 521–35.

     de Waal, Dominick Revell, and Maximilian Leo Hirn. 2015. “The Intricacies of Attracting and Sustaining Investment in
     WASH in Fragile States: Lessons from Liberia.” Working Paper 106721, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Delli Priscoli, J., and E. Stakhiv. 2015. “Water-related Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) Management in the United States:
     Floods and Storm Surges.” Water Policy 17: 58–88.

     Delli Priscoli, Jerome. 1998. “Water and Civilization: Using History to Reframe Water Policy Debates and to Build a New
     Ecological Realism.” Water Policy 1: 623–36.

     Devictor, X. 2016. “Forcibly Displaced: Toward a Development Approach Supporting Refugees, the Internally Displaced
     and Their Hosts.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

     DuBois King, Marcus. 2015. “The Weaponization of Water in Syria and Iraq,” The Washington Quarterly 38 (4): 153–69.

     Farajalla, N. 2016. “Impact of Syrian Refugees on Lebanon’s Water Resources. In Water, Migration and How They Are
     Interlinked, edited by A. Jägerskog and A. Swain. Working Report 27. Stockholm: SIWI (Stiftelsen Stockholm International
     Water Institute).

     Fawzi, N. A.-M., K. P. Goodwin, B. A. Mahdi, and M. L. Stevens. 2016. “Effects of Mesopotamian Marsh (Iraq) Desiccation
     on the Cultural Knowledge and Livelihood of Marsh Arab Women.” Ecosystem Health and Sustainability 2(3): e01207. doi:
     10.1002​/ehs2.1207.



38   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
Flanigan, S. T., and M. Abdel-Samad. 2009. “Hezbollah’s Social Jihad: Nonprofits as Resistance Organizations.” Middle East
Policy 16 (2): 122–37.

Francis, A. 2015. “Jordan’s Refugee Crisis.” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. http://carnegieendowment.org/
files​/­CP_247_Francis_Jordan_final.pdf.

Fritz, H. M., C. D. Blount, S. Thwin, M. K. Thu, and N. Chan. 2009. “Cyclone Nargis Storm Surge in Myanmar.” Nature
Geoscience 2: 448–49.

Fusco, W. 2012. “Regiões Metropolitanas do Nordeste: Origens, Destinos e Retornos de Migrantes,” Revista Interdisciplinar
da Mobilidade Humana XX (39): 101–16.

Gemenne, F., C. Zickgraf, and D. Ionesco. 2015. The State of Environmental Migration 2015. Paris: International Organization
for Migration.

Ginnetti, J., and T. Franck. 2014. “Assessing Drought Displacement for Kenyan, Ethiopian and Somali Pastoralists.”
Technical Report, Norwegian Refugee Council and Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC), Geneva.

Gleick, P. H. 2014. “Water, Drought, Climate Change, and Conflict in Syria.” Weather, Climate and Society 6 (3): 331–40.

Godwin, M. J. 2012. “Political Inclusion in Unstable Contexts: Muqtada al-Sadr and Iraq’s Sadrist Movement.” Contemporary
Arab Affairs 5 (3): 448–56. doi: 10.1080/17550912.2012.695462.

Gray, C., and V. Mueller. 2012. “Drought and Population Mobility in Rural Ethiopia.” World Development 40 (1): 134–45.

Grey, D. R. C., and H. J. Cooke. 1977. “Some Problems in the Quarternary Evolution of the Landforms of Northern Botswana.”
CATENA 4 (1-2): 122–33.

Guerrero, Alejandro. 2011. “Rebuilding Trust in Government via Service Delivery: The Case of Medellin, Colombia.” World
Bank, Washington, DC.

Hales, G. 2010. “Under Pressure: Social Violence over Land and Water in Yemen.” Issue Brief Number 2, Yemen Armed
Violence Assessment.

Hammond, L. 2014. “History, Overview, Trends and Issues in Major Somali Refugee Displacements in the Near Region.”
New  Issues in Refugee Research, UNHCR Research Paper No. 268, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
https://goo.gl/XskK29.

Harris, K., D. Keen, and T. Mitchell. 2013. “When Disasters and Conflicts Collide. Improving the Links between Disaster
Resilience and Conflict Prevention.” Overseas Development Institute, London.

Henry, S., B. Schoumaker, and C. Beauchemin. 2004. “The Impact of Rainfall on the First Out-migration: A Multi-level
Event-history Analysis in Burkina Faso.” Population and Environment 25: 423. doi:10.1023/B:POEN.0000036928.17696.e8.
­

IAU (Inter-Agency Information and Analysis Unit). 2011. “Water in Iraq Factsheet.” United Nations Country Team Iraq,
Baghadad, http://goo.gl/DMSbBs.

ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross) and WFP (World Food Programme). 2007. “Una mirada a la población
desplazada en ocho ciudades de Colombia: respuesta institucional local, condiciones de vida y recomendaciones para su
­
atención.” ICRC and WFP.

IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2012. “IOM Iraq Special Report: Water Scarcity.” https://goo.gl/jLAEW2.

Jägerskog, A., and A. Swain, ed. 2016. Water, Migration and How They Are Interlinked. Working Report 27. Stockholm: SIWI
(Stiftelsen Stockholm International Water Institute).

Kooy, M., and L. Wild. 2012. “Tearfund WASH Service Delivery in South Sudan: Contributions to Peace-building and State-
building.” London: Overseas Development Institute.

Kooy, M., L. Wild, and N. Mason. 2015. “Doing Things Differently: Can Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Services
Support Peace and State-building Processes?” Development Policy Review 33 (4): 433–56.

Lecocq, Baz, and Nadia Belalimat. 2012. The Tuareg: Between Armed Uprising and Drought. African Arguments. London:
Royal African Society. https://goo.gl/Ew4PHO.

Lewis, D. 2012. “Mali Coup Shakes Cocktail of Instability in Sahel.” Reuters (accessed: June 9, 2016), https://goo.gl/vpOAeE.



Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                                              39
     Library of Congress, Federal Research Division. 2006. “Country Profile: Iraq.” https://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/cs/profiles/Iraq​
     .pdf.

     Lichtenthaeler, G. 2010. “Water Conflict and Cooperation in Yemen.” Middle East Report 254, Middle East Research and
     Information Project, Washington, DC.

     Mason, N. 2012. Relationships between Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Service Delivery and Peace-building
     and State-building. A Review of the Literature.” ODI Working Report 362, Overseas Development Institute, London.

     Mcloughlin, Claire. 2015. “When Does Service Delivery Improve the Legitimacy of a Fragile or Conflict-Affected State?”
     Governance 28 (3): 341–56. doi:10.1111/gove.12091.

     Mercy Corps. 2014. “Tapped Out: Water Scarcity and Refugee Pressures in Jordan.” Mercy Corps, Portland, Oregon.

     Ministry of Environment of Lebanon. 2014. “Lebanon Environmental Assessment of the Syrian Conflict and Priority
     Interventions.” MOE/EU/UNDP Report, Beirut, https://goo.gl/5c9DQa.

     Mitra, S., and J. Vivekananda. 2015. “Compounding Risks: Disasters, Fragility and Conflict.” Policy brief, International
     Alert, London.

     Neumann, B., A. T. Vafeidis, J. Zimmermann, and R. J. Nicholls. 2015. “Future Coastal Population Growth and Exposure to
     Sea-level Rise and Coastal Flooding–A Global Assessment.” Plos ONE 10 (6): e0131375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131375.
     ­

     OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2008. “Service Delivery in Fragile Situations: Key
     Concepts, Findings and Lessons.” OECD/DAC Discussion Report, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,
     Paris.

     ———. 2015. “States of Fragility 2015: Meeting Post-2015 Ambitions.” Organization for Economic Cooperation and
     Development, Paris.

     Özerdem, A. 2010. “The Responsibility to Protect in Natural Disasters: Another Excuse for Interventionism? Nargis
     Cyclone, Myanmar.” Conflict, Security and Development 10 (5): 693–713.

     Ruckstuhl, Sandra. 2014. “Conflict-Sensitive Development Programming in Transitional Situations: Lessons from Water-
     Related Projects.” Research Paper, United States Agency for International Development, Washington, DC.

     Rüttinger, L., D. Smith, G. Stang, D. Tänzler, and J. Vivekanada. 2016. A New Climate for Peace: Taking Action on Climate and
     Fragility Risks. An independent report commissioned by the G7 members.

     Sadoff, C. W. and D. Grey. 2005. “Cooperation on International Rivers: A Continuum for Securing and Sharing Benefits.”
     Water International Vol. 30, No. 4, pp 420-427.

     Selth, A. 2008. “Even Paranoids Have Enemies: Cyclone Nargis and Myanmar’s Fears of Invasion.” Contemporary Southeast
     Asia 30 (3): 379–402.

     Shi, W., M. Wang, and W. Guo. 2014. “Long-term Hydrological Changes of the Aral Sea Observed by Satellites.” Journal of
     Geophysical Research, Oceans 119: 3313–26. doi:10.1002/2014JC009988.

     Sowers, J., J., Waterbury, J. and E. Woertz (2013) Did Drought Trigger The Crisis in Syria? Footnote.

     Stewart, D. J. 2013. “What is Next for Mali? The Roots of Conflict and Challenges to Stability.” Strategic Studies Institute and
     U.S. Army War College Press. https://goo.gl/WD9z7T.

     Tawfeeq, M., and Salma Abdelaziz. 2016. “ISIS Uses Water as Weapon in Mosul Fight,” CNN (Cable News Network),
     December 1 (accessed December 11, 2016). http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/30/middleeast/mosul-water-isis/.

     UNEP (United Nations Environmental Programme). 2001. “The Mesopotamian Marshlands: Demise of an Ecosystem.”
     UNEP/DEWA/TR.01-3, Division of Early Warning and Assessment, United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi.

     UNEP Global Environmental Alert Service. 2014. “The Future of the Aral Sea Lies in Transboundary Cooperation.” Global
     Environmental Alert Service Bulletin 63 (1)-2014.

     UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2011. “Somalia. Population Movement Tracking.” http://data​
     .unhcr​.org/horn-of-africa/download.php?id=455.

     ———. 2015. “Worldwide Displacement Hits All-time High as War and Persecution Increase.” Press release, June 18, http://
     www​.unhcr.org/558193896.html.




40   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
United States, House of Representatives. 2006. “A Failure of Initiative. Final Report of the Select Bipartisan Committee to
Investigate the Preparation for and Response to Hurricane Katrina.” Report 109-377, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Washington DC. https://goo.gl/BEVULu.

von Lossow, Tobias. 2016. “The Rebirth of Water as a Weapon: IS in Syria and Iraq.” The International Spectator 51 (3).

Waraich, O. 2010. “Has Pakistan’s Military Lost Ground to the Floods? TIME World (accessed July 1, 2016) https://goo​
.gl/03Ap2Y.

Ward, C. 2014. The Water Crisis in Yemen: Managing Extreme Water Scarcity in the Middle East. I. B.Tauris

Webster, P. C. 2011. “Iraq’s Health System Yet to Heal from Ravages of War.” The Lancet 378 (9794): 863–66.

Webster, P. J., V. E. Toma, and H.-M. Kim. 2011. “Were the 2010 Pakistan Floods Predictable?” Geophysical Research Letters
38 (4): L04806. doi:10.1029/2010GL046346.

Weinthal, E., J. Troell, and M. Nakayama. 2011. “Water and Post-conflict Peacebuilding: Introduction.” Water International
36 (2): 143–53.

———. 2013. Water and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding, 3rd volume. Routledge.

Williams, G. 2011. “Study on Disaster Risk Reduction, Decentralization and Political Economy: The Political Economy of
Disaster Risk Reduction.” Background report for the Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UN/ISDR,
Geneva.

Wolf, A. 2007. “Shared Waters: Conflict and Cooperation.” Annual Review of Environmental Resources 32: 241–69.

Wolf, A., and J. Newton. 2014. Case Study of Transboundary Dispute Resolution: Aral Sea. http://www.transboundarywaters​
.orst.edu/research/case_studies/Documents/aral_sea.pdf

World Bank. 2005. “Bosnia-Herzegovina Mostar Water Supply and Sanitation.” World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www​
-wds​.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2006/01/17/000160016_20060117125630/Rendered ​
/­PDF​/34620.pdf.

———. 2007. “Yemen: Towards Qat Demand Reduction.” Report No. 39738-YE. World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2011. World Development Report 2011. Conflict, Security and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2015. “Nutrition Glance, Yemen.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2016b. “Forced Displacement by the Boko Haram Conflict in the Lake Chad Region”. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

———. 2017. World Development Report 2017. Governance and the Law. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WSP (Water and Sanitation Program, World Bank). 2011 “Pathways to Progress: Transitioning to Country-Led Service
Delivery Pathways to Meet Africa’s Water Supply and Sanitation Targets.” World Bank, Washington, DC. http://www.wsp​
.org/sites/wsp​.org/files/publications/CSO-Synthesis-Report.pdf

———. 2014. “Beitbridge Emergency Water Supply and Sanitation Project. Effects on service access and citizen confidence in
government institutions.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2016. “Water Supply, The Transition from Emergency to Development Support: Evidence from Country Case Studies
in Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2016. “Water Supply, The Transition from Emergency to Development Support: Evidence from Country Case Studies
in Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Zarfl, C., A. E.  Lumsdon, J. Berlekamp, Laura  Tydecks, and K. Tockner. 2015. “A Global Boom in Hydropower Dam
Construction.” Aquatic Sciences 77 (1): 161–70.

Zetter, R., and G. Deikun. 2010. “Meeting Humanitarian Challenges in Urban Areas.” Migration Review, Issue 34, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Zolnikov, T. R. 2013. “The Maladies of Water and War: Addressing Poor Water Quality in Iraq.” American Journal of Public
Health 103 (6): 980–87.




Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                                             41
                                     © Claudia W. Sadoff/World Bank.




Chapter 4                            Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts

                                     The 2011 World Development Report on Conflict, Security, and Development asserts that
                                     the process of escaping fragility and moving toward a virtuous cycle of confidence-build-
                                     ing and institutional transformation requires at least a generation (World Bank 2011).
                                     Countries undertaking this transition face a legacy of pervasive and enduring mistrust,
                                     which makes action to address collective challenges or provide public goods more diffi-
                                     cult. The transition process is not linear or smooth. It requires strategic, targeted invest-
                                     ment to address grievances and inequity, and it is vulnerable to internal and external
                                     shocks that can push countries back into fragility.
                                       Outsiders cannot restore confidence and transform institutions for countries because
                                     these processes are domestic and must be nationally led. But international actors can
                                     become third-party intermediaries in situations of conflict and discontent, and they can
                                     provide external support and incentives that are sensitive to the context of the conflict
                                     ­
                                     and help build resilience to environmental, economic, and social stressors.
                                       Third parties can also promote transparency of data, which is essential to supporting a
In the management of shared          socially inclusive approach and to building constructive civilian-government relations.
water resources at any scale,        Data and information that can be particularly constructive to share in these circum-
systems for sharing hydrological     stances—both to prevent conflict and to foster trust—can describe investments, the distri-
data can be politically
                                     bution of services and benefits, and hydrology. In the management of shared water
complicated; yet they are integral
                                     resources at any scale (whether within or between nations), systems for sharing hydro-
to coordinated, equitable and
                                     logical data can be politically complicated; yet they are integral to coordinated, equitable
informed planning processes that
                                     and informed planning processes that cultivate confidence.
cultivate confidence


                                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                             43
                                    Efforts to reverse the vicious cycle of water insecurity and fragility must occur within
                                                                                                                    ­ itizen-state
                                  broader efforts to escape from fragility. They are thus likewise hindered by weak c
                                  relations, exogenous shocks, and the limited role that outsiders can play in transforming
                                                                                                                           ­ utting
                                  domestic institutions. At best, water-related investments and institutions can be at the c
                                  edge of this transformation—pushing it forward rather than holding it back.1 But equally
                                  important is the notion that water-related investments can provide a measure of resilience to
Water-related investments can     shocks that could otherwise threaten to push a country back into broader fragility.
provide a measure of resilience     Before setting out a framework to help identify appropriate types of water-related
to shocks that could otherwise
                                  investments later in this section, some examples are given of situations where water
threaten to push a country back
                                  sector ­
                                  ­      institutions have been at the cutting edge of promoting stability and have helped
into broader fragility
                                  prevent a country sliding back into fragility.


                                  Water Management as a Catalyst for Development and Stability
                                  In supporting utility reform across fragile states in Sub-Saharan Africa, the World Bank’s
                                  Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) has found that results have been strongly influ-
                                  enced by the interaction of interventions to increase water availability and the political
                                  incentives to make services work. In drier countries where a crisis at the central govern-
                                  ment level has led to an upsurge of subnational authority, local political incentives
                                  for  acting on water have been very strong. Where crises have diminished the central
                                  government’s presence and legitimacy, through war (Somalia) or hyperinflation
                                  (Zimbabwe), politicians at the ­subnational level have viewed the opportunity to improve
                                        supply as a tangible c
                                  water ­                    ­ ollective action problem worth acting upon to demonstrate
                                                           central impotence.
                                  local competence against ­
                                    Addressing water supply has the potential to bolster both the legitimacy and the local tax
                                  base of emerging subnational entities. Network supplies have economies of scale that
                                  enable services to be delivered at prices well below alternative solutions (private boreholes
                                  or water tankers)—often by orders of magnitude. With lower costs per cubic meter, water
                                  revenues have been viewed as a way of directly and indirectly increasing the tax base.
                                  Taxing water sales directly has increased the tax base. For instance, in Somalia, 5 percent of
                                  the sales of the Hargeisa Water Agency are remitted to the Somaliland central bank. Water
                                  revenues in Zimbabwe account for up to 50 percent of municipal revenues. Water services,
                                  particularly in Zimbabwe, have also been seen as an indirect mechanism to increase and
                                  broaden the tax base. Municipalities can cut off water when tariffs are not being paid.
                                  Servicing new housing plots with water and sewer can raise the auction price of land and
                                  expand the population of houses that are ratable. These joint opportunities have prompted
                                  the emerging regional and local governments to be willing both to deliver water and to
                                  charge for it, ensuring stable and financially sustainable services in a fragile context.
                                    By contrast, in countries like Liberia and Sierra Leone that have remained highly cen-
                                  tralized and that have abundant water resources, high rainfall, and shallow aquifers, util-
                                  ity reform has been a much lower political priority. For wealthier households, it has been


44                                Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                    ­relatively simple to privatize a solution to water supply by sinking a well in their ­backyards.
                                    Alternative service delivery models have sprung up as hydrogeology is conducive to
                                    low-cost alternative water sources. This has fueled a vicious cycle of expanding alterna-
                                    ­
                                    tives and shrinking utility services (as discussed earlier).
                                      In the wake of violence and conflict, the military can play a significant role in reconstruct-
                                    ing infrastructure and thus helping to rebuild the social contract between a ­beleaguered pop-
                                    ulation and its government. However, in fragile and conflict-affected countries, distrust due
                                    to any history of military oppression can persist. In postindependence Senegal, for example,
                                    the Armee-Nation project, a civil-military effort to protect citizens through collaborative
                                    development projects, promoted positive relations between these entities. The project
                                    yielded investment in several types of water infrastructure, including wells, water retention
                                    basins, canals, and wastewater treatment facilities. In addition to fostering trust between
                                    civilians and security forces, these activities also helped build durable solutions to water
                                    access challenges and reduce risks of future conflict (Partners for Democratic Change 2010).
                                      Improvements in the delivery of irrigation water, local consultation, and equitable
Improvements in the delivery of     access to resources can also act as a catalyst for development and stability, preventing
irrigation water, local             countries from sliding back into fragility. Following ethnic conflict and population dis-
consultation, and equitable
                                    placement in southern Kyrgyz Republic in 2010, the World Food Programme and the
access to resources can also act
                                    Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations promoted the rehabilitation of
as a catalyst for development and
                                    irrigation channels employing ethnically mixed groups, bringing Uzbek and Kyrgyz pop-
stability, preventing countries
                                    ulations to work together on a common resource management challenge (Troell and
from sliding back into fragility
                                    Weinthal 2014). The shared management of irrigation infrastructure and the develop-
                                    ment of water user associations to resolve disputes over water access at the local level
                                    were used to facilitate reconciliation and dialogue in the postconflict situation (UN PBSO
                                    2012). Strengthening water institutions and improving mechanisms for inclusive, local
                                    participation in turn allowed communities to develop trust over the management of irri-
                                    gation infrastructure. Water-related investments served as a platform to reduce fragility
                                    and increase cooperation among groups.
                                      Transboundary water agreements and cooperation can also act as a catalyst for devel-
Transboundary water                 opment and stability. The Indus Water Treaty of 1960 is an example of how successful
agreements and cooperation can      transboundary water cooperation can promote regional stability and prevent conflict
act as a catalyst for development
                                    over water resources. The treaty provides a plan for allocation of the flow of the Indus
and stability
                                    River between India and Pakistan and a mechanism to resolve disputes (Salman and
                                    Uprety 2003). The success of the treaty demonstrates the importance of encouraging and
                                    facilitating the creation and strengthening of institutions and actors to preserve and man-
                                    age transboundary waters. The World Bank’s positive third-party role in brokering the
                                                               ­ urther suggests that international organizations and donors
                                    Indus Water Treaty in 1960 f
                                    can actively promote such agreements across national and international borders.
                                      Another example of the role that initiatives over transboundary waters can play in pro-
                                    moting regional stability and cooperation comes from the Middle East. In 2013, Israel,


                                    Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                 45
                                                   Jordan, and the Palestinian Authority signed a memorandum of understanding outlining
                                                   pilot regional water-sharing initiatives. These include a desalination plant in Aqaba,
                                                   Jordan, where the water produced will be shared with Israel, increased releases to Jordan
                                                   from Israel’s Sea of Galilee, and the sale of water from Israel to the Palestinian Authority.
                                                   This agreement was facilitated by the World Bank, again highlighting the contribution
                                                   that international organizations and donors can make in playing a constructive third-
                                                   party role and promoting cooperative transboundary water management as a tool for
                                                   ­
                                                   stability and prosperity.


                                                   Water Management Institutions as Buffers to Shocks
                                                   In contexts that are already fragile, when the capacity to deal with water-related chal-
      Functioning water management
                                                   lenges is inadequate, natural disasters and socioeconomic crises can create additional
      institutions and robust water-
      related investments can act as               conditions of fragility and increase the potential for conflict and violence. By contrast,
      buffers at times of crises, reducing         functioning water management institutions and robust water-related investments can, at
      the risks of further fragility               times, act as buffers at times of crises, reducing the risks of further fragility.
                                                     In early 2014 Sierra Leone was hit by a major shock: the announcement of the first
                                                   ­
                                                   suspected cases of Ebola Virus Disease. In late 2103 and early 2014, the World Bank Water
                                                   and Sanitation Program had been working with the country’s largest utility, Guma Valley
                                                   Water Corporation (GVWC), to upgrade their customer billing system and carry out a


      Figure 4.1. Monthly Collections by the Guma Valley Water Corporation during the 2014 Outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease in
      Sierra Leone


                                  3.0

                                  2.8                                                                                                     Includes
                                                       First
                                                                                                                                        government
                                  2.6                cases of
                                                                                                                                          payment
Revenue collection (Le billion)




                                  2.4                Ebola in
                                                                            More than                                                  of Le 1 billion
                                                   Sierra Leone
                                                                           100 cases of
                                  2.2                                                                                                    in arrears
                                                                               Ebola
                                  2.0                                        per week

                                  1.8

                                  1.6

                                  1.4

                                  1.2

                                  1.0
                                   Se 3

                                   O 3
                                   No 3

                                   De 3

                                   Fe 3

                                   M 4

                                   Ap 4

                                   M 4

                                   Ju 4

                                    Ju 4
                                   Au 4

                                   Se 4

                                   O 4

                                   No 4

                                   De 4

                                   Ja 4
                                   Fe 5

                                   M 5

                                   Ap 5
                                   M 5

                                   Ju 5
                                    Ju 5
                                   Au 5

                                   Se 5

                                   O 5
                                   No 5

                                   De 5
                                          15
                                          1

                                          1
                                        -1

                                          1

                                          1




                                          1

                                          1
                                        -1

                                          1
                                        -1

                                          1
                                          1

                                          1

                                          1
                                        -1

                                          1
                                         1
                                        -1

                                         1
                                        -1

                                         1
                                         1

                                         1

                                         1
                                        -1

                                         1

                                         1
                                      g-

                                      p-



                                      v-

                                      c-




                                      n-

                                      b-



                                      r-



                                      n-
                                       l-
                                      g-

                                      p-



                                      v-

                                      c-
                                      b-



                                      r-



                                      n-

                                      l-
                                      g-

                                      p-



                                      v-

                                      c-
                                     ct




                                     ar



                                     ay




                                     ct
                                     ar



                                     ay




                                     ct
                                   Au




      Source: Water and Sanitation Program 2016.
      Notes: Le = Sierra Leone leones; An improved billing system and customer database allowed the water utility to sustain revenues and keep operations going during the
      outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease, aiding the response.



      46                                           Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                                                         customers. As the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak took hold, many of
                                     survey of all their ­
                                     GVWC’s larger commercial customers scaled back or shut down their businesses, reducing
                                     consumption and thus the utility’s revenues. However, the utility used the new billing
                                     system and improved customer database to keep track of the shifting demand as new
                                                                                        ­ apital city of Freetown. The utility
                                     users such as humanitarian agencies moved into the c
                                     also introduced innovations such as SMS (short message service) billing to reduce the
                                     amount of physical contact their staff had with customers. The government also paid
                                     arrears for past water use to stabilize the utility in a period of crisis. These combined
                                                                                    (figure 4.1), retain staff at work, and keep
                                     actions helped to meet costs, sustain revenues ­
                                     operations going, enabling GVWC to be an active part of the Ebola Virus Disease response
                                     that was extending services with humanitarian actors into poorer areas of Freetown. In
                                     Guinea, in the capital city of Conakry, where there was no similar intervention to improve
                                     the billing system at the main utility (SEG, Société des Eaux de Guinée), the Ebola Virus
                                             outbreak contributed to a drop of 35 percent in revenue collected from private
                                     Disease ­
                                     households and a related drop in collection efficiency from 92 percent to 59 percent.
                                       Zimbabwe provides another example of how functioning water institutions can provide a
                                     cushion during shocks. During the height of the hyperinflation crisis in 2008, Zimbabwe was
                                     also struck by a cholera outbreak. UNICEF provided utilities with water treatment chemicals
                                     that they had stopped using when hyperinflation of the Zimbabwe dollar made the chemi-
                                     cals unaffordable. However, from 2009 onward, when the country adopted the U.S. dollar
                                     and other neighboring currencies, revenues bounced back and a system of service-level
                                     benchmarking was brought in across all utilities. Stable revenues and clear performance
                                     indicators helped improve efficiency of water utilities and freed up cash for small critical
                                     investments, allowing for continued water services to be delivered in an environment where
                                     sanctions and national debt hampered internal and external investment, creating the
                                     potential for instability.
                                     ­


                                     A General Framework for Investment that Reverses the Cycle
                                     of Water Insecurity–Fragility
                                     The preceding examples illustrate how interventions can address the water insecurity and
                                     ­
                                     fragility cycle. Success in these endeavors requires strategies that recognize the fragile
                                     context, the water context, and the perpetual interaction between them. Interventions can
                                     ­
                                     be proactive in promoting security, development, and peacebuilding through long-term
                                     development operations; or they can be reactive, responding to shocks and crises when
Interventions should promote
                                     required. To be truly conflict-sensitive (to move from “do no harm” to proactive “peace-
inclusive governance and should
take into account the distribution   building”), all such interventions should promote inclusive governance—which is the crux
of benefits from investment in       of maintaining the social compact—and should take into account the distribution of bene-
the short term and long term         fits from investment in the short term and long term. Equitable benefits can be integral
                                     both to maintaining and building stability and reducing risks of exclusion, grievance,
                                     conflict, and fragility (Ruckstuhl 2012).
                                     ­


                                     Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                            47
                                                                                                                        ­ ontribute
                                       During positive periods of development opportunity, water sector investments can c
                                     to the broader escape from fragility. In these more standard long-term development operations,
                                     local domestic actors seek help to work on very visible water management issues, addressing
                                     concerns where citizens and institutions feel water management can “pinch” most. Investments
Investments in visible water         in visible water infrastructure (such as water supply and irrigation) and in improving services
infrastructure (such as water        can bolster support for nascent transition governments, helping to strengthen ­citizen-state rela-
supply and irrigation) and in
                                     tions and to support domestically led development processes. Good data and information
improving services can bolster
                                                                                    components of any investment. They pro-
                                     about water resources and supply are important ­
support for nascent transition
                                                                                                  relationships—including between
                                     mote principles of transparency, which are required to build ­
governments, helping to
                                     civilians and governments, and between parties in fragile contexts.
           citizen-state relations
strengthen ­
and to support domestically led
                                       During periods of positive development opportunity, proactive, conflict-sensitive invest-

development processes                ments may also be designed to strengthen inclusive water resources management and
                                     water-related disaster risk management systems. These investments build resilience
                                     and help avoid or mitigate potential “trigger” events that might result from exclusionary
                                     practices that can cause or deepen fragility. These systems can also help governments
                                     deliver services and protections that mitigate risk should the country experience an
                                     increase in fragility.
                                       During shocks and protracted crises, local measures to reinforce existing water sector
                                     institutions and infrastructure in the face of adversity, and to promote inclusion within
                                     them, may promote stability, preventing countries from sliding further into fragility.
                                     Investments in highly visible infrastructure may not be possible (for example, during
                                     armed conflict) or desirable (for example, visibly supporting state institutions that are
                                     being ­contested), but inaction will lead to failures that hurt the poor and vulnerable most.
                                     Investments can instead be focused on less visible but critically important issues that
                                     enable water sector institutions to strategically address needs and inequities, promote
                                     inclusion, and mitigate risks of fragility. These investments include improving water
                                                 efficiency of services; protecting water resources that utilities and popula-
                                     quality and ­
                                     tions rely upon; and/or preventing state institutions from promoting exclusionary poli-
                                     cies and practices, such as those that benefit private or factional interests. As in the case
                                     of “traditional” long-term investments, good information and data sharing are essential
                                     to any activity that seeks to promote trust and build relationships in fragile contexts.
                                       While a period of development opportunity such as following a peace agreement may seem
                                     easy to distinguish from a health crisis like Ebola Virus Disease, in practice, “fragility” is a
                                     dynamic condition that is comprised of a wide array of causes and characteristics. Thus it is
                                     often difficult to pinpoint whether a country is on a trajectory toward being more or less frag-
                                     ile. Moreover, though development agencies can play an important role as third-party inter-
                                     mediaries, it is rare that external development support (as opposed to humanitarian response)
                                     can adapt quickly enough to respond precisely to these waves of progress and regress.
                                       The framework in table 4.1 sets out options for external development to support
                                     water sector institutions in situations of development opportunity and in situations of


48                                   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
     Table 4.1.    Examples of Water-Related Investments Aimed at Reversing the Water Insecurity and Fragility Cycle


                                                                                   SITUATIONS OF DEVELOPMENT                       SITUATIONS OF SHOCKS
                                                                                   OPPORTUNITY                                     AND PROTRACTED CRISIS
     Provide water services
     Guaranteeing water services that meet                                                                                         Support cost recovery with one-off
     standards of affordability, reliability and quality                           water utilities                                 subsidies or in-kind donations for
     helps to reverse the vicious cycle. Investments                               Develop a customer database                     operating needs
     to reduce inadequate and unequal access to                                    Finance labour intensive irrigation             Retain skilled staff
     water services can promote stability in fragile                               rehabilitation and expansion                    Extend water utility services to IDPs
     contexts.                                                                     Strengthen dam safety                           and host communities
                                                                                   Construct small-scale hydropower for
                                                                                   isolated communities

     Protect from water-related disasters
     Preparedness and response to disasters are                                    Develop disaster preparedness plans             Protect key hydrometeorological early
     central elements of the social compact. Disaster                              Integrate remote sensing data into              warning and ICT systems
     impacts and recovery options vary widely                                      information systems                             Ensure equity and transparency in
     so investments need to account for different                                  Upgrade hydrometeorological forecast and        disaster response and relief efforts
     gender, social and economic circumstances.                                    early warning systems

                                                                                   management systems


                                                                                   Strengthen communication for disaster
                                                                                   response

     Preserve surface, ground- and transboundary water resources
     Governments need to guarantee the adequacy                                    Sustain water resources planning, monitoring    Protect critical interconnected
     of water resources for their populations and to                               and enforcement                                 infrastructure
     preserve healthy aquatic ecosystems. Working                                  Regulate and monitor groundwater                Prevent encroachment by private and
     towards sustainable waterresources management                                 abstraction                                     fractional interest
     and cooperative water sharing agreements is key                               Rehabilitate/develop water storage              Prevent investments in non-sustainable
     to reverse the water security and fragility cycle.                            infrastructure using labour intensive methods   solutions
                                                                                   Share information in transboundary basins       Monitor compliance with transboundary
                                                                                   Pursue cooperative transboundary water          agreements
                                                                                   agreements

     Source: World Bank.
49




     Note: DRR = Disaster Risk Reduction; ICT = information and communication technologies; IDPs = internally displaced persons.
                                    shocks and crises. These activities are complementary and can be scaled and adapted to
                                    suit  countries and the diverse needs of communities within them (such as Khyber
                                    Pakhtunkhwa, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and Baluchistan in Pakistan) so
                                    the distribution of benefits can be strategically planned to mitigate fragility and promote
                                    equity over time.
                                      Support during periods of development opportunity should prepare water institutions
                                    for situations of shock. Similarly, responses during periods of shock should support, not
                                    undermine, longer-term investments in periods of development opportunity.
                                      Pursuing water security in fragile contexts requires cross-sectoral approaches. Reversing
                                    the water insecurity and fragility cycle means designing and implementing interventions
                                    across different sectors, not just the water sector. For instance, addressing forced displace-
                                    ment linked to water insecurity entails providing water services but also creating liveli-
                                    hood opportunities or improving land zoning and housing to prevent displaced
                                    communities from settling in flood-prone areas or areas without adequate safe water
                                    resources. In order to reduce the risks of fragility and promote economic diversification,
                                    the water-related interventions in table 4.1 need to be considered as part of a broader set of
                                    cross-sectoral investments.
                                      Reversing the cycle of water insecurity and fragility also means focusing water-related
                                    interventions on livelihood outcomes, prioritizing and designing interventions to pro-
                                    mote employment opportunities, including for vulnerable groups that have experienced
                                    greater risk to the security of their livelihoods. In countries where a large share of the labor
To reduce the risks of fragility    force is employed in irrigated agriculture, interventions to preserve resources and reach
and promote economic                transboundary water agreements can stabilize the delivery of irrigation water, in turn sta-
diversification, water-related
                                    bilizing livelihoods dependent on agriculture. Similarly, labor-intensive rehabilitation of
interventions need to be
                                    water and irrigation infrastructure can provide temporary employment opportunities in
considered as part of a broader
                                    fragile contexts. To the reduce the risks of fragility and promote economic diversification,
set of cross-sectoral investments
                                    water-related interventions need to be considered as part of a broader set of cross-sectoral
                                    investments.

                                    Note
                                    1. This can be the case even if it is unrealistic to expect that water sector institutions can be transformed in isolation of
                                    other domestic institutions.




50                                  Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
                              © Maada Kpenge/Guma Valley Water Company.




Chapter 5                     Conclusion

                              As political instability and fragility unfold in many parts of the world, investments in
                              water security may not seem a priority compared with investments to address deteriorat-
                              ing humanitarian and political circumstances. Yet, as this report has argued, water inse-
                              curity and fragility are very much interrelated. Water security can both contribute to
                              fragility and to stability and should therefore be considered as an integral part of broader
                              strategies for escaping fragility. The report identified three mechanisms linking water
                                            fragility: (1) failure to provide citizens with water services; (2) failure to pro-
                              insecurity to ­
                              tect citizens from water-related disasters; and (3) failure to preserve surface, ground, and
                              transboundary water resources. These failures are symptoms of water insecurity, which
                              can weaken the social compact between a government and its people, adding to a down-
                              ward spiral of water insecurity and fragility. Conversely, addressing these failures and
                              achieving water security can diminish the role of water as a risk multiplier, provide an
                              increased measure of resilience for countries that slide deeper into fragility, and contrib-
                              ute to stability and equitable long-term development.
                                Development efforts are increasingly being undertaken in contexts affected by fragility,
The complex                   protracted conflict, and crises (Devictor 2016). At the same time, humanitarian actors call
interrelationships between    for bridging the artificial gap between relief and development interventions (ICRC 2015).
water and fragility suggest   Water-related investments can play an important role in this context, alleviating human
that robust water             suffering and promoting stability.
management systems should
                                The complex interrelationships between water and fragility suggest that robust water
be a priority in fragile
                              management systems should be a priority in fragile contexts. Failures to deliver services
contexts


                              Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                 51
     or to ensure resilience to water-related shocks will have particularly powerful effects in
     fragile contexts, and can prolong and deepen fragility. For water security to continue to
     be central to poverty reduction efforts and development, water-related investments need
     to increasingly address compound risks arising from fragility, conflict, and violence.


     References
     Devictor, X. 2016. “Forcibly Displaced: Toward a Development Approach Supporting Refugees, the Internally Displaced
     and Their Hosts.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

     ICRC (International Committee of the Red Cross). 2015. “Urban Services during Protracted Armed Conflict: A Call for a
     Better Approach to Assisting Affected People.” ICRC, Geneva.

     Partners for Democratic Change. 2010. “Senegal’s Armée-Nation: Lessons Learned from an Indigenous Model for Building
     Peace, Stability and Effective Civil-Military Relations in West Africa.” Partners for Democratic Change, Washington, DC.
     http://www.partnersglobal.org/where/africa/Senegals percent20Armee percent20Nation.pdf

     Ruckstuhl, Sandra. 2012. “Implementing Water Supply Projects in Countries Affected by Conflict and Social Fragility.”
     Operational Guidance Note, Social Development Department, World Bank. Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.
     org​/curated/en/996921468152706423/pdf/685090NWP00PUB0l0development0papers.pdf.

     Salman, Salman M. A.; Uprety, Kishor. 2003. Conflict and cooperation on South Asia’s international rivers : a legal perspec-
     tive. Law, justice, and development series. Washington, DC : World Bank Group.

     Troell, J., and E. Weinthal. 2014. “Harnessing Water Management for More Effective Peacebuilding: Lessons Learned.” In
     Water and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding, edited by E. Weinthal, J. Troell, and M. Nakayama. London: Earthscan.

     UN PBSO (United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office). 2012. “Peace Dividends and Beyond: Contributions of
     Administrative and Social Services to Peacebuilding.” United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office, New York.

     World Bank World Development Report 2011. Conflict, Security and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     WSP (Water and Sanitation Program, World Bank). 2016. “Water Supply, The Transition from Emergency to Development
     Support: Evidence from Country Case Studies in Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC.




52   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
Appendix A   Harmonized List of Fragile Situations

             Table A .1.     World Bank Harmonized List of Fragile Situations, Fiscal Year 2017a

                                                                                                         Political and
                                                                             Harmonized   Peacekeeping
              Country                    WBG CPIA   AfDB CPIA   ADB CPIA                                 peacebuilding
                                                                             average      missionsb
                                                                                                         missionsc

             IDA Eligible

             Afghanistan                   2.692                  2.800         2.75                          P

             Burundi                       3.067       3.231                    3.15                          P

             Central African Republic      2.458       2.376                    2.42                          P

             Chad                          2.783       3.264                    3.02

             Comoros                       2.833       2.238                    2.54

             Congo, Dem. Rep.              3.000       3.329                    3.16           Pk

             Côte d’lvoire                  3.275      3.640                    3.46           Pk

             Djibouti                      2.967       3.362                    3.16

             Eritrea                        1.942      2.094                    2.02

             Gambia, The                   2.925       3.116                    3.02

             Guinea-Bissau                  2.475      2.717                    2.60                          P

             Haiti                         2.900                                2.90           Pk

             Kiribati                      2.950                  3.050         3.00

             Kosovo                         3.525                               3.53           Pk

             Liberia                       3.100       3.463                    3.28           Pk

             Madagascar                     3.142      3.168                    3.15

             Mali                          3.383       3.679                    3.53           Pk

             Marshall Islands              2.600                  2.900         2.75

             Micronesia, Fed. Sts           2.775                 2.950         2.86

             Myanmar                       3.075                  3.133         3.10

             Papua New Guinea              3.000                  3.258         3.13

             Sierra Leone                  3.267       3.310                    3.29                          P

             Solomon Islands               2.975                  3.225         3.10

             Somalia                                   1.111                    1.11                          P

             South Sudan                    1.867      1.971                    1.92           Pk

             Sudan                         2.425       2.545                    2.49           Pk

             Togo                          2.975       3.229                    3.10

             Tuvalu                        2.858                  2.975         2.92

             Yemen, Rep.                   2.608                                2.61


                                                                                              table continues next page




             Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts                                          53
     Table A .1.    continued

                                                                                                                          Political and
                                                                                       Harmonized       Peacekeeping
      Country                         WBG CPIA         A1DB CPIA       ADB CPIA                                           peacebuilding
                                                                                       average          missionsb
                                                                                                                          Missionsc

     Economies

     West Bank and Gaza                                                                                                            P

     Blend

     Zimbabwe                            2.858            2.655                            2.76

     IBRD Only

     Iraq                                                                                                                          P

     Lehanon                                                                                                                       P

     Libya                                                                                                                         P

     Syrian Arab Republic

     Source: World Bank.
     Note: ADB = Asian Development Bank; AfDB = African Development Bank; AU = African Union; CPIA = Country Policy and
     Institutional Assessment; IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; IDA = International Development
     Association; P=Peacebuilding; Pk = Peacekeeping; WBG=World Bank Group.
     a. ”Fragile Situations” have: either a) a harmonized average CPIA country rating of 3.2 or less, or b) the presence of a UN and/or
     regional peace-keeping or peace-building mission during the past three years. This list includes only IDA eligible countries and
     non-member or inactive territories/countries without CPIA data. IBRD countries with CPIA ratings below 3.200 do not qualify
     on this list due to non disclosure of CPIA ratings; IBRD countries that are included here qualify only by the presence of a
     peacekeeping, political or peace-builing mission - and their CPIA ratings are thus not quoted here.
     b. Specifically defined as the presence of a UN and/or regional (eg: AU, EU, OAS, NATO) peace-keeping operation in this
     country in the last three years, with the exclusion of border monitoring operations [sources: UN DPKO, AU, EC, websites]
     For additional information regarding this list, please read the FCS Information Note and FAQ found on our website: www​
     .­worldbank.org/fragilityandconflict.
     c. Specifically defined as the presence of a UN and/or regional (eg: AU, EU, OAS) peace-building and political mission in
     this country in the last three years [sources: UN DPKO, AU, EU websites].




54   Turbulent Waters: Pursuing Water Security in Fragile Contexts
SKU W16005
