                                                      WPS7987


  Policy Research Working Paper                      7987




       Rising Incomes and Inequality of Access
to Infrastructure among Latin American Households
                                    Marianne Fay
                                   Stéphane Straub




  Sustainable Development Global Practice Group
  February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7987


  Abstract
 This paper documents access to services and ownership of                           only. In addition, few country fundamentals appear to be
 infrastructure-related durables in the water, energy, telecom,                     significant in explaining this variability, pointing to policy
 and transport areas, based on harmonized household survey                          differences as an important determinant. The paper derives
 data covering 1.6 million households in 14 Latin Ameri-                            the income elasticity of infrastructure access for the full
 can countries during 1992 to 2012. The paper provides                              set of indicators, and uses these to estimate the time that
 a systematic disaggregation of access and ownership rates                          would be needed to close the remaining gap for households
 at different levels of income and over time, and econo-                            at different levels of the income distribution under a “busi-
 metrically derives the country infrastructure premium, a                           ness as usual” hypothesis. Under that scenario, universal
 measure of how much a household benefits from simply                               access appears to be decades away for many countries in the
 being located in a given country. The results show extensive                       region. The last part discusses the policy challenges, argu-
 inequality of access, within countries across the income                           ing that in a context in which public budgets face strong
 distribution, but also across countries for households at                          constraints and significant increases in private investment
 similar levels of income. For water and electricity, for                           are unlikely to be forthcoming, a large part of the solu-
 example, up to two-thirds of the variability in individual                         tion lies in refocused investment strategies, better demand
 percentile access to infrastructure services and consump-                          management, and improved public spending efficiency.
 tion of related assets can be explained by country residence



  This paper is a product of the Sustainable Development Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at mfay@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Rising Incomes and Inequality of Access to Infrastructure
                                     among Latin American Households



                                                   Marianne Fay and Stéphane Straub1




JEL Codes: H54, O54, D12

Keywords: Infrastructure, Latin America and the Caribbean, Household Consumption




                                                            
1
  Marianne Fay: World Bank. Email address: mfay@worldbank.org. Stéphane Straub: Toulouse School of
Economics, University of Toulouse Capitole (IDEI and IAST) and World Bank. E-mail address:
stephane.straub@tse-fr.eu. We thank Charles Fox and the World Bank LAC Stats team for help with data access,
María-José Graña for outstanding research assistance, and Uwe Deichmann, Augusto de la Torre, and Stephane
Hallegatte, and participants at the World Bank ‘Unbaked and Wired’ Infrastructure workshop for useful
comments and suggestions.
1. Introduction

In Latin America, as in large parts of the developing world, aggregate indicators show that
access to infrastructure services is still largely rationed, with both households and firms
suffering from shortfalls across all major types of infrastructure (Estache and Fay 2009). This
situation is likely to have been exacerbated over the last two decades by the rapid growth in the
share of households attaining middle-income status and the growth in demand for infrastructure
services they generated (Ferreira et al. 2013, Lakner and Milanovic 2015). However, despite its
potential importance in designing infrastructure policy, there is no systematic information on
how access to infrastructure varies across the income distribution.

This paper addresses this gap by documenting access to services and ownership of
infrastructure-related durables in the water, energy, telecom, and transport areas, based on large
scale harmonized household survey data from Latin America covering 14 countries over the
1992 to 2012 period. It provides a systematic disaggregation of access and ownership rates
across the income distribution, allowing for an assessment of the situation of households at
different levels of income and over time across the countries of the region.

For a number of indicators, the data reveal wide disparities across households at similar levels
of income in different countries. We then econometrically derive country infrastructure premia,
which show how much a household at a specific level of the income distribution benefits from
simply being located in a given country, and assess the progressivity or regressivity of
infrastructure access patterns across the income distribution. We then show that these premia
are only partly explained by per capita GDP and are not systematically aligned with other
country overall characteristics such as inequality, density, or urbanization, which means they
are very likely to be for a large part policy driven.

Second, we compute the income elasticity of infrastructure access for our set of indicators, and
use these to forecast the time that would be needed to close the remaining gap for households
at different levels of the income distribution under a business as usual hypothesis. The general
message is rather somber: without fundamental changes to the pace and efficiency of
infrastructure delivery, universal access is in many cases still decades away. We also highlight
an asset ownership “pecking order”, by which, as their income grows, poorer households tend
to acquire first a fridge, then a washing machine, and finally a car.




                                                 2 
 
The last part of the paper discusses the road ahead given the magnitude of the challenge. Based
on the observed performance of countries in mobilizing investment in infrastructure, it argues
that in a context in which public budgets face strong constraints and large increases in private
investment are unlikely to be forthcoming, the solution may lie in other parts of the delivery
equation. Specifically, we discuss three promising margins: refocused investment goals,
demand management, and interventions to improve public spending efficiency.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature and shows how this
paper contributes to it. Section 3 presents the data used in the analysis. Section 4 documents the
evolution in infrastructure demand throughout the period in the different countries, and the
implications for infrastructure delivery looking at the future. Section 5 discusses the policy
challenges and concludes.



2. Literature Review

For decades, the economic literature on infrastructure has mostly focused on aggregate data at
the regional or more often the national level. Traditionally, infrastructure has either been
measured through supply-side physical indicators, such as electricity generation capacity or
kilometers of roads, or demand-side ones such as aggregate electricity or water connection
rates. Given the fact that such data ignore both the spatial nature of and the distributional
disparities in infrastructure access, the policy relevance of the conclusions have been limited
(see Straub 2011 for a critical review).

There were of course micro-econometric studies using household-level data to look at specific
local outcomes, such as Gibson and Rozelle (2003), Galiani, Gertler, and Schargrodsky (2005),
or Dinkelman (2011), to cite only a few. More recently, the growing use of spatial data has been
instrumental in generating a renewal of the field, allowing for example for local (often
municipal) level infrastructure usage indicators.2

However, there have been surprisingly few papers using micro-data to analyze systematically
how infrastructure demand at the household level varies along the income distribution. As a
result, little is known about the way demand for infrastructure varies with income at any point
in time, and how it evolves over time as household income grows.


                                                            
2
    See Straub (2008, 2015) for reviews.


                                                               3 
 
A recent exception is Gertler, Shelef, Wolfram, and Fuchs (2016), which uses household survey
data in several large developing countries to document an S-shaped relationship between the
income distribution and both consumer durable ownership and energy use, in the cross-section
and over time as income grows. They then make use of a cash-transfer program-generated
exogenous shock to incomes in Mexico to establish that such relationship is indeed causal. In a
related paper, Davis and Gertler (2015) analyze energy consumption using Mexican household
data, looking at both the extensive margin (whether households adopt air conditioning or not)
and the intensive margin (the dollar amount of electricity consumption).

Lee, Miguel, and Wolfram (2016) use an experiment to derive the demand for electricity
connections among poor rural households in Kenya, and find that consumer surplus is far less
than total costs at all price levels, suggesting that residential electrification may reduce social
welfare—at least in the absence of externalities.

Our contribution is first to systematically document infrastructure access and asset ownership
across a panel of 14 countries in Latin America over 20 years, in the four main infrastructure
sectors. The SEDLAC database provides a harmonized sample of surveys, allowing in
particular for the comparison of households at similar levels of income across countries of the
region. While the household surveys used here are not following the same households over
time, we are able to construct a pseudo-panel by grouping households by income quantiles and
looking at the within-quantile evolution of infrastructure access over time. This then allows for
the estimation of income elasticities of infrastructure access in a dynamic setting.

This enables us to document extensive inequality of access, within countries across the income
distribution, and across countries in Latin America for households at similar levels of income.
In addition, the scope of the dataset allows us to test the relevance of country fundamentals vs.
policies in explaining these differences, and to provide comparative estimates of the time
needed to reach universal coverage.

This paper focuses exclusively on the extensive margin, i.e., whether households have access
to services or own durables, and provides descriptive evidence on infrastructure demand in a
context in which household income has experienced strong and sustained growth. It therefore
stops short of providing insights on the intensive margin as captured by the value of
consumption expenditures on these services. Finally, it does so in the context of potential
binding supply constraints on the infrastructure provision side, and credit constraints on the
demand side. Addressing these issues is the object of ongoing work.


                                                4 
 
3. Data

We use household surveys microdata from the Socio-Economic Database for Latin America
and the Caribbean (SEDLAC), developed by The Center for Distributional, Labor and Social
Studies (CEDLAS) of the University of La Plata, in partnership with World Bank Latin
America and the Caribbean Poverty and Gender Group (LCSPP).

Based on the availability of key variables related to infrastructure access and infrastructure-
related assets, we build a five-year interval dataset for 14 countries between 1992 and 2012.3
The final dataset covers 1.6 million unique household observations and includes the surveys
shown in table 1. Table 2 shows the coverage by country and variable.

The main variables of interest are the per capita household income adjusted by purchasing
power parity, in 2005 US dollars, and infrastructure. Income here includes labor and non-labor
income as well as the imputed rent of owner-occupied housing. Infrastructure is measured
through a set of dummies related to access to water, sewerage, electricity, fixed and mobile
phones, and internet access. Another set of dummies indicates households´ ownership of
infrastructure-related appliances and assets. We focus on the following variables: refrigerators,
washing machine, television, computer, car, and motorcycle.

The use of access / ownership dummies means that we are bound to concentrate on the extensive
margin, i.e., on whether households are connected or use a service or not, but are unable to offer
insights on the intensive margin due to the absence of specific expenditure data.

Finally, we add a number of standard country-level variables such as GDP per capita, income
inequality, population density, and urbanization, all from the World Bank Indicators database.

To exploit the panel dimension of the data, we split it into income quantiles, alternatively
percentiles or deciles, defined by reference to the regional income distribution.4 We define
quantiles corresponding to the region-wide income distribution at each date. In this way, a
household at say, the 11th percentile or the 6th decile of the distribution in 2012 is at similar




                                                            
3
  We allow for +/-1 year when the survey for the exact year is not available.
4
  Following SEDLAC practice when computing inequality measures, we drop observations reporting zero
income (see CEDLAS and The World Bank, 2014).


                                                               5 
 
level of income regardless of whether it is from Honduras or Chile for example. In what follows,
we refer to this as the global quantiles (deciles / percentiles) distribution.5

This way of defining income class allows for easy comparisons across countries, and for the
disentangling of country- vs. individual determinants of households’ situation. Based on this,
the next section examines access to infrastructure across countries and at different levels of the
income distribution.



4. The Demand for Infrastructure

The last decade witnessed significant changes in the shape of the income distribution of
developing and emerging countries (Lakner and Milanovic 2015). In Latin America
specifically, Ferreira et al. (2013) estimated that the number of people that can be considered
as middle class increased by 50% over the 2003 to 2009 period. They define the concept of
middle class following a criteria of economic security, whereby a household is considered
middle class if it has a probability of falling back into poverty no larger than 10% over a five-
year interval. This implies a middle class income threshold of $10 a day, which is at the 68th
percentile of the Latin American income distribution in 2009, while the moderate poverty line
of $4 leads to 30.5% of the population falling below it.

Looking at our data and relying on a consistent sample of 14 countries for which data are
available from 2002 to 2012, Latin America was characterized by important income gains
across the income distribution during the 2002-2012 period. Indeed, over that ten-year period,
the annual growth rate of the incomes of the lowest three deciles was above 5%, that of
vulnerable households at above 4%, and that of the top three deciles, which includes the middle
class and rich households at almost 3%.6


4.1. Access Patterns in Latin America: The Situation as of 2012




                                                            
5
   We often take the semantic shortcut of referring to households “in a given quantile” when talking of those
below a given threshold (e.g., in quantile 1 for those below the first quantile threshold) or between two
successive ones (e.g., in quantile 5 for those between the quantiles 4 and 5 thresholds).
6
   Household surveys of the type used here typically do not include very rich individuals because of random
sampling, non-response, or large under-reporting. This may lead to the figure for the growth of income of the top
decile being lower than the actual one, but it is inconsequential for our purpose.


                                                               6 
 
This rapid income growth led to a surge in the demand for home equipment and mobility, hence
for infrastructure services such as water, electricity connections, and transport, and for related
durables such as electric appliances and vehicles. Yet, as of 2012, access and ownership rates
still vary widely, as can be seen in Figure 1, which graphs Latin American average access and
ownership rates by deciles, as well as average rates in the worst- and best-performing countries
of the sample respectively.7

For water, Latin American averages, which go from around 71% in decile 1 to 98% at the top
of the distribution, mask wide differences, from an abysmal 19% of the poorest decile
households in El Salvador having access to a source of water in the house or lot (a measure akin
to basic access as defined in the MDGs) to 99% for households of similar income in Argentina.
Beyond El Salvador which could be considered an outlier, three countries, Bolivia, the
Dominican Republic, and Peru, have barely more than half of the bottom decile households
with access to water.

The situation is more critical for sanitation. In 2012, only 1% of households in the poorest decile
lived in a dwelling connected to a public sewerage system in Paraguay. With the exception of
Chile, where 82% of the poorest households are connected, no country has more than 46%
connections, for a Latin American average of 35% in the poorest decile. The range narrows
only slightly when moving up the income distribution. At the eighth decile, roughly the lower
limit for middle class households according to Ferreira et al. (2013), average Latin American
access rates are still only 72%, hovering below 80% for 9 out of 14 countries.

Electricity is clearly the dimension in which the region performs best. As of 2012, regional
averages start at 89% in decile 1, and reach 99% from decile 6 up. At the bottom of the
distribution coverage rates start at 67%, and all countries in the sample are providing above
90% coverage in all deciles, except El Salvador in the first decile, Bolivia in the first two, and
Honduras and Peru in the first three.

But these rather encouraging electricity connections figures are not exactly mirrored in
appliances ownership rates. Overall, less than 80% of households in the bottom three deciles



                                                            
7
 Average Latin American rates are simple averages over the total 420,204 households’ sample. Household
survey weights are used, but we do not weight by country population or otherwise. Note however that bigger
countries have larger samples: the number of households varies from 4,889 for Paraguay to 111,612 for Brazil,
and looking only at 2012, the correlations of country sample size with population and GDP are .67 and .64
respectively.


                                                               7 
 
own refrigerators and less than 60 percent washing machines—with access considerably lower
in some countries.

Finally, despite the frequently heard claim that access to cars has increased widely, and despite
increased credit availability in many countries (World Bank 2017), cars are still luxury goods
and the average ownership rates remain modest—only exceeding 40% for the top two deciles
and below 20% for a large majority of deciles and countries. This is partly compensated by
larger ownership rates of motorcycles, particularly for intermediate income groups, from
deciles 5 to 8. However, these averages mask important differences across countries, as
motorcycle use is mostly concentrated in the Dominican Republic, Colombia, Paraguay, and
Uruguay.

The numbers above show that household income alone has limited explanatory power when it
comes to infrastructure access. But how much of infrastructure access is explained by
households’ country of residence, and how does this vary along the income distribution? We
start with a simple decomposition, focusing on the situation in 2012.8 Consider that access to a
specific type of infrastructure service A in country c is given by:

                             DAic = α + θc + εic,                                                 (1)

where DAic is the average access to infrastructure asset A, in country c, by households in income
percentile i, θc are country fixed effects, α is a constant, and εic is the error term.

The results are in Table 3. Each cell in Panel A reports the R-squared from the estimation of
(1) using the percentiles of the infrastructure service access / assets indicated at the top of the
column. Given the large number of indicators, we discuss the results referring to infrastructure
“clusters”, concentrating on indicators for which coverage is large enough:

       -      The water cluster, which includes access to water, sewerage, and a toilet connected to a
              sewerage system or to a septic tank;
       -      The electricity cluster, including access to electricity and ownership of the following
              assets: refrigerator, washing machine, and television;
       -      The ICT cluster, which includes landline and cell phones, internet access, and ownership
              of a computer;


                                                            
8
  See Milanovic (2015) for an application to inequality. Note however that our approach differs in that this paper
compares country-level quantiles, which correspond to different levels of income, whereas we use a common
income distribution and look at differences in infrastructure access for households at the same level of income.


                                                               8 
 
    -   The transport cluster, including ownership of cars and motorcycles.

The results indicate that a large share of the variability in individual percentile access to
infrastructure services and consumption of related assets can be explained by country residence
only. For the water cluster, country dummies explain between 40 and 67% of the variability of
individual percentile-level access across Latin America.

The electricity cluster displays an equally strong explanatory power of locational aspects, with
country dummies explaining 33% of the variability in access to electricity, and between 54%
(for refrigerators), 64% for television, and 66% (for washing machines) of the variability in
related assets ownership. The fact that country dummies explain more of the difference in
durables than infrastructure access itself, despite the fact that access may be constrained, may
be related to differences in access to credit or in cost, such as variation in taxation of durables
across countries.

The outcomes for the ICT cluster indicate that 16 and 40% of landlines and cell phones
variability in access is explained by location respectively, while it is 25% for computers, and
18% for internet access.

Finally, in the transport cluster country dummies explain only 10% of the variability in
ownership of cars, but this jumps to 85% for motorbikes due to the strong concentration in a
few countries noted above.

Panel B presents the country premium, as given by the coefficients of the corresponding country
dummy, relative to the poorest country in the sample, which in this case is Honduras. This
indicates, for each indicator, the average premium related to living in each country rather than
Honduras.

In Figure 2, we summarize graphically how countries perform given for example their level of
development, by plotting the average premium against their 2012 per capita GDP. Honduras is
the benchmark, i.e., a premium equal to zero.

For water, six countries are at or below the horizontal zero line, thus doing equal or worse than
Honduras despite boasting considerably higher per capita GDP. The situation is particularly
bad for El Salvador, and to a lesser extent Bolivia, Peru, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and
Paraguay. The other group of dots above the horizontal axis corresponds to more virtuous




                                                9 
 
countries, although Colombia, Costa Rica, Uruguay, and Argentina appear to fare relatively
better than Mexico and Chile.9

This tale of several groups of countries also characterizes the regional sanitation panorama,
although the composition of these groups is slightly different, with Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic and Paraguay now the strong underperformers, Brazil, Mexico, and Uruguay in an
intermediate and rather weak position, and Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru and Colombia performing
well.

Finally, for electricity, the region displays overall a much smoother concave picture, with the
notable exception of Peru, whose poor performance makes it an outlier.

In addition, the use of household survey micro data allows for an unprecedented window into
the relative treatment of households at different levels of the income distribution within
countries. The comparison of within-country premia for each decile tells us whether the current
access situation is progressive, meaning that a given country does relatively better delivering
infrastructure to the lower rather than the upper part of the distribution, or regressive (Figure
3).

For water, there is again a clear dichotomy, between countries that display a rather regressive
pattern (El Salvador, the Dominican Republic, Peru, Bolivia, and Paraguay) and those that
display the opposite pattern, especially Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, and Argentina. Note that
to a large extent, these two groups overlap with the ones that emerged from the comparison of
per capita GDP and average premium in the preceding figure. What this means is that for water,
given the convergence to high access levels at the top of the income distribution, overall
underperformance mostly stems from a failure to address service shortfalls for the lowest
income quantiles.

This situation contrasts with that of sewerage. Indeed, in this case, a few countries fare badly
overall, as witnessed by their negative premium in figure 2 above and the fact that the entire set
of decile-level premiums are negative in Figure 3, despite boasting a rather progressive pattern.
This is the case of Paraguay, Costa Rica, and the Dominican Republic. The only country with
a clearly regressive pattern is Peru, whose premium goes from -1% at the first decile, to +27%
at the tenth decile.



                                                            
9
    No official figure is available for Argentina’s per capita GDP around 2012. We set it at 20,000$.


                                                               10 
 
Finally, a similar story prevails for electricity, where all countries appear to have progressive
delivery patterns, except again for Peru and to a lesser extent Bolivia.

The fact that location may imply such large differences in access for otherwise similar
households speaks to the importance of country-level factors in determining infrastructure
rollout. In particular, it begs the question of whether these locational premia can be attributed
to some specific country-level fundamental characteristics. To address this, we estimate
equation (2):

                DAic = α + Xicγ1 + εic,                                     (2)

where Xic includes country-level per capita GDP, inequality (Gini), population density, and
urbanization. Because of the small number of clusters (14 at most), standard errors are
computed using wild cluster bootstrapping (Cameron and Miller 2015). The results are in Table
4.

The elasticity of infrastructure indicators with respect to countries’ per capita GDP is strong
and significant for water (0.43***) and toilet (0.74***), but not for sewerage (-0.75NS). In the
electricity cluster, it is strong for electricity access (0.24***), refrigerator (0.75***) and
washing machine (1.43) although this last one is imprecisely estimated. In the ICT cluster, it is
only significant for internet access (0.56***), but is actually negative and not significant for
cell phones (-0.18NS) and computers (-0.09NS). Finally, the elasticity of vehicle ownership is
positive for cars (0.23**) and motorcycles (0.45NS).

Interestingly, other determinants do not appear to matter much. Inequality as measured through
the Gini coefficient is almost never a significant determinant of infrastructure indicators (a
higher Gini only marginally increases internet access). Higher density reduces water access,
and increases computer ownership. Finally, a higher urbanization rate leads to lower toilet
access, lower electricity access, but higher computer ownership.

In addition, the comparison of the R-square across Tables 3 and 4 shows that for most
infrastructure indicators, there is a large drop in explanatory power when using specific country
characteristics rather than generic country dummies.

While we must be cautious in interpreting these results, they suggest that the wide disparity in
access to infrastructure is only partially the result of countries’ fundamentals. While richer
countries have to some extent been more successful in providing infrastructure to their citizens,
for example in water, electricity and internet, this has not been the case for other services such


                                               11 
 
as sanitation or phones. The fact that aspects such as the pattern of urbanization, population
density, and inequality, i.e., generic aspects that move slowly over time and are unlikely to be
much affected in the short term by economic policies, also appears to have little impact suggests
that other policy dimensions not necessarily captured by macro indicators may be key to
explaining the extension of services in the last few decades. Before discussing these, we turn to
the analysis of the dynamic aspects of infrastructure provision.



4.2. The Dynamic View: The Elasticity of Infrastructure Access and Durables
Ownership

There is a variety of patterns in the evolution of access to infrastructure across types of services
and countries in the last two decades. For example, in 1997 water access at similar levels of
income differed widely across countries: approximately 80% of households in the first decile
of the Latin American income distribution had access to water in Chile, but for households at
similar level of income, the rate was around 45% in Brazil, 20% in El Salvador and 10% in
Paraguay. Clearly, most of the disparity concentrated in the lowest part of the income
distribution, as in all four countries the top decile enjoyed access rates of 90% or more, even in
earlier periods.

In addition, there were wide differences in how these access rates evolved over time. For
example, between 1997 and 2012, Paraguay successfully increased access rates of all income
deciles above 60%, and above 80% from the third decile up, while El Salvador displayed much
less progress, with only households in the sixth decile and above enjoying access rates of 60%
or more.

On the other hand, when looking at sewerage access rates, fewer differences are apparent
between households in countries with very different levels of per capita GDP, in line with the
previous result that the elasticity of per capita GDP is negative and not significant. Surprisingly,
more progress appears to have been made in countries such as Peru and Bolivia, especially for
households in lower deciles, than in richer countries such as Costa Rica and Uruguay.

Electricity offers a slightly more optimistic panorama. Across Latin America, access rates have
converged to very high levels. Countries in which two decades ago access rates for lower deciles
were as low as 20 to 40%, such as Peru and El Salvador, have increased them to 70% or more




                                                12 
 
across the whole income distribution, while in others like Mexico or Brazil, universal access is
now almost the rule.

While this has in some cases led to large progress in access to energy consuming devices such
as refrigerators or washing machines, different patterns emerge. In Brazil, ownership of
refrigerators did increase in lower income deciles following connection to the electric grid, but
the process was much slower in Mexico. Similarly, comparing El Salvador and Peru, two
countries with similar profiles of electrification, reveals quite different evolutions. Access to
refrigerators stagnated and if anything progress was greater at the top of the income distribution
in the latter, while the former witnessed large increase in ownership.

Next, we use the complete panel, based on the global quantiles distribution, to analyze how the
income elasticity of infrastructure access varies across services and countries, and within these,
at different levels of the income distribution over the 1992-2012 period.

Table 5 presents two sets of results using the household survey data. First, in Panel A, we report
an average Latin American elasticity given by the following estimation:

                             DAdct = α + log(income)dct γ1 + θct + εdct,              (3)

where DAdct is the average access / ownership rate for infrastructure asset A, in country c, by
households in income decile d, at time t, log(income)dct is the average decile income, and θct
are country-time fixed effects.10

This simple specification assumes that infrastructure demand indicators at the decile level are
a function of average income in that decile, and of the price of infrastructure as proxied by
country-time fixed effects. The underlying assumption is thus that this price is uniform within
countries in a given period, but varies over time. This is much milder than proxying prices
through country dummies in the country-level panel, in effect assuming that prices are invariant
across time period. In addition, the country-time fixed effects absorb any other relevant country-
level determinants, such as the ones discussed above.

Second, in Panel B, we differentiate elasticities by country, through the following specification:

              DAdct = α + log(income)dct γ1 + (log(income)dct.θc) γ2c + θct + εdct.   (4)



                                                            
10
     Using the percentiles instead yields very similar results.



                                                               13 
 
The elasticity of country c is then given by γ1 + γ2c, where γ2c is the coefficient of the
corresponding country interaction.

The resulting elasticities of access are in the expected range and strongly significant throughout.
For example, the Latin American average water access elasticity is 0.08, and country-specific
values vary between 0.02 for Argentina and Costa Rica, and 0.18 for Peru. The values for toilet
ownership and sanitation access are higher on average, at 0.16 and 0.17 respectively, and range
between 0.07 and 0.25.

Similarly, the average Latin American electricity access elasticity is 0.06, and it ranges from
0.01 for Argentina, 0.02 for Costa Rica and Ecuador, to 0.16 for Peru. Interestingly, elasticities
for appliances ownership are in general quite larger, with 0.15 averages for refrigerators and
washing machines, and ranges between 0.08 and 0.24, indicating faster progress on the
intensive margin of consumption.

In the ICT cluster, elasticities are high across all indicators. Notably, these are higher for
landline phones than cell phones.

Finally, the elasticity of vehicle ownership is strong for cars, with a Latin American average of
0.16, ranging between 0.09 in Bolivia and 0.20 in Mexico, but very small for motorcycles, with
an average of 0.01 only.

Gertler et al. (2016), looking at refrigerators, suggested that the elasticities of asset ownership
vary along the income distribution. The Latin American data display a rich pattern, with
heterogeneity across assets. Figure 4 shows the rate increase for each decile between 2002 and
2012 for refrigerators, washing machines and cars, as well as the related income elasticity
computed separately at each decile. While the lowest income groups have experienced the
largest increase for refrigerators, a clear inverted U-shaped pattern emerges for washing
machine, with the largest increase in the middle of the income distribution. Finally, car
ownership displays the opposite pattern, with access increasing mostly for the richest
households.

Table 6 offers a summary comparison of the demand elasticity of infrastructure assets and
access using different approaches: Latin American average, countries average, country-level
elasticities computed at the 10th, 25th, 75th and 90th percentiles respectively, as well as cross-
country averages from Fay and Yepes (2003) and some more recent estimations for Latin
America from Perrotti and Sanchez (2011). The first immediate observation is that elasticities



                                                14 
 
estimated using micro data from household surveys are smaller than those produced by macro
studies.

This is especially true for elasticities of electricity access, previously computed in the 0.18 to
0.43 range, while our estimate is at most 0.06 on average and 0.16 for the highest country value
(Peru). Similarly, macro estimates for cell phones ownership and internet access are lower than
when estimated with household survey data. The closest values are for water and sewerage,
although the macro estimates tend to match the highest household data country estimates.

It is probable that this disparity is partly due to the ability of disaggregated household data to
control adequately for the prices of infrastructure through country-time fixed effects, while
macro data can only include time invariant country fixed effects. Consequently, the difference
in estimates appears bigger when dealing with services for which the price matters more and
has experienced large shifts over the last two or three decades, such as cell phones, internet
access, and to a lesser extent electricity.

Several factors are likely to be key in understanding the differences in how countries have been
able to accommodate the demand pressure on infrastructure stemming from growing incomes.
First, demand side issues are likely to matter, for example the extent that credit constraints have
limited the ability of households to access infrastructure and related equipment.

In addition, on the supply side, it is likely that constraints related to limited investment and
institutional capacity are playing a role. Given these likely binding supply constraints, it is
enlightening to simply ask what these elasticities mean in terms of the ability of policy makers
throughout the region to meet very simple universal access goals, akin to the early MDGs
criteria, such as for water “access to a source of water in the house or lot.” Making simple
assumptions on future income growth, we can forecast for each country the number of years it
would take to offer universal access to a given infrastructure service under a “business as usual”
scenario.

Consider very simple mechanical projections, assuming a high income growth scenario similar
to the one of the 2002-2012 period and the average historical elasticities just discussed (Table
7).11 With the exception of Argentina, which is close to full access according to this criterion,

                                                            
11
  Using average elasticities is a safe approximation given that Table 5 shows they display little variations across
income quantiles. Given that the values in Table 5 give “semi-elasticities”, for any value ε, ε/100 is the unit
change in access when income increases by 1%. The number of years to close the gap to full access is then given
by N = (1-C)/(ε/100.g), where C is the current coverage (between 0 and 1), and g is the income growth rate.


                                                               15 
 
the panorama is rather bleak for the lowest income deciles: at current elasticities, countries of
the region will take between three and more than nine decades to provide water to the poorest
10% of households.

In a number of countries, this extends to higher quantiles and even to the top of the distribution:
it will still take between 40 years in Ecuador and Honduras, and 73 years in El Salvador to
provide water to households in the fourth decile, i.e., above the poverty line, and from 39 years
in the Dominican Republic, to 48 years in El Salvador, and 45 years in Bolivia to serve those
in the middle class range, i.e., above the seventh decile.

Of course, these projections would be even less optimistic in case of a growth slowdown. Just
halving the income growth rate, to 3% annually for the poorest 10% and 2,3% for households
just above the poverty rate, would lead to delays in closing the water gap in decile 1 of 28 years
in Argentina, 61 years in Uruguay, 72 years in Brazil and Mexico, and 86 years in Peru.

Note that the value of the elasticity plays here a crucial role. Consider the three countries with
similar coverage rates at the bottom of the income distribution, Bolivia (53%), the Dominican
Republic (54%), and Peru (54%). The different income elasticities, of 0.08, 0.12, and 0.18,
translate into delays of respectively 43, 64, and 96 years to achieve universal coverage among
the lowest decile.

Similar exercises for sewerage reveal an even grimmer picture. Even the best performing
countries in the region are not on course to achieve universal basic sanitation (defined as a
dwelling connected to a public sewerage system) in less than three decades at the seventh,
“middle class decile”. At the current rate, and with high income growth, the region’s best
performer, Chile, would need 30 years to achieve universal sanitation for the poorest 10% of
households and 31 years for middle class ones above the 70th percentile, while Peru, due to its
much more regressive pattern, would attain universal connections in 54 years at the bottom
deciles and in 13 years for middle class households in the top three deciles.

Finally, for electricity, most countries are on track to achieve full connection for richer
households (above the 70th percentile) in the next 13 years or less, but delays increase to 22
years for Ecuador and Colombia at the 40th percentile, and to more than 30 years for the poorest
decile for half of the countries in the region.

This elasticity exercise is in some sense a reduced form way to think of the “last-mile”
infrastructure challenge. Obviously, the “business as usual” scenario does not constitute a



                                                  16 
 
satisfactory option for governments in the region. The question becomes to identify the realistic
components of a successful infrastructure strategy that cuts down on the time needed to achieve
the necessary improvements. The next section addresses this issue.



5. The Policy Challenges

For a start, let us think of the potential gains to be had from speeding up improvements in
infrastructure access. Taking again the example of water, and raising the income elasticity to
0.2 (that is above the current regional best performer) would allow the 9 best performing
countries to connect all decile 1 households in less than 21 years. An even higher elasticity of
0.5 would allow all countries, except El Salvador, to complete that task in 16 years or less.

The elasticity used in our reduced form exercise is in fact the outcome of a model combining
amount invested and efficiency of such investments on the supply side, with amount demanded
as a result of price and quality options available on the demand side. However, the conventional
wisdom has generally taken investment amounts as the main, if not the only, policy lever.
Unfortunately, experience shows that overall investment levels are unlikely to adjust
significantly in the short run.

As discussed in World Bank (2017), governments in the region face tight fiscal constraints. In
the last decade, the combination of the commodity price bonanza, very low international interest
rates, real exchange rate appreciations, and rising consumer credit, allowed major commodity
exporters to rely on terms-of-trade windfalls to expand domestic demand, in particular through
fiscal spending. As the recent, sharp and likely durable deterioration of their terms of trade
brought down dramatically the purchasing power of their incomes, these countries (which
include virtually all the major countries in South America) are now forced to reduce domestic
spending.

The current level of total public investment is 3.4 percent. On average, about a third of this
public investment goes to infrastructure. As for public-private partnerships (PPPs), the best
figures available, from the World Bank PPI database, puts them at about 40 percent of Latin
America’s infrastructure investments. However, an often-disregarded fact is that they depend
heavily on government support. New figures that have been gathered starting in 2015 show that
about a third of the recorded investments actually come from public sources, and about half are




                                               17 
 
backed by some type of government guarantees.12 In that way, constraints to public investment
spill over to private investment in infrastructure.

In summary, considering average levels of PPP investments of between 0.5 and 1 percent of
GDP, and public infrastructure investments of 1 to 1.5 percent, Latin American average
investment in infrastructure is unlikely to exceed 1.5-2.5 percent of GDP in the near future,
very much in line with current levels.13

This leaves investment efficiency improvements, including refocusing spending “needs”,
reducing costs, improving cost recovery, and managing demand as the only realistic avenues to
speed up infrastructure delivery in the short and medium run.

In terms of setting adequate targets or goals, consider the cases of water and electricity,
highlighted in World Bank (2017). By one estimate (Hutton and Varughese 2016) achieving
universal access to basic water, sanitation, and hygiene by 2030, in line with the early
Millennium Development Goal (MDG), would require an investment of only 0.05 percent of
GDP a year through 2030. On the other hand, achieving the much more ambitious Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) of universal access to safely managed water and sanitation services
by 2030 would cost five times more, at 0.25 percent of GDP, an amount equivalent to current
Latin American spending on water and sanitation.

The potential for demand management, through better pricing schemes, incentives and
behavioral nudges, is probably large. The experience of Brazil in 2001, when the drought-
induced energy crisis led to the implementation of a large scale electricity saving program, is a
case in point (Costa and Gerard 2015). Faced with strong incentives, including quotas and
penalties for exceeding them, households responded sharply, reducing electricity consumption.
More interestingly, the policy led to a permanent and stable reduction in average electricity use
of 11% four years later, arguably through a change in consumption habits. The possibility of
hysteresis, whereby temporary policies may have permanent effects by shifting agents to a
different equilibrium, has clearly been underestimated when defining policy goals in the context
of infrastructure investments, which lock in behaviors over a long period of time.

Finally, boosting the efficiency of investment spending should be high on the agenda. It has
been known at least since Pritchett (2000) that (cumulated) investment flows may translate into


                                                            
12
     See https://ppi.worldbank.org/
13
     See http://infralatam.info/


                                                               18 
 
very different effective capital stocks, and hence services, depending on the environment in
which they take place. Among the reasons for this discrepancy are government inefficiency,
corruption, or departures from efficiency for redistributive motives among others. Given this,
improving public investment efficiency can have direct effects on infrastructure delivery.

On the cost side, there is first an ex ante aspect, stressed in the public investment management
(PIM) model (IMF 2015). A first step towards useful policy recommendations would be to
clarify what the relevant investment efficiency model is, something that is likely to be very
context dependent, and to collect relevant empirical evidence to test this model. Considering
the two main stages of the investment process corresponding first to the planning stage, in which
projects are selected and their characteristics (size, timing, technology) are decided, and second
the execution stage, in which they are carried out, this means understanding how the different
stages interact, depending on the sector, the level of institutional capacity, and the level of
development. For example, contrary to what is claimed in IMF (2015), focusing on the
efficiency of delivery in the poorest countries is likely to be a misguided strategy. Indeed, if the
two stages are strongly complementary and planning capacity is low, such efficiency gains will
be useless from a social welfare point of view if the wrong projects are selected to start with.

In addition, other aspects are relevant here, such as competition policy, to the extent that
competition in downstream sectors such as construction and related activities is likely to have
an important impact on ex ante costs.

Next, there is a post construction stage of the cost issue that relates to operational efficiency.
This is a crucial aspect that has much more to do with the political economy of running and
delivering the service. The focus in that case should be on utilities managers’ incentives, as
regard in particular their relationship with politicians, soft-budget constraint issues, and
consequences for example in terms of overstaffing and clientelism. Addressing this part of the
cost structure separately may be more fruitful, and would entail in particular to look at the
quality of the regulatory framework.

Finally, there is much talk in policy circle about public investment efficiency improvements as
catalysts for additional and sustained flows of private investment (see for example Leigland et
al. 2016). However, there is again a lack of rigorous empirical evidence to evaluate the
relevance of this potential channel.




                                                19 
 
Given the constraints discussed above, generating evidence to guide policy makers on the
overall issue of how to improve investment efficiency appears to deserve a high rank on the list
of applied research priorities.



References

Cameron, A. C. and D. L. Miller. (2015). “A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference”,
Journal of Human Resources, Vol.50, No. 2, pp.317-373.

CEDLAS and The World Bank. (2014). “A Guide to SEDLAC Socio-economic database for
Latin America and the Caribbean.” http://sedlac.econo.unlp.edu.ar/eng/methodology.php

Costa, F., and F. Gerard. (2015). “Hysteresis and the Social Cost of Corrective Policies:
Evidence From a Temporary Energy Saving Program”, mimeo.

Davis, L., and P. Gertler. (2015). “Contribution of air conditioning adoption to future energy
use under global warming”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 112(19):
5962–5967.

Dinkelman, T. (2011). “The effects of rural electrification on employment: New evidence from
South Africa”, American Economic Review, Vol. 101(7) pp. 3078-3108

Estache, A., and M. Fay. (2009). Current Debates on Infrastructure Policy. Comm. Growth
Dev., World Bank Publication.

Fay, M. and T. Yepes. (2003). “Investing in Infrastructure: What is Needed from 2000 to
2010?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3102.

Ferreira, F. H. G., Messina, J., Rigolini, J., López-Calva, L.-F., Lugo, M. A. and R. Vakis.
(2013). Economic Mobility and the Rise of the Latin American Middle Class. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

Galiani, S., P. Gertler and E. Schargrodsky. (2005). “Water for Life: The Impact of Privatization
of Water Services on Child Mortality”, Journal of Political Economy, 113: 83-120.

Gertler, P., O. Shelef, C. Wolfram, and A. Fuchs. (2016). “The Demand for Energy-Using
Assets among the World's Rising Middle Classes,” American Economic Review. Vol. 106, No.
6, pp. 1366-1401.




                                               20 
 
Gibson J. and S. Rozelle. (2003). “Poverty and Access to Roads in Papua New Guinea”,
Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 52 (1), pp. 159-185.

Hutton, G., and M. Varughese. (2016). “The Costs of Meeting the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goal Targets on Drinking Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene.” Water and Sanitation
Program Technical Paper. Washington, D.C., World Bank.

IMF. (2015). “Making Public Investment More Efficient.” International Monetary Fund,
Washington DC.

Lakner, C., and B. Milanovic. (2015). “Global Income Distribution: From the Fall of the Berlin
Wall to the Great Recession”, World Bank Economic Review, Advance Access published
September 26, 2015.

Lee, K., Miguel, T., and C. Wolfram. (2016). “Experimental Evidence on the Demand for and
Costs of Rural Electrification.” Unpublished working paper.

Leigland, J., Trémolet, S. and J. Ikeda. (2016). “Achieving Universal Access to Water and
Sanitation by 2030. The Role of Blended Finance.” World Bank Water Global Practice
Discussion Paper.

Milanovic, B. (2015). “Global inequality of opportunity:       how much of our income is
determined by where we live”, Review of Economics and Statistics.

Pritchett, L. (2000). “The Tyranny of Concepts: CUDIE (Cumulated, Depreciated, Investment
Effort) Is Not Capital.” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol. 5, Issue 4, pp 361–384.

Straub, S. (2008). Infrastructure and growth in developing countries: Recent advances and
research challenges. Policy Research working paper 4460. World Bank.

Straub, S. (2011). Infrastructure and Development: A Critical Appraisal of the Macro-level
Literature. Journal of Development Studies. 47, 683–708.

Straub, S. (2015). “Policy Lessons from the Recent Literature on Transport Infrastructure
Development,” in The Economics of Infrastructure Provisioning: The (Changing) Role of the
State, in Picot, Florio, Grove, and Kranz eds., MIT Press.

World Bank. (Forthcoming, 2017). Rethinking Infrastructure in Latin America and the
Caribbean –Spending better to achieve more. Washington D.C.




                                             21 
 
Figure 1: Infrastructure Access across Deciles




                                     

                             




                                           22 
 
Figure 2: Access Premium vs. per capita GDP




                                        23 
 
 



Figure 3: Countries’ Access Premium across the Income Distribution

                                                     WATER
    0.3



    0.2



    0.1



      0
           1         2       3         4         5         6          7          8         9         10


    ‐0.1



    ‐0.2



    ‐0.3



    ‐0.4



    ‐0.5



    ‐0.6



    ‐0.7
               ARG   CHL   URY   MEX       BRA       CRI       COL   SLV   PRY       DOM       ECU        PER   BOL




                                                                           24 
 
                                                                    SANITATION
     0.7




     0.5




     0.3




     0.1



            1           2             3              4              5              6          7              8               9               10

     ‐0.1




     ‐0.3




     ‐0.5




     ‐0.7
                ARG     CHL      URY        MEX               BRA            CRI       COL   SLV       PRY           DOM             ECU          PER        BOL




                                                                    ELECTRICITY
     0.3



    0.25



     0.2



    0.15



     0.1



    0.05



       0
            1               2          3                 4              5              6           7             8               9                10



    ‐0.05



     ‐0.1



    ‐0.15
                      BOL       BRA        CHL               COL            CRI    DOM        ECU       MEX            PER             PRY             SLV     URY




                                                                                                       25 
 
Figure 4: Durable ownership accross the income distribution 

               Change in households durables ownership 2002-2012, by
                                      deciles
    25%


    20%


    15%


    10%


     5%


     0%
           1        2          3        4     5       6          7   8          9   10

                             Refrigerators        Washmachines           Cars



                Income elasticity of durable ownership, by deciles
    0.35

     0.3

    0.25

     0.2

    0.15

     0.1

    0.05

      0
           1        2         3         4     5       6          7   8          9   10

                              Refrigerators       Washmachines       Cars




                                                    26 
 
Table 1: Household surveys included in the database

             Time period                       1                   2                 3                 4                    5
    Argentina                                 1992                1998              2002              2007                 2012
    Bolivia                                                                         2002              2007                 2012
    Brazil                                                        1997              2002              2007                 2012
    Chile                                     1992                1996              2003              2006                 2011
    Colombia                                                      1996              2002              2008                 2012
    Costa Rica                                1992                1997              2002              2007                 2012
    Dominican Republic                                            1997              2002              2007                 2011
    Ecuador                                                                         2003              2007                 2012
    Honduras                                  1992                1997              2003              2007                 2011
    Mexico                                    1992                1998              2002              2006                 2011
    Paraguay                                                      1997              2002              2007                 2011
    Peru                                                          1997              2002              2007                 2012
    El Salvador                               1991                1998              2002              2007                 2012
    Uruguay                                   1992                1997              2002              2007                 2012


Table 2: Missing indicators

        Variable         1992 (7 countries)        1997 (12 countries)      2002 (14 countries)     2007 (14 countries)      2012 (14 countries)

         Water                  ‐‐‐‐                      DOM                       COL                SLV  (all  obs=1)              ‐‐‐‐


         Toilet                 ‐‐‐‐                      DOM                       COL                      ‐‐‐‐                     ‐‐‐‐


        Sewers                ARG/CRI                     DOM                       COL                      ‐‐‐‐                     ‐‐‐‐


       Electricity              ARG                       DOM                     COL/URY                    ARG                     ARG


      Refrigerator          ARG/CHL/HND             ARG/CHL/DOM/HND             ARG/COL/HND                  ARG                     ARG


    Washing machine         ARG/CHL/HND             ARG/CHL/DOM/HND          ARG/COL/ECU/HND             ARG/HND                  ARG/CRI/HND


     Landline phone       ARG/CHL/HND/URY         ARG/CHL/DOM/HND/URY      ARG/BOL/COL/HND/URY               ARG                   ARG/URY

                      ARG/CHL/CRI/HND/MEX/SLV/ ARG/BRA/CHL/COL/CRI/DOM ARG/BOL/COL/CRI/DOM/ECU
       Cell phone                                                                                      ARG/COL/ECU                   ARG
                                 URY              /HND/MEX/PRY/URY            /HND/URY
                                                 ARG/BRA/CHL/COL/DOM/HN
       Computer         ARG/CHL/CRI/HND/URY                                ARG/BOL/COL/ECU/HND               ARG                     ARG
                                                        D/PRY/URY 
                      ARG/CHL/CRI/HND/MEX/SLV/                            ARG/BOL/COL/CRI/DOM/ECU
        Internet                                          12/12                                      ARG/BOL/DOM/ECU               ARG/DOM
                                 URY                                               /HND
                                                 ARG/BOL/BRA/CHL/COL/DO
          Car               ARG/CHL/HND                                    ARG/BRA/CHL/COL/HND         ARG/BRA/CHL                 ARG/BRA
                                                         M/HND 
                                              ARG/BOL/BRA/CHL/COL/CRI/ ARG/BRA/CHL/COL/CRI/ECU/
      Motorcycle      ARG/CHL/CRI/HND/SLV/URY                                                       ARG/BRA/CHL/CRI/SLV           ARG/BRA/CHL
                                                 DOM/HND/SLV/URY             HND/SLV/URY




                                                                          27 
 
     Table 3: Cross-country variability in access to infrastructure – 2012

Panel A: Share of variability explained by country dummies only (R2)
                                                                                 Washing                 Landline     Cell
              pc GDP Water        Toilet       Sewers Electricity Refrigerator                  TV                             Computer Internet      Car      Motorcycle
                                                                                 machine                  phone      phone
                         0.669    0.395         0.657     0.334       0.542          0.662      0.643     0.157       0.399      0.246      0.184     0.099      0.852
Panel B: Country premium relative to Honduras - 2012
Argentina         -      0.103  0.277     0.238
Bolivia        5 793   -0.0879 0.0405    0.122      0.0121            -0.176         -0.536    0.00895    -0.105     -0.0152     0.0540     -0.109   -0.0679     0.0536
Brazil         14 970   0.0467   0.108    0.104     0.0890            0.234          -0.191     0.134     -0.0198   -0.00150     0.154      0.142
Chile          20 266   0.0370  0.267     0.320     0.0853            0.173          0.0695    -0.390     -0.0719    -0.0597     0.149      0.0727   0.0144
Colombia       11 840   0.0386  0.304     0.370     0.0817            0.101          -0.141     0.105    0.00660     0.0396      0.113      0.0728   -0.106      0.161
Costa Rica     13 589   0.0894  0.321    -0.318     0.0848            0.192                     0.113     0.103     0.00574      0.0854     0.148    0.0405      0.0494
Rep.Dom        10 322   -0.191  0.0151   -0.251     0.0670           0.00877         0.0142    0.0150     -0.139     -0.144     -0.0858              -0.0559     0.260
Ecuador         7 718   0.00373   0.293         0.151    0.0637      0.0582          -0.348    0.0357     0.0386     -0.0792     0.0386    -0.0169   -0.0257     0.0117
Mexico         16 136   0.0189    0.0291       0.0833    0.0834      0.0967          -0.0577   0.0773     0.0131     -0.165      0.0123    -0.0183   0.0227      -0.0102
Paraguay       10 851   -0.0410   0.135        -0.340    0.0813       0.132                    0.0798     -0.141    -0.00581    -0.00253   -0.0009   0.0456      0.410
Peru            7 505   -0.119    0.0877        0.140    -0.0157      -0.280         -0.509    -0.0372    -0.138     -0.110     -0.00785   -0.0716   -0.156      0.0536
El Salvador    11 376   -0.409    0.211        0.0652    0.0390      -0.0509         -0.522    0.0194     -0.0730   0.00916     -0.0502    -0.0353   -0.0488     -0.0391
Uruguay        18 439   0.0875    0.236        0.0327    0.0870       0.223          -0.0450    0.121                -0.128      0.330      0.119    0.00391     0.289
     Note:	Honduras	is	taken	as	reference	country	for	having	the	lowest	pc	GDP	in	2012	($4433).	Argentinean	pc	GDP	is	unavailable	for	any	year	close	to	
     2012.	




                                                                               28 
      
          Table 4: Cross-country variability in access to infrastructure explained by country determinants - 2012

                                                                                   Washing           TV      Landline     Cell
                  Water       Toilet    Sewers        Electricity   Refrigerator                                                  Computer     Internet    Car      Motorcycle
                                                                                   machine                    phone      phone
ln GDP pc        0.4300**    0.735***   -0.7500       0.243***       0.745***      1.4280          -0.0898    0.2650    -0.1790    -0.0937    0.3230*** 0.2280**      0.4470
Gini              0.0075     -0.0053    0.0090         0.0018         0.0148       0.0176          -0.0051   0.0051     0.0077*    0.0001     0.0097**    0.0018      0.0067
Density         -0.0011***   -0.0002    0.0000         0.0000         0.0002       0.0000          -0.0001   0.0000     0.0002     -0.0004     0.0003*    -0.0001    -0.0003
Urbanization     -0.0031     -0.0078*   0.0185        -0.0018*        -0.0031      -0.0104         -0.0016   -0.0036    0.0023    0.0074***    0.0011     -0.0034    -0,0015
Observations      1,188       1,188     1,188           1,188          1,188         990           1,188      1,089      1,188      1,188       1,089     1,089        990
R2                 0.52        0.18      0.17            0.20          0.29         0.41            0.04       0.03      0.15       0.19        0.14       0.02        0.20




                                                                                             29 
           
Table 5: Household infrastructure income elasticity

                                                                                      Washing    Landline    Cell
                  Water      Toilet         Sewers     Electricity Refrigerator                                        Computer Internet       Car      Motorcycle
                                                                                      machine     phone     phone
    Panel A
    LAC           0,085***   0,157***       0,168***    0,060***     0,151***         0,153***   0,197***   0,099***   0,134***   0,122***   0,156***     0,012**
    Panel B
    Argentina     0,017***   0,122***       0,175***    0,005***        -                -          -          -           -         -          -            -
    Bolivia       0,081***   0,128***       0,136***    0,103***     0,178***         0,075***   0,141***   0,102***   0,148***   0,092***   0,094***    0,021***
    Brazil        0,094***   0,161***       0,174***    0,03***      0,099***         0,212***   0,224***   0,129***   0,181***   0,164***      -            -
    Chile         0,041***   0,097***       0,102***    0,018**      0,082***         0,132***   0,165***    0,091     0,154***   0,135***                   -
    Colombia      0,069***   0,088***       0,153***    0,034***     0,136***         0,165***   0,191***              0,196***   0,161***   0,141***    0,023***
    Costa Rica    0,022***   0,065***       0,073***    0,02***      0,086***          0,099     0,174***    0,123     0,155***   0,150***   0,157***    0,009***
    Dom. Rep.     0,120***   0,198***       0,117***     0,037*      0,133***         0,124***   0,207***   0,105***   0,134***       -      0,187***     -0,010
    Ecuador       0,054***    0,08***       0,188***    0,024***     0,156***         0,19***    0,212***              0,188***   0,176***   0,159***      0,006
    Honduras      0,073***   0,195***       0,182***    0,137***     0,177***             -      0,17***    0,103**    0,146***    0,098**   0,167***    0,015***
    Mexico        0,091***   0,247***       0,239***    0,029***     0,186***         0,193***   0,226***   0,154***   0,125***   0,112***   0,198***    0,005***
    Peru          0,177***   0,188***       0,253***    0,164***     0,241***         0,182***   0,233***   0,114***    0,096**   0,098**    0,099***      0,038
    Paraguay      0,169***    0,22***       0,092***    0,059***     0,164***         0,182***   0,17***    0,113***   0,139***   0,088*     0,187***      0,013
    El Salvador   0,193***   0,219***       0,218***    0,104***     0,215***         0,116***   0,195***   0,061***    0,087**   0,088**    0,164***
    Uruguay       0,026***   0,151***       0,211***    0,025***     0,095***         0,164***   0,259***   0,01***     0,086*    0,140***   0,148***    -0,029**




                                                                                30 
 
Table 6: Comparative household infrastructure income elasticity

                      HH surveys                                                      Fay &        Perrotti &
                       data LAC    LAC Q 0,1   LAC Q 0,25 LAC Q 0,75    LAC Q 0,9   Yepes 2003   Sanchez 2011
    Water                 0,08       0,06        0,06       0,05          0,04         0,11          0,13
    Toilet                0,16       0,14        0,15       0,14          0,12
    Sewers                0,17       0,16        0,17       0,17          0,15         0,19          0,22
    Electricity*          0,06       0,04        0.03       0,02          0,01         0,18          0,43
    Refrigerator          0,15       0,13        0,14       0,13          0,12
    Washing machine       0,15       0,14        0,16       0,15          0,14
    Landline phone        0,20       0,19        0,20       0,20          0,18         0,39          0,12
    Cell phone            0,10       0,09        0,08       0,09          0,09         0,64          1,00
    Computer              0,13       0,11        0,12       0,14          0,14
    Internet              0,12       0,09        0,10       0,13          0,12                       0,37
    Car                   0,16       0,13        0,14       0,16          0,16
    Motorcycle            0,01       0,00        0,01       0,01          0,02




                                                                  31 
 
Table 7: Years to Close Gap
          Water       Decile 1   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4         Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10
    Argentina           14          7          3          2                3          3          2          3          3          3
    Bolivia             96         58         55         43               48         36         45         45         56          90
    Brazil              36         21         15         14               11          8         13          5          6           2
    Chile               34         28         24         22               19         16         18         16         18          16
    Colombia            56         41         29         24               20         20         18         17         24          30
    Costa Rica          38         21         15         20                9          9          6          9          2           6
    Dominican Rep ,     64         57         59         53               50         39         38         38         31          26
    Ecuador             71         52         46         41               40         31         27         26         21          24
    Honduras            57         44         40         40               32         32         26         35         25          42
    Mexico              36         28         36         19               17         12         16         12         11          10
    Peru                43         38         30         24               21         19         17         13         14          11
    Paraguay            36         26         19         23               16         16         19          9          8          23
    El Salvador         85         81         73         65               64         52         48         41         42          37
    Uruguay             31         21         17         18               17         12         14          8          5           3

        Sewerage      Decile 1   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4         Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10
    Argentina           58         64         62         61               60         53         52         51         48          37
    Bolivia             97         81         75         76               70         77         73         75          80        122
    Brazil              65         61         55         56               50         48         56         46          49         48
    Chile               30         33         35         34               34         30         32         31         29          29
    Colombia            71         62         49         43               32         26         25         25          17         18
    Costa Rica         203        221        237        245              247        261        267        292        330         443
    Dominican Rep ,    122        134        142        145              153        150        156        162         186        260
    Ecuador             56         54         47         43               41         33         30         26          20         29
    Honduras            79         76         75         70               68         68         61         68          70        107
    Mexico              52         49         47         41               38         29         27         30         22          22
    Peru                54         50         37         30               25         19         17         13          13         10
    Paraguay           180        202        216        224              237        236        254        269        301         406
    El Salvador         53         40         40         35               36         24         29         27         27          25
    Uruguay             57         61         63         60               59         56         54         52         44          42

                                                                  32 
 
        Electricity   Decile 1   Decile 2   Decile 3   Decile 4         Decile 5   Decile 6   Decile 7   Decile 8   Decile 9   Decile 10
    Bolivia             51         26         18         12               10         10          9         12         14          12
    Brazil              13          5          3          3                3          2          4          1          1          0
    Chile               14          7          8          7                6          4          4          6          4          3
    Colombia            52         26         25         21               15         15         14          9          5           4
    Costa Rica          33         10          6          6                6          3          6          4          0          2
    Dominican Rep ,     21         13         13         14               16         13          4          2          4           2
    Ecuador             53         39         25         22               19         14         17         12          6          15
    Honduras            39         21         17         17               17          7         11         12         14          20
    Mexico              16          9          8          7                4          0          3          4          5          0
    Peru                33         24         15          8                6          4          5          3          3          2
    Paraguay            15         11          7          8                3          5          1          0          1          0
    El Salvador         28         17         13          9                9          4          5          3          1          1
    Uruguay              9         11          8          8               10          5          6          4          3          1




                                                                  33 
 
