                                                  WPS7993


Policy Research Working Paper                    7993




  Growing Markets through Business Training
          for Female Entrepreneurs
      A Market-Level Randomized Experiment in Kenya

                                David McKenzie
                                 Susana Puerto




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7993


  Abstract
 A common concern with efforts to directly help some small                          There is no evidence of negative spillovers on the competing
 businesses to grow is that their growth comes at the expense                       businesses, and the markets as a whole appear to have grown
 of their unassisted competitors. This study tests this possi-                      in terms of number of customers and sales volumes. This
 bility using a two-stage randomized experiment in Kenya.                           market growth appears to come from enhanced customer
 The experiment randomizes business training at the market                          service and new product introduction, generating more
 level, and then within markets to selected businesses. Three                       customers and more sales from existing customers. As a
 years after training, the treated businesses are selling more,                     result, business growth in underdeveloped markets is pos-
 earn higher profits, and their owners have higher well-being.                      sible without taking sales away from nontreated businesses.




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at dmckenzie@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
          Growing Markets through Business Training for Female Entrepreneurs:
                  A Market-Level Randomized Experiment in Kenya*


                David McKenzie, Development Research Group, World Bank
      Susana Puerto, Employment Policy Department, International Labour Organization




Keywords: Business Training, Spillovers, Microenterprise, Market Development
JEL codes: O12, O17, J16, L26.




*
  We gratefully acknowledge funding provided to this project from the International Initiative for
Impact Evaluation (3ie), Private Enterprise Development in Low-Income Countries (PEDL), the
International Labour Organization (ILO), the Strategic Research Program (SRP), and the World
Bank Jobs Umbrella multi-donor trust fund. Human Subjects Approval was obtained from
Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA, 13February-002) and the Maseno University Ethics Review
Committee (MSU/DRPC/MUERC/000006/13). Authority to conduct research in Kenya was
provided by the Kenyan Ministry of Science and Technology (NCST/RCD/14/013/553B). A pre-
analysis plan and the associated trial were registered on the AEA Social Science Registry on
February 21, 2014 (AEARCTR-0000287). We thank Valerie Breda, Faizan Diwan, Bilal Hakeem,
Mary Kamore, Virginia Losada, Jane Maigua, Grace Makana, Silvia Paruzzolo, and Miriam
Wekesa for their contributions to the study design and implementation, ICRW for their qualitative
work, and participants at various seminars for useful comments.
        
        
        
    1. Introduction

Governments and NGOs around the world promote and offer a variety of direct support to small
businesses, with the provision of business training one of the most common services provided.
Better business practices are strongly associated with better firm performance across a range of
countries in both the cross-section and over time (McKenzie and Woodruff, 2015), and so the hope
is that teaching these practices will help firms grow. However, a key concern around public or
subsidized provision of business training is whether any growth of trained firms comes at the
expense of their competitors (Rotemberg, 2014). This concern is particularly apparent when
working with microenterprises in rural markets in developing countries, where it is easy to believe
that if firms are all selling similar products in a small market, any extra sales made by trained firms
must come from competing away these sales from neighboring untrained firms. Conversely, if
better management practices are best thought of as a technology (as in Bloom et al., 2015), then
there might be positive spillover benefits as untrained firms copy the practices adopted by the
trained firms and also become more productive. Furthermore, if training leads firms to expand the
variety of products being offered and the customer service provided, the overall market size may
increase, particularly in underdeveloped marketplaces.
We conduct a randomized experiment in 157 rural markets in Kenya to test how business training
(the International Labour Organization (ILO)’s Gender and Enterprise Together program) affects
the profitability, growth and survival of female-owned businesses, and to evaluate whether any
gains in profitability come at the expense of other business owners. We work with a large sample
of 3,537 firms, and use a two-stage randomization, first randomizing at the market level, and then
randomizing the offer of training to individuals within treated markets. A year and a half after the
training has taken place, half of the sample assigned to training was then offered a subsequent
mentoring intervention intended to test whether additional group-based and in-person support
strengthens the impacts of training. Four rounds of follow-up surveys with low attrition are used
to measure impacts at one and three years after training.
Firms assigned to training are 3 percentage points more likely to survive after three years, earn 18
percent higher sales, and make 15 percent higher profits. Their owners have better mental health
and a higher subjective standard of living. These gains are greater at three years than at one year

                                                  2 
 
after the training, and are similar for firms assigned to training only as for firms also assigned to a
mentor. These gains come with no significant spillover effects on untreated firms operating in the
same markets, and total sales and the total number of customers are higher in the treated markets
than control markets. We also find no reduction in new entry into these markets after training. This
market growth appears to stem from better customer services, better business practices, and the
introduction of new products, with no significant impacts on access to finance or input
management. We conclude that, in underdeveloped markets, microenterprise growth need not
come at the expense of competitors, and business training can help the overall market grow.
There are three strands of this literature of particular relevance to this study. The first is evidence
on the effectiveness of business training. McKenzie and Woodruff (2014) review this literature
and note that overall evidence on effectiveness is mixed, in part because many studies have low
statistical power and measure impacts over short durations. This existing literature also suggests
that business training may be less effective for female business owners, either because they work
in sectors with very low efficient scales or because they face many other constraints that limit the
ability of their businesses to grow (e.g. de Mel et al., 2014; Berge et al., 2015; Giné and Mansuri,
2016). Get-Ahead, the training program studied here, was designed especially for women with low
education levels. Bulte et al. (2016) evaluate the impact of this same program on female
microfinance clients in Vietnam and find some evidence of firm growth 12 months after training.
Our results show stronger and longer-term evidence that this training can help female-owned
businesses grow.
Second, several studies examine whether augmenting standard business training with mentoring
can enhance its effectiveness. Valdivia (2015) and Giné and Mansuri (2016) find that
individualized hand-holding or mentoring after training does not have sustained impacts relative
to training alone. Brooks et al. (2016) find, also in Kenya, that assigning a mentor to a young firm
does increase profits in the short-run, but the effect fades over time. Our results are consistent with
mentoring not delivering additional gains compared to training alone.
Third, almost all of the existing literature to date has been unable to measure impacts at the market
level, so cannot tell if any gains come from untrained firms. The one exception is Calderón et al.
(2013), who worked with 17 villages in rural Mexico, assigning 7 to treatment and 10 to control.
They find no significant spillovers, although this may in part reflect low statistical power given
the small number of villages and that they lose 18 percent of their sample to attrition and 41 percent

                                                  3 
 
to closure by their second follow-up. Our paper builds on this work and not only shows no
significant spillovers, but significant growth at the market level.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses the selection of our sample
and randomization procedure; Section 3 the training and mentoring interventions; Section 4 our
data collection and estimation approach; Section 5 impacts on primary and secondary outcomes;
Section 6 mechanisms for these results; Section 7 cost-effectiveness; and Section 8 concludes.


       2. Selection of the Sample, Randomization Procedure, and Baseline Characteristics

2.1 Selecting a Sample
A participatory process involving the ILO, government ministries, and organizations serving
female entrepreneurs1 was used to select four counties for the study: Kakamega and Kisii in the
Western region, and Embu and Kitui in the Eastern region. These regions are largely rural, with
an average population for each county of approximately 1 million, and the majority of the
population below the poverty line. In each of the four counties, field staff from Innovations for
Poverty Action, Kenya, mapped out all market centers deemed as “medium” or “large” outside of
the main cities and conducted a market census of all female-owned businesses between June and
November 2013 (see timeline in Appendix 1). After listing, an eligibility filter was applied
(Appendix 2) and a baseline survey administered to 3,537 individuals located in 157 separate
markets.

These markets are typically small and remote, largely consisting of women2 operating a limited
variety of businesses such as selling fruits, vegetables, grains, and dried fish products from tables;
and offering services like hairdressing, dressmaking and small food kiosks. The market is a
designated place in the village, and authorities typically build several stalls for the sellers to display




                                                            
1
  Stakeholders consulted included the Department of Micro and Small Enterprise Development (DMSED) of the
Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Youth Affairs, Ministry of Cooperative Development and Marketing, Ministry of
Youth, Federation of women entrepreneurs associations (FEWA), Women Enterprise Fund (WEF), Youth
Employment Development Fund (YEDF), Business Development Service providers, and Inoorero University.
2
  While men operate some businesses in these markets, they tend to specialize in other products, and women are the
dominant sellers of the products in our sample. 

                                                               4 
 
their goods and services, and charge them a market fee to sell in the market. The average market
in our study has 22 firms surveyed in it, with 75 percent in retail trade and 25 percent in services.3



2.2 Randomization Procedure
Individuals were then assigned to treatment and control for the business training intervention in a
two-stage process, diagrammed in Figure 1.
First, Markets were assigned to treatment (have some individuals in them invited to training) or
control (no one in the market would be invited to training) status. Randomization was done within
35 strata defined by geographical region (within county) and the number of women surveyed in
the market. The need to ensure sufficient numbers for training meant that more than half the
markets were allocated to treatment, with 93 markets assigned to treatment and 64 to control.
Then within each market, Individuals were assigned to treatment (be invited to training) or control
(not be invited to training) within treated markets by forming four strata, based on quartiles of
weekly profits from the census (<=450, 451-800, 801-1500, 1501-4000), and then assigning half
the individuals within each stratum to training. This resulted in 1,172 of the 2,160 individuals in
treated markets being assigned to treatment, and 988 to control.4
For the follow-up mentoring intervention, we dropped markets with 15 or fewer firms in the study,
since these would have too few firms to make mentoring cost-effective. This left 73 of the 93
treated markets. We randomly assigned 37 of these (within the original randomization strata) to
mentoring, and the remaining 36 to be training only. Then within the mentoring markets, all those
individuals assigned to training were assigned to be offered mentoring services, although in
practice only those businesses still surviving were actually offered these services. We then
compare the mentoring and training-only markets to the 44 markets in the control group with 16
or more firms.

2.3 Characteristics of the Sample and Verification of Random Assignment
Table 1 provides some key characteristics of the women selected in our sample and their firms by
treatment assignment (Appendix Table 1 provides a similar table by assignment to mentoring).

                                                            
3
  In addition, markets typically have a market day once a week, where outside vendors come to sell goods such as
clothing, plastic housewares, and shoes. These vendors who are only in the market one day a week are not included
in our study.
4
  When the number of firms within a stratum was odd, the additional unit was also randomly allocated to training.

                                                               5 
 
The sample looks similar across the three groups and we cannot reject the joint orthogonality of
baseline characteristics when comparing the treatment group to the spillover group, the treatment
group to the pure control, or the spillover group to the pure control. The average woman in our
sample is 36 years old, has 9 years of schooling, and has been running her firm for just over 6
years. Two-thirds of the women are currently married. The modal firm has no employees (only 20
percent have one or more employees). The mean firm earns 1,100 KSH (US$13) per week in
profits on sales of 5,500 KSH (US$65), and has capital stock of 31,000 KSH (US$370).5 One-
quarter have ever received financing from a bank or microfinance organization and 45 percent are
registered at the local level. Only 35 percent of firms keep business records at baseline, and on
average firms are using just over half of the 26 business practices in the McKenzie and Woodruff
(2015) index. This suggests scope for improvement from business training.


       3. The Training and Mentoring Interventions

3.1 The Get-Ahead Program
The training provided is the ILO’s Gender and Entrepreneurship Together – Get-Ahead for Women
in Enterprise program. This program “differs from conventional business training materials by
highlighting essential entrepreneurial skills from a gender perspective... It addresses the practical
and strategic needs of low-income women in enterprise by strengthening their basic business and
people management skills. It shows women how to develop their personal entrepreneurial traits
and obtain support through groups, networks and institutions dealing with enterprise development”
(Bauer et al., 2004). The program began in Thailand in 2001, and has now been used in at least 21
countries, serving approximately 400,000 women.
The program has four key modules, with the following themes:

             Module 1: Basics on Gender and Entrepreneurship. The module introduces Get-Ahead and
              delivers basic concepts on the promotion of gender equality between men and women and
              the life cycle of people and enterprises.
             Module 2: The Business Woman and Her Environment. The module focuses on raising
              awareness among women about their strengths and weaknesses as well as current or future
              working environment and its effect on the business.
                                                            
5
    The exchange rate was approximately 1 US$=84 KSH in 2013 at the time of baseline.

                                                               6 
 
             Module 3: The Business Project. The module offers trainees information on the
              development of business ideas, opportunities and challenges, and the basics around
              marketing, production, services and technology, and financing, including costing and book
              keeping.
             Module 4: People, Organization and Management. It is a soft skills module around
              managing a business (or a family business), with information on management of self and
              others, business support and networking, and action planning.

Some of the topics covered throughout these modules are not often emphasized in general business
training programs, for example the conversations about the difference between sex and gender,
and the role of cultural constraints in shaping women in business; dividing household and business
tasks; and how to network with other women and the role of women’s associations. In addition, it
covers a number of topics more typical of standard programs such as recordkeeping and
bookkeeping; separating business and household finances; marketing; financial concepts; costing
and pricing; generating and fine-tuning new business ideas; setting smart objectives; and traits
needed for business success.
The program seeks to create a “business mind” among low-income women engaged in small-scale
businesses. The training methodology is participatory, with practical exercises to teach concepts.
Modules expose women to different situations and environments simulating real business life. For
example, women learn about the different types of costs involved in production, and how to
account for their own costs through making lemonade. They have role play exercises to practice
different sales strategies for customers, and make necklaces to discuss a production process and
the importance of different factors in product design.
The course is a five-day course, as shown in Appendix 3. All trainers had at least five years of
experience in training small firms, and had tertiary qualifications. Training took place in two to
three locations per county. The locations were chosen to be relatively central to clusters of
marketplaces, and were typically held in local hotels or church buildings. Training was offered for
free, and participants were provided transport subsidies of approximately US$6 per day to cover
the costs of traveling from their residences to these locations (an average of 14 kilometers). The
cost of providing the training is estimated at between US$222 and US$333 per woman trained.6

                                                            
6
     The smaller number reflects workshops with 20 attendees, while the larger is for workshops with 30 attendees.

                                                               7 
 
3.2 Training Take-up
Training took place immediately after the baseline surveys in each county, between June and
November 2013. Of the 1,172 individuals assigned to training, 77.7 percent attended at least one
day of training. Of the individuals who attended at least one day, 94.6% attended all five days. In
Diwan et al. (2014) we report on a choice structure experiment intended to increase training
attendance, and discuss the correlates of attendance. Age and marital status are strong and
statistically significant predictors of attendance: all else equal, women aged above 35 are 35
percentage points more likely to attend training than those below 35, while married women are 24
percentage points less likely to attend than unmarried women. This potentially reflects the
competing demands on their time from other household tasks. Women are also more likely to
attend if they have previously participated in training (perhaps reflecting greater perceived benefits
from attending), have a large household (potentially providing more people to undertake household
and business tasks in their absence), and are located closer to the training venue (reducing travel
time). Women who earn more profits are less likely to attend, perhaps reflecting a higher
opportunity cost of time, or that they think there is less need to improve.
3.3 Mentoring Intervention
After seeing the one-year follow-up results and emerging evidence suggesting that many business
training programs may be too short to show sizeable impacts (McKenzie and Woodruff, 2014,
2015), we decided to add a mentoring component for half the sample assigned to training. Mentors
were female business owners of a similar average age to our study sample, with 75 percent having
had post-secondary education, and 68 percent having studied business or accounting, and a median
of 5.5 years’ business experience. They were recruited and trained by the implementing partners
Women Enterprise Fund (WEF) and Kenya Industrial Estates (KIE).
Each mentor was assigned a group of three to six mentees. The mentor program then involved the
mentor meeting in a group with the mentees for 10 sessions, comprising of one session every two
weeks for five months, following a standardized structure (Appendix 5). In addition, the mentor
would meet with the individual mentees once a month over this period to provide individualized
guidance. The mentoring process aimed to reinforce the business training by having the business
owner identify core goals for their business, consider where there are gaps, explore options to fill
these gaps, and then take action towards meeting these goals.



                                                  8 
 
There were 524 firms assigned to training in the mentoring markets. In practice, only the 446
women whose businesses were surviving at the time of the first follow-up were contacted about
mentoring. Out of these, 392 signed up for the program, and 388 attended at least one session.
Conditional on attending, the median went to 77 percent of all sessions. Take-up is thus 388/524
(74 percent) of those assigned, and 388/446 (87 percent) of those in business at the time of the
intervention. The cost of providing the mentoring is estimated at US$553 per woman trained.7
3.4 How might training and mentoring affect treated and spillover firms?
The aim of these programs is to help those participating to grow their businesses. Consider a
standard firm production decision, in which a firm owner with entrepreneurial ability θ, and
production function f(.), chooses inputs of labor L and capital K to maximize profits:
                   , ,                                     s.t.                   (1)
Where p is the market price of their product, w and r are the prevailing market input prices for
labor and capital, and τ reflects how binding credit constraints on capital acquisition are, given
wealth level A.
Business training and mentoring can then potentially increase profit levels through several
channels. Increasing entrepreneurial ability may allow the business owner to produce more with
the same inputs, giving the business more to sell. Better record-keeping and financial accounts
may make it easier for the owner to obtain financing, alleviating credit constraints and again
allowing the business to produce more. If markets are perfectly competitive, then firm owners will
be able to sell all they produce at the market price p, and there will be no spillover impact on other
firms in the market.
However, if firms are competing with one another for customers, then the price p need not remain
constant as firms produce more. Better marketing practices, better customer service, and more
efficient cost control may enable trained firms to compete away customers from other firms in the
market. As a consequence, any gains to treated firms could come at the expense of lower sales and
lower profits for non-treated firms in these markets.
Conversely, one of the hopes of the training providers is the possibility of positive spillovers to
other firms in the market. A first potential channel is that the trained business owners might teach
other in the market the skills learned, or that others in the market may be able to observe and adopt
the new practices irrespective of whether or not they are directly taught. Second, the Get Ahead
                                                            
7
    The estimate is based on the number of women that attended at least one session.

                                                                  9 
 
training emphasizes the role of networks and women working together to seek financing or
purchase products together to obtain bulk discounts, which could result in lower costs and higher
profits for both treated and untreated.
Implicit in this discussion is the assumption that the production function f(.) is itself unchanged.
But business training may encourage firm owners to consider producing new products or offering
new services. This offers another means for treated firms to grow without negatively impacting on
untreated firms – they can expand the market through increasing variety.

    4. Follow-up Surveys and Estimation Approach
4.1 Follow-up Surveys

Four rounds of follow-up surveys were conducted, in order to measure outcomes approximately
one year and three years after training occurred (see timeline Appendix 1). Two types of surveys
were used. A comprehensive long-form survey collecting data on a wide range of business
outcomes was used in rounds 2 and 4. These were supplemented by much shorter surveys in rounds
3 and 5. These short surveys were conducted two or three months after the long surveys, and were
intended to provide a second observation on volatile business outcomes like sales and profits, as
well as an additional opportunity to gather data from individuals who could not be found at the
time of the long survey rounds. Appendix 6 describes how the key outcomes are measured.
Appendix Table 2 details response rates. Overall, we were able to interview 95.0 percent of the
sample in at least one of round 2 or 3, and 92.3 percent in at least one of round 4 or 5. In addition,
in cases where we were unable to interview someone due to refusal, travel, death, or other reasons,
we collected information from other household members or close contacts on whether the
individual in our sample was currently operating a business. This enables us to have data on
survival status for 99.3 percent of the sample at one year, and 97.2 percent at three years. There is
no significant difference in data availability with treatment status at the three-year horizon,
although those assigned to treatment are 1 to 2 percentage points more likely to have data available
at the one year horizon.
In addition to the survey data, we have two other sources of information that aid in assessing
impact. The first are photos of the inventories of the businesses, which were taken at the time of
the baseline survey and in rounds 2 and 4. We had two independent field staff value these
inventories based on the market prices of the different items, and average these values to get a


                                                 10 
 
photo-based measure of the size of the firm. They also visually compared the firms in photos to
determine whether the business looked bigger in relative terms to what it was at baseline. Secondly,
intensive qualitative work for impacts over the first year of the study was carried out by ICRW
(2015).

4.2 Estimation Approach
A pre-analysis plan and the associated trial were registered on the AEA Social Science Registry
on February 21, 2014. The assigned registry number is AEARCTR-0000287.8 This plan pre-
specified the primary and secondary outcomes of the study, the estimation approach, and the causal
chain to be investigated prior to the collection of any follow-up data. Subsequent funding enabled
us to conduct the short follow-up surveys to collect additional data on profits and sales immediately
following the long-form surveys, and to add the mentoring intervention.
Following McKenzie (2012) we pool these short and long-run follow-up data to get average effects
at one and three years, and use an ANCOVA specification where the baseline data are available in
order to maximize power. We then examine outcomes at the individual firm level by estimating
for firm i in market j at time t=2,..,5:

    , ,,                    ,    ∗1                  ,   ∗3                  ,     ∗1                ,       ∗3

       , ,                  ,,        ,,         ∑            1              , ,        (2)


Where            , ,   is the given outcome variable measured in round t ,                    , ,   is its baseline value and

           , ,    a dummy variable indicating whether or not this baseline value is missing,                               ,   is an
indicator for being in a treatment market and being assigned to treatment,	                              ,   is the spillover term,
measuring whether firm i is a control firm in a market assigned to treatment; 1                                       is a dummy
taking the value one in follow-up rounds 2 and 3; 3                                     is a dummy taking the value one in
follow-up rounds 4 and 5; we follow Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) in using                                             as a vector of
randomization strata dummy variables (geographic region*market size*profit range),                                              are
survey round dummies, and                  , ,   is the error term, which we cluster at the market level to account
for the market level random assignment.                           and     provide the intent-to-treat effects at one- and
three-year horizons, which is the effect of being assigned to treatment relative to being a firm in

                                                            
8
  http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/287

                                                                    11 
 
the control markets. Note that the three-year impact represents the impact of having been assigned
to receive business training three years earlier, followed by having a 50 percent chance of being
assigned to receive mentoring approximately 9 months earlier. We test                  =     to determine
whether the impacts differ over time, and       =         =0 to determine whether we can reject that there
is no treatment effect in any period.
One of the main questions of interest in this study is also whether there are spillovers from the
treated individuals to other individuals within the same villages. These spillovers could be positive
(e.g. treated women share knowledge with control women in the same markets) or negative (e.g.
treated women compete away the sales of control women from the same markets).                      and
measure these spillover effects at the one and three year horizons by comparing control firms in
treated markets to control firms in control markets.
We then test whether being assigned to the mentoring treatment had a differential impact from
training alone via the following regression, estimated using only rounds 4 and 5:
    , ,,                 ,                  ,                                ,

                         ,       , ,                ,,          ,,       1       4     , ,   (3)
Where Mentor indicates being in a market assigned to mentorship and being assigned a mentor,
Trainonly indicates being in a market assigned to training only and being assigned training, and
Spillovermentor and SpilloverTrainonly are the spillover groups in the mentor and training only
markets. We estimate this equation only for markets eligible for the mentoring intervention (those
with more than 15 firms in them at baseline). The standard errors are again clustered at the market
level. We then test          in order to determine whether mentoring has a different effect from
training alone.
We focus on the intention-to-treat effects in our main analysis. In Appendix 8 we also report the
local average treatment effects (LATE) of receiving training on our primary outcomes, by
instrumenting training attendance with training assignment in equation (2). None of the control
group attended training, so the LATE is the same as the average treatment effect on the treated.
The LATE impacts are approximately 24 percent higher than the ITTs.


       5. Impacts on Primary and Secondary Outcomes




                                                         12 
 
We begin by examining impacts on our primary and secondary outcomes at the individual level,
then examine impacts on the markets as a whole.
5.1 Impacts on Primary Outcomes at the Individual Level
Our primary outcomes are whether the business training succeeds in helping the firm survive, and
increases firm sales, profits, and size (as measured by the photo value of inventories). We consider
several measures of these variables, as specified in the pre-analysis plan, along with an aggregate
index, which is the average of standardized z-scores of these outcomes and provides an overall
measure of whether the intervention has succeeded in increasing firm performance as well as a
way for controlling for multiple hypothesis testing.
Table 2 provides the results. Panel A shows the one and three year impacts of assignment to
training, while panel B separates the three-year results by whether the firm is in a market also
assigned to mentoring or to training only. Over the one-year horizon the direct impacts are all
positive, but only the impact on daily sales is statistically significant at the 5 percent level, and
there is a 0.05 standard deviation increase in the aggregate index, significant at the 10 percent
level. These estimates are all larger in magnitude by year three, with statistically significant
impacts on survival (3 percentage points), daily sales (171 KSH, or 14.6% of the control mean),
weekly sales (1,038 KSH, or 18.0% of the control mean), weekly sales of the main product the
business sells (454 KSH, or 13.4% of the control mean), and weekly profits (221 KSH, or 15.4%
of the control mean). The overall aggregate index shows a 0.088 standard deviation increase, which
is significant at the 1 percent level. The year three results are statistically different from the year
one results for the key outcomes of survival, weekly sales, and weekly profits, and we can reject
the null hypothesis of no treatment effect in either period.
The impact on our objective and independent measure of business size: the value of inventories as
photographed in the firm is positive (818 KSH, or 9.5% of the control mean), but not statistically
significant. Appendix 9 considers a second measure from the photographs, which comes from
comparing the round 4 business to the baseline business and classifying it as bigger, smaller, or
the same size. We do find treated businesses are 4.2 percentage points more likely to be classified
as bigger, which is significant at the 5 percent level. Appendix 9 also considers two additional sets
of robustness checks. Our main analysis codes profits and sales as zero for firms which have closed
down (since they are not earning profits or sales). Appendix 9 shows that firms assigned to training
have significantly higher weekly profits, weekly sales, and a higher aggregate index even when

                                                  13 
 
we condition on survival. Appendix 9 also shows the results remain significant after using an
alternative definition of firm survival, and when using alternative transforms of profits and sales
such as the inverse hyperbolic sine and logarithmic transformations. Finally, it also addresses the
potential concern that business training affects how profits and sales are reporting by showing no
treatment effect on the number of reporting errors, nor on the difference between the reported
inventories and the size based on valuing photographs of inventories.
Figures 2 and 3 show the quantile treatment effects on profits and sales for the three-year time
horizon. The quantile effects increase with quantile, showing that the impacts were larger at the
top of the distribution than the bottom, but are statistically significant from the 20th percentile
onwards until at least the 80th percentile.
Consider next the evidence for spillover effects. Over a one-year horizon we see negative
spillovers on weekly profits and weekly sales, with this effect significant at the 10 percent level
for sales. However, we also see positive and insignificant spillover estimates for several of our
other profits and sales measures and, as a result, the impact on the aggregate index is small, with
the point estimate being a 0.01 standard deviation reduction, which is not statistically significant.
Over the three-year horizon, none of the outcomes shows a significant spillover impact, and the
aggregate index has a 0.002 standard deviation increase, which is small and not statistically
significant. Likewise, the quantile treatment effects in Figures 2 and 3 show the spillover impacts
to be much smaller than the direct effects, and not statistically significant. As a result, we cannot
reject that there are no spillover effects (either positive or negative) on untreated firms operating
in the same markets as the treated.
This picture of either small or no spillovers in sales and profits is consistent with the qualitative
work, with some respondents saying they saw no change in the market competition as a result of
some women being trained, while others noting a mix of positive (passing on knowledge to other
firms) and negative (treated women providing better customer service to attract customers)
spillovers.
Panel B examines whether the impacts differ for those assigned to mentoring versus training alone.
The impacts are similar in magnitude for most outcomes, with the one exception being survival,
where training alone appears to have a larger impact than training followed by mentoring. When
we consider our overall index, which accounts for multiple testing, we find a 0.098 standard



                                                 14 
 
deviation increase for mentoring and 0.104 standard deviation increase for training alone. These
impacts are very similar in magnitude, and we cannot reject equality (p=0.901).




5.2 Impacts on Secondary Outcomes at the Individual Level
To examine the extent to which these improvements in profits and sales translate into broader
individual wellbeing, our pre-analysis plan specified four domains of secondary outcomes to
examine. The impacts on these outcomes are shown in Table 3.
The first set of secondary outcomes concerns employment, whether in self-employment or wage
work. Column 1 of Table 3 shows that 88.5 percent of the pure control group are engaged in some
form of employment for pay at the time of the three-year follow-up surveys, and the increase in
firm survival also translates into an increase in any employment. Column 2 looks at all income
from work, which combines profits from self-employment with any earnings from wage labor. We
see the higher profits are not being offset by lower wage earnings, as total income from work
increases by 389 KSH per week, or 18.1% of the control mean.
The training emphasized a number of topics and approaches that had the goal of empowering
women in terms of decision-making around finances and business. We measure 10 different
outcomes in this domain (e.g. are they compelled to spend money on their husband or family, do
they need someone’s permission to travel to sell a business asset, do they have money they have
sole control over, etc.). The average individual in the control group is able to do 7 out of 10 of
these decisions, and Column 3 shows that training is not found to have any sizeable or significant
impact on this measure of empowerment at either time horizon. This is consistent with the
qualitative assessment, which noted that training did not appear to change individual or household
decision-making dynamics (ICRW, 2015).
The third domain we examine is subjective well-being and mental health. We measure subjective
well-being today and anticipated subjective standard of living in 5 years’ time on a Cantril ladder,
and mental health using the MHI-5 index of Veit and Ware (scored so that higher scores indicate
better mental health). Respondents show a great deal of optimism about the future, seeing
themselves as being on step 5.0 out of 10 on the life ladder currently, but expecting to be on step
8.0 in five years’ time. Training increases both current and future subjective well-being by 0.2 to

                                                15 
 
0.3 steps. The impact on mental health is positive and also statistically significant in both time
periods. Finally, we examine the impact on ownership of household durable assets. There is a
positive, but marginally significant impact in year one, and positive but insignificant impact in
year three. The only evidence for a significant difference between the mentoring and training alone
groups comes for the any employment outcome, which is consistent with the differential survival
effect. Taken together, these results show the higher profits and sales do appear to have translated
into higher overall well-being for the women given training.
5.3 Market-Level Impacts
Our results show that firms assigned to treatment have grown, with no negative spillover for the
untrained in the same market. This suggests that the overall markets have grown. To formally test
this hypothesis, we aggregate outcomes to the market-level, and estimate the following equation
at the level of the 157 markets:
        ,                                ∗1                                ∗3

            ,             ∑        1            ,         (4)
Where MarketTrained indicates market j was assigned to training, TotalY is the total of outcome
Y (profits, sales, or customers) in market j at time t, and the standard errors are clustered over time
at the market level.
Table 4 shows the results of estimating equation (4). By the third year, overall profits have grown
2,554 KSH per week (9.2% of the control mean, not statistically significant), overall sales in the
market by 15,353 KSH per week (13.7% of the control mean, significant at the 5 percent level),
and the total number of customers in the market per week by 318 (16.7% of the control mean).
These results are consistent with the overall market growing, at least over the longer-term.
In rounds 2 and 4 we also conducted a market census to determine whether there were new entrants
to the market since the time of training, and whether these new entrants along with existing firms
that did not pass our eligibility filters had cut back on profits due to some firms being trained.
Columns 3 through 6 show positive and insignificant impacts on the numbers of new entrants in
these markets, the total number of firms not in our survey, and the weekly profits of these firms.
The success of those trained therefore also does not come from crowding out new entrants.


    6. Why do these impacts arise? Causal Chain and Mechanisms



                                                    16 
 
Our surveys and pre-analysis plan enable us to trace out the causal chain from providing training
through to changes in business outcomes, and to examine the different mechanisms through which
training may or may not have an effect. Since we examine a number of different mechanisms, in
Appendix 10 we provide sharpened q-values that hold constant the false discovery rate when
reporting results for specific outcomes. All outcomes at the three-year horizon that have p-values
below 0.05 also have sharpened q-values below 0.05, whereas only the one year impacts that are
significant at the 1 percent level have sharpened q-values below 0.10.
6.1. Changes in Business Knowledge, Practices, and Use of a Mentor
The first step in the causal chain is for training to lead to changes in the business knowledge and
business practices of the women taking training. Business knowledge was assessed through giving
respondents a description of a business and then asking them seven questions that involve
calculating the revenue, value of stock on hand, variable costs, total expenses, profits, fixed costs,
and break-even point. This proved very difficult for most participants, with the median respondent
only getting 2 out of 7 questions right, and only 0.5 percent getting all the answers correct. This
question was only asked in the first long follow-up survey and was asked of both those with
surviving businesses as well as those whose business had closed down. Column 1 of Table 5 shows
that there is no significant treatment effect or spillover effect on business knowledge. This is
consistent with the financial literacy results of Carpena et al. (2011) who find that financial literacy
training does not improve performance on questions involving numerical calculations.
We measure business practices through a set of 26 questions that measure the marketing, record-
keeping, buying and stock control, and financial planning of the firm. These questions are only
measured in the long follow-up survey rounds and only for firms that survive. These questions
have been shown to correlate strongly with business performance in a range of countries by
McKenzie and Woodruff (2015), and to predict future survival and growth of the firm. The mean
firm in the pure control group is employing 53 percent of these practices.
Column 2 shows that the impact of being invited to training is a statistically significant increase in
the use of business practices at both the 1 and 3 year horizons: treated firms have a 0.05 to 0.07
increase in the proportion of practices used. This is approximately a 10-13 percent increase on the
control mean. There is a marginally significant positive spillover in business practices to untreated
firms in the same marketplaces over 1 year, however the magnitude is very small (0.01), and the
three-year impact is smaller still and not significant. The increase in practices is three times as

                                                  17 
 
large for those assigned to mentoring (0.096), compared to those assigned to training alone (0.033),
suggesting the mentoring did help reinforce business practices.
Finally, column 3 confirms that those assigned to the mentoring treatment are indeed much more
likely to say they have used a mentor. However, we also see a significant impact on using a mentor
from those firms assigned only to training, suggesting that training did lead to a doubling in the
use of a mentor, even without the separate mentorship intervention.


    6.2 Impact on Dealing with Customers
Increased marketing and better presentation of the business may enable the firm to increase sales
through gaining more customers and being better able to retain existing customers. We examine
this in the first three columns of Table 6. The women in our sample serve a median of 60 and mean
of 100 customers per week in the control markets (after top-coding at the 99th percentile to reduce
the influence of outliers). Column 1 shows that those assigned to training are serving an additional
14 customers a week after three years, significant at the 1 percent level. Columns 2 and 3 show
treated firms are more likely to have gained a new customer during the last 3 months, and less
likely to have lost a regular customer during the same time period. There is no significant spillover
impact, which is consistent with the previous evidence that the total number of customers in the
market increased.
Total sales of the business increased, as did the number of customers. Column 4 considers the sales
per customer. The point estimates are positive, suggesting more revenue per customer, but not
statistically significant. If we instead consider outcomes in log form, so that we have the identity:
log                      /                                                   (5)
Then the treatment effects are 17.6 percent on sales (p=0.006), 9.0 percent on sales per customer
(p=0.107) and 8.5 percent on the number of customers, suggesting that the increase in sales volume
is coming approximately evenly from expanding the number of customers as well as from
obtaining more revenue per customer.
Why might business owners be able to get more customers? The qualitative work in part points to
a better customer experience, with shops being cleaner, more likely to open on time, and owners
being nicer to the customers. For example, the qualitative work noted one woman saying “There
are those who didn’t know how to attract customers, but now I can see they have been able to
attract customers…They are talking to them nicely unlike before where they would talk rudely,”

                                                 18 
 
and another noting that now “I try to talk [with] customers in a nice and professional way. I try to
make delicious meals and make my place of work look attractive to them…I make sure [my
cooking] it's up to the customers’ standard, not watery food” (ICRW, 2015). In qualitative
interviews with those who had gone through mentoring, one participant said “I used to not care
much about my business, I could open late, and sometimes the shop would remain closed if I don’t
feel like opening. Now I know that it is important to put effort into my business.”
We incorporated this potential channel into the three-year follow-up survey, asking whether the
business always opened at a set time each day. Column 5 shows only 34 percent of the control
group do this, and training increases this by a significant 6 percentage points. Mentoring appears
to have a greater impact than training alone on having regular opening hours. Appendix 11 shows
that the route to more customers does not appear to be through price competition, with no
significant impact of treatment on the prices charged (or input costs of) the most commonly sold
goods.
A second reason firms were able to attract more customers was by diversifying the range of
products they sold. Banerjee and Duflo (2008) note the preponderance of small businesses in
developing countries all selling similar things to one another, with no reason for customers to seek
them out in terms of either product line or shopping environment. Column 6 shows that firms
assigned to training were 9 to 11 percentage points more likely to have introduced a new product
to their business, significant at the 1 percent level. There was tremendous variety in the new
products introduced, with almost every business that said it had introduced a new product giving
a different answer for what product it had introduced. Examples included avocados, oranges,
carrots, garlic, fertilizer, body oil, cowpeas, belts, hair oil, tea, tobacco and Weetabix. Since most
firms were selling only a handful of products, this diversification could have attracted customers
that would not have otherwise purchased from them.
6.3 Impact on Financial Control, Access to Finance, and Capital Levels
We next examine the extent to which training enables firm owners to produce more or earn higher
profits by managing resources more effectively, and overcoming financial constraints. Several
studies have emphasized the possibility that business training may have its strongest impact on
sales during a bad month by helping participants identify strategies to reduce downward
fluctuations in sales through diversifying the products they offer, as well as being more proactive
about alternative activities during slow months. McKenzie and Woodruff (2014) note however

                                                 19 
 
that the evidence for this has been mixed in existing studies. We examine this channel in columns
1 and 2 of Table 7. We see that although businesses are more likely to regularly use business
records to know if sales of a particular product are increasing or decreasing, this does not translate
into any impact on reducing fluctuations in profits in bad months relative to usual months.
Columns 3, 4, and 5 of Table 7 examine the inventory management and purchasing outcomes of
the firms. We see no significant impacts of treatment on the fraction of stock lost to spoilage, the
receipt of bulk discounts in purchasing, or in the cost of producing the firm’s most profitable item.
The latter is measured with considerable noise, so the insignificant point estimate admits a wide
confidence interval.
Better business practices may enable firms to obtain more financing. This may work through either
the demand or supply side for formal finance. On the demand side, individuals who have gone
through training may have more plans for expansion or feel more confident approaching banks.
On the supply side, banks may be more willing to lend to firms which keep better records, or which
have higher profitability and sales. However, column 6 of Table 7 shows that access to finance is
limited in our sample, with only 17 percent of the pure control group receiving a loan from a bank
or microfinance organization in the past year, and that treatment does not have a significant impact
on this. This is consistent with the qualitative work, which found a number of challenges on both
the demand and supply side for formal finance: women were often afraid of what might happen if
they fell behind on payments, found the loan application process cumbersome and time-
consuming, and also faced challenges in terms of ability to provide documentation and/or collateral
in some cases (ICRW, 2015).
We do find firms to be 5.8 percentage points more likely to be using business bank accounts
(column 7). Columns 8 and 9 then look at whether firms have grown in size according to their
inventory levels and capital stock. By year three both the inventory levels and capital stocks are
higher in the treatment group, which is consistent with them having more to sell, and with building
up the size of the firm. The inventory impact is larger after mentoring than after training alone.
Since firms did not receive more finance, this build-up in inventories and capital is likely to reflect
re-investment of profits. This may also explain why impacts are stronger after three years than one
year, since it takes time for firm owners to slowly reinvest profits into more merchandise to sell.
6.4 Impacts on Owner Hours, Attitudes, and Social Capital



                                                  20 
 
The final set of intermediate outcomes and mechanisms are examined in Table 8. We start by
examining whether women change the amount of time they are devoting to their business. The
qualitative work suggested this might be the case, as evidenced by this quote from one participant
“Then I used to open [my business] any time I wished…I would open much later…but these days
it’s better since I constantly open at nine and close at night at around eight. Those days I just used
to do a little work, I could not stay for long. Whenever I got some money to pay for my merry-go-
round, then I would just close my business for the day. Also, then if I got someone who was buying
five bags of maize, then I could just close business and leave for home, but these days I stay until
I am convinced that it’s time to leave.” (ICRW, 2015). This qualitative finding does not show up
in the one year horizon, but is there over three years for both mentoring and training alone, with
women working 4 hours more per week.
The training was intended to also increase the confidence of women in their ability to perform
business tasks. We measure entrepreneurial self-efficacy through 10 questions that measure the
owner’s confidence in their ability to perform key business activities such as coming up with ideas
for new products, sell a product to a customer they are meeting for the first time, and persuade a
bank to lend them money for their business. The mean control group individual is very confident
in their ability to do 4.5 out of these 10 tasks, and Column 2 shows that we find no significant
effect of training on self-efficacy. We also ask eleven questions intended to measure the types of
attitudes that Get Ahead tries to encourage. These include willingness to take risks to get ahead in
business, planning for the future, feeling confident that one can find solutions to problems that
arise, and keeping your eyes open for ways to improve the business. These are scored on a 5-point
scale, where 5 indicates the most agreement. The mean score across these questions is 3.8 for the
pure control group. Column 3 shows no significant effect of treatment on these.
The training also emphasized and encouraged cooperating with other women in the marketplace.
The remaining columns of Table 8 examine aspects of this. Columns 4, 5, and 6 consider
membership of women’s associations, discussing business with other women in the market, and
working together with other women to obtain bulk discounts or to purchase goods together. We
find no significant treatment effects on any of these measures over the one-year horizon, but do
find treated individuals to be more likely to belong to associations and discuss business with others
over the three-year horizon. Despite the hope of the trainers that treated women would band



                                                 21 
 
together with untreated women to purchase inputs at discounts together, there is no direct effect
nor spillover effect on this outcome.

    7. Cost-Benefit

Our analysis shows that, over a three-year horizon, the training has grown these underdeveloped
markets, increasing the total volume of sales and number of customers. As a result, gains to the
treated firms do not come at the expense of lost customers for the untreated firms in the same
markets. The cost of training was approximately US$200 per person assigned to training, and the
gain in weekly profits was 221 KSH ($2.60). The gain in profits would therefore need to last for
at least 76 weeks, or approximately 1.5 years, for the benefits of the program to exceed the costs.
Although we do not have a long time series to examine these benefits, we do see them being greater
at three years than one year, suggesting this appears plausible.
The additional mentoring treatment cost approximately $553 USD per individual assigned to
mentoring. Since we are unable to reject that the impacts are the same for mentoring as for training
alone for our primary outcomes, the evidence here suggests that adding mentoring does not pass a
cost-benefit test.

    8. Conclusions

We find the Get Ahead business training program does improve the survival, profitability, and
growth of businesses that receive training. These impacts are much clearer over a three-year
horizon than one year after training, and suggest the scope for small businesses run by women to
expand. Moreover, we find that this growth does not appear to come from taking sales away from
competitor businesses, but instead arises from growing the overall market. Many markets in
developing countries are underdeveloped, with poorly managed firms selling a narrow variety of
products. The results of this paper show that training can be one way to develop these markets.




                                                 22 
 
References
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2008) “What is Middle Class about the Middle Classes Around
       the World?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 3-28.
Bauer, Susanne, Gerry Finnegan and Nelien Haspels (2004) Gender and Entrepreneurship
       Together: GET Ahead for Women in Enterprise: Training Package and Resource Kit,
       Bangkok, Berlin and Geneva, International Labour Office.
Berge, Lars, Kjetil Bjorvatn and Bertil Tungodden (2015) “Human and Financial Capital for
       Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field and Lab Experiment”, Management
       Science 61(4): 707-22.
Bloom, Nicolas, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen (2015) “Management as a Technology”,
       Mimeo. Stanford.
Brooks, Wyatt, Kevin Donovan and Terence Johnson (2016) “The Dynamics of Inter-Firm Skill
       Transmission among Kenya Microenterprises”, Mimeo.
Bruhn, Miriam and David McKenzie (2009) “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
       Development Field Experiments”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4):
       200-232.
Bulte, Erwin, Robert Lensink, Rosine van Velzen and Nhung Thi Hong Vu (2016) “Do Gender
       and Business Trainings Affect Business Outcomes? Experimental Evidence from
       Vietnam”, Mimeo.
Calderon, Gabriela, Jesse Cunha, and Giacomo de Giorgi (2013) “Business Literacy and
       Development: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Rural Mexico.”, NBER Working
       Paper
Carpena, Fenella, Shawn Cole, Jeremy Shapiro and Bilal Zia (2011) “Unpacking the Causal Chain
       of Financial Literacy”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 5798.
Chandy, Rajesh, Stephen Anderson-McDonald and Bilal Zia (2016) “Pathways to Profits:
       Identifying Separate Channels of Firm Growth Through Business Training”, World Bank
       Policy Research Working Paper no. 7774.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2014) “Business Training and
       Female Enterprise Start-up, Growth, and Dynamics: Experimental evidence from Sri
       Lanka”, Journal of Development Economics, 106: 199-210.
Diwan, Faizan, Grace Makana, David McKenzie, and Silvia Paruzzolo (2014) “Invitation Choice
       Structure Has No Impact on Attendance in a Female Business Training Program in Kenya”
       PLOS ONE, 9(10): e109873
Giné, Xavier and Ghazala Mansuri (2016) “Money or Management? A Field Experiment on
       Constraints to Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan”, Mimeo. World Bank.
ICRW (2015) ““I am determined, no matter how hard it becomes, I will not give up”: A qualitative
       assessment of the ILO’s GET Ahead Business Training Program”, ICRW 2015.
McKenzie, David (2012) "Beyond Baseline and Follow-up: The Case for More T in Experiments",
       Journal of Development Economics 99(2): 210-221.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff (2015) “Business Practices in Small Firms in
       Developing Countries”, Management Science, forthcoming.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff (2014) “What are we learning from business training
       evaluations around the developing world?”, World Bank Research Observer, 29(1): 48-82.
Rotemberg, Martin (2014) “Equilibrium Effects of Firm Subsidies”, Mimeo.
Valdivia, Martin (2015) “Business training plus for female entrepreneurship? Short and medium
       term experimental evidence from Peru”, Journal of Development Economics 113:33-51.

                                              23 
 
Veit, C.T. and Ware, Jnr, J.E. (1983). “The structure of psychological distress and well-being in
       general populations”, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51, 730-742




                                               24 
 
Figure 1: Randomization Design

                                                         Baseline Sample 

                                                    157 Markets, 3537 Firms 

                                                                                                                                          Market‐level randomization 

 

            Treatment Markets                                                                 Control Markets 

       93 Markets, 2160 Firms                                                           64 Markets, 1377 Firms                                          GET AHEAD 
 
                                                                                                                                                    Business Training 
                                                               Individual‐level randomization 
                                                                                                                                                        Intervention 
Treated Firms        Control Firms 

1172 Firms                      988 Firms 

 

 

 

 

Mentor              Training Only      Training Only                          Control                            Control 
                                                                                                                                                                 Additional 
Markets                   Markets                 Small Markets                         Markets                               Small Markets 

37 Markets            36 Markets        20 Markets                            44 Markets                20 Markets                                               Mentoring 

983 Firms             963 Firms            214 Firms                              1158 Firms                  219 Firms                                         Intervention 

524 treated          521 treated 

459 control           442 controls 

Notes: Graphic shows assignment to treatment. The first intervention of business training assigned firms to the GET 
AHEAD business training program using a two‐stage randomization: first markets were assigned to be treatment or 
control, and then, within markets, firms were randomly selected to be assigned to training. Then in a second stage, 
markets  with  fewer  than  16  firms  at  baseline  (“small  markets”)  were  dropped,  and  half  the  training  treatment 
markets were assigned to also have those assigned to training within the market receive mentoring. Mentoring was 
only offered conditional on the firm surviving.  




                                                                                25 
 
Figure 2: Quantile Treatment Effects on Profits After Three Years


                                         Treatment Effect                                                          Spillover Effect
                      1000




                                                                                               1000
                      500




                                                                                               500
     Weekly Profits




                                                                              Weekly Profits
                      0




                                                                                               0
                      -500




                                                                                               -500




                             5 10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   9095                           5 10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   9095
                                              Percentile                                                               Percentile


Notes: Intent-to-treat effects from quantile regressions controlling for randomization strata and baseline profits, combining round 4 and round 5 survey data.
Straight dashed line shows OLS estimate. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed allowing for clustering at market level.


                                                                                                      26 
 
Figure 3: Quantile Treatment Effects on Sales After Three Years


                                        Treatment Effect                                                         Spillover Effect
                    6000




                                                                                            6000
                    4000




                                                                                            4000
     Weekly Sales




                                                                             Weekly Sales
                    2000




                                                                                            2000
                    0




                                                                                            0
                    -2000




                                                                                            -2000




                            5 10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   9095                          5 10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   9095
                                             Percentile                                                              Percentile


Notes: Intent-to-treat effects from quantile regressions controlling for randomization strata and baseline sales, combining round 4 and round 5 survey data.
Straight dashed line shows OLS estimate. 95 percent confidence intervals displayed allowing for clustering at market level.




                                                                                                       27 
 
Table 1: Individual Characteristics and Verification of Randomization 
                                    Means by Treatment Assignment
                                  Treatment Spillover         Pure        Pure 
                                     Group        Group     Controls     Control    P‐value P‐value P‐value
                                       (1)          (2)        (3)         S.D.    (1) vs (2) (1) vs (3) (2) vs (3)
Age                                   36.0         35.6       35.7         9.05      0.482      0.454      0.690
Years of Education                    8.92         8.91       9.09         2.92      0.910      0.569      0.515
Married                               0.67         0.66       0.67         0.47      0.404      0.638      0.518
Household Size                        4.97         4.85       4.85         2.10      0.188      0.262      0.499
Age of Firm                           6.39         6.57       6.27         6.92      0.574      0.741      0.403
Number of Employees                   0.27         0.27       0.27         0.63      0.747      0.989      0.953
Weekly Profits                        1128         1140       1091         834       0.987      0.395      0.322
Weekly Sales                          5220         5885       5401         8048      0.065      0.266      0.288
Capital Stock                        30571        34092      29370        60530      0.248      0.863      0.101
Ever Received Bank/MFI Loan           0.24         0.25       0.24         0.43      0.891      0.482      0.934
Keeps Records                         0.37         0.34       0.34         0.47      0.235      0.094      0.974
Business Practices Score              0.53         0.53       0.52         0.19      0.934      0.487      0.598
Retail Firm                           0.77         0.76       0.75         0.43      0.446      0.121      0.474
Registered with City Council          0.44         0.45       0.42         0.49      0.328      0.447      0.100

Joint orthogonality test p‐value                                                      0.597      0.435     0.691
Sample Size                          1172        988          1377
Notes:
Tests of treatment versus spillover group control for individual‐level randomization strata and are based on
robust standard errors. Tests of the treatment or spillover group compared to the pure control group control
for market level randomization strata and use standard errors clustered at the market level.




                                                       28 
 
Table 2: Impacts on Primary Outcomes
                                               Firm       Daily       Weekly Main Product Weekly   Main Product             Photo      Aggregate  
                                             Survival     Sales        Sales          Sales      Profits     Profits     Inventories       Index
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                   0.006       161**         284            150          78          52            482         0.049*
                                             (0.010)       (68)        (255)          (297)        (69)        (91)         (343)        (0.026)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years                0.030**      171**      1038***           454*      221**         155            818       0.088***
                                             (0.013)       (85)        (349)          (268)        (88)        (97)         (879)        (0.032)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                      0.002         32         ‐476*           157         ‐65          ‐16           337         ‐0.011
                                             (0.011)       (70)        (270)          (328)        (66)        (93)         (345)        (0.026)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                     0.013          1           27            182         ‐29           5            671          0.002
                                             (0.014)       (85)        (330)          (270)        (79)        (95)         (874)        (0.030)
Mean of Pure Control Group                    0.852       1173          5763           3368       1439        1137          8567           0.005
Sample Size                                   13508       12943        12909          12064      12881       11985          5598           12923
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years              0.056       0.889        0.006          0.380      0.051        0.399         0.679          0.148
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years             0.403       0.726        0.103          0.943      0.650        0.866         0.688          0.647
P‐value: Training effect zero both years      0.068       0.047        0.008          0.239      0.043        0.269         0.344          0.024
Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                         0.011        172        1216**           586       279**         133          1909         0.098**
                                             (0.018)      (115)        (486)          (366)       (116)       (129)        (1339)        (0.041)
Assigned to Training Alone                  0.052***      209*         954**           523      300***        236*            256        0.104**
                                             (0.016)      (110)        (427)          (357)       (114)       (132)         (941)        (0.042)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                  0.024         ‐75         138            391         ‐16          27          1972          ‐0.001
                                             (0.018)      (112)        (451)          (340)        (99)       (120)        (1299)        (0.037)
Spillover Group to Training Alone             0.003        122           ‐3            231          53          69           ‐192          0.034
                                             (0.020)      (105)        (401)          (380)        (97)       (129)        (1095)        (0.037)
Sample Size                                    5822       5625          5606           5535       5591        5530          2655            5608
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone           0.030       0.765        0.605          0.886      0.877        0.522         0.184          0.901
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects, for the baseline value of the outcome, and for survey round fixed effects.
Panel B uses only survey rounds 4 and 5, since mentoring intervention was carried out after round 3.
Aggregate index is the average of standardized z‐scores of the other variables. See data appendix for variable definitions.
                                                                        29 
 
Table 3: Impacts on Secondary Outcomes
                                             Employed   All work Empowerment   Life Ladder Life Ladder Mental          Household  
                                               for pay income            Index          Today     5 Years   Health Durables Index
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                     0.009      177*          0.109        0.254*** 0.253*** 0.265*           0.108*
                                               (0.008)      (96)        (0.110)        (0.050)    (0.064)  (0.151)       (0.058)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years                  0.020*     389***         ‐0.037       0.221*** 0.322*** 0.356**           0.091
                                               (0.011)     (141)        (0.094)        (0.049)    (0.054)  (0.162)       (0.065)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                        0.003       ‐112         0.013         ‐0.011      0.000    0.115         0.048
                                               (0.009)      (93)        (0.113)        (0.056)    (0.068)  (0.143)       (0.059)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                       0.011        24          0.070          0.062      0.029    0.272         0.073
                                               (0.012)     (133)        (0.105)        (0.046)    (0.058)  (0.174)       (0.070)
Mean of Pure Control Group                      0.885      2144          7.034          5.015      7.982   17.707         ‐0.063
Sample Size                                     13508     12881           5873          12609      12608     5873          5823
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years                0.323      0.114         0.289          0.581      0.420    0.659         0.813
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years               0.533      0.283         0.689          0.297      0.740    0.460         0.721
P‐value: Training effect zero both years        0.169      0.019         0.543          0.000      0.000    0.034         0.137
Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                           0.005     488**          ‐0.062       0.283*** 0.417*** 0.477**          0.226*
                                               (0.015)     (187)        (0.133)        (0.063)    (0.057)  (0.206)       (0.121)
Assigned to Training Alone                    0.035** 477***             0.133        0.204*** 0.271***     0.169         0.132
                                               (0.014)     (181)        (0.115)        (0.056)    (0.064)  (0.217)       (0.106)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                    0.017        30          ‐0.019       0.192***     0.093    0.236       0.306***
                                               (0.015)     (180)        (0.142)        (0.052)    (0.067)  (0.232)       (0.117)
Spillover Group to Training Alone               0.005       178         0.293**         0.042      0.064    0.049         ‐0.000
                                               (0.016)     (153)        (0.128)        (0.052)    (0.062)  (0.221)       (0.128)
Sample Size                                      5822      5591           2470           5511       5511     2470          2465
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone             0.062      0.958         0.174          0.270      0.037    0.237         0.450
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects, for the baseline value of the outcome where available,
and for survey fixed effects. Panel B uses round 4 and 5 data only.

                                                                     30 
 
Table 4: Impacts on Market Level
                                        Total Market Total Market Total Market # New Total Other Other Firm
                                           Profits       Sales     Customers Entrants   Firms      Profits
Market Assigned to Training*1 Year           792         2672         131       0.193   1.473       4439
                                           (1378)       (5211)       (104)     (0.509) (1.375)     (2940)
Market Assigned to Training *3 Years        2554       15353**       318**      0.833   1.290       2662
                                           (1568)       (6613)       (124)     (0.785) (1.784)     (3685)

Mean of Control Markets                       27651         110944          1916       8.59       22.48    34870
Sample Size                                     628           628            628        301        301      301
P‐value: 1 Year=3 Years                       0.201          0.021          0.038      0.517      0.933    0.684
Notes:
Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level. Unit of observation is market‐survey round.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Regressions include controls for randomization strata, survey round, and baseline value of outcome where available.




                                                                    31 
 
Table 5: Impact on Business Knowledge, Business Practices, and Use of a Mentor
                                                Business Business   Worked with
                                               Knowledge Practices     Mentor
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                      ‐0.018     0.049***
                                                 (0.089)     (0.008)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years                               0.068*** 0.335***
                                                             (0.009)   (0.037)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                          0.124      0.014*
                                                 (0.091)     (0.008)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                                     0.006     0.018
                                                             (0.009)   (0.020)
Mean of Pure Control Group                        2.000       0.533     0.106
Sample Size                                       3059        5404      2520
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years                              0.067
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years                             0.389
P‐value: Training effect zero both years                      0.000

Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                                         0.096*** 0.666***
                                                               (0.012)      (0.028)
Assigned to Training Alone                                    0.033*** 0.108***
                                                               (0.010)      (0.020)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                                    ‐0.006       0.009
                                                               (0.011)      (0.023)
Spillover Group to Training Alone                                0.004      0.047*
                                                               (0.012)      (0.026)
Sample Size                                                      2236        2212
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone                              0.000       0.000
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects.
Business knowledge only collected in round 2, mentoring only collected in round 4.
Business practices collected in round 2 and 4, with regression controlling for 
survey round and for baseline business practices.
Outcomes are conditional on operating a firm




                                                   32 
 
Table 6: Impact on Dealings with Customers
                                          Weekly Gained new   Lost regular Sales per Open Business   Introduced
                                         Customers Customer Customer Customer          at set time   New Product
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                  1.7       0.023*       ‐0.038**  25.5                    0.116***
                                            (3.8)      (0.013)       (0.017) (30.0)                    (0.022)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years             14.5***     0.034**      ‐0.041***  38.7      0.062***      0.089***
                                            (4.4)      (0.016)       (0.015) (25.9)      (0.024)       (0.021)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                    ‐2.2        0.009        ‐0.020    0.7                      0.007
                                            (3.9)      (0.014)       (0.018) (20.6)                    (0.021)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                   ‐0.7        0.008        ‐0.009    2.2        0.030         0.008
                                            (4.6)      (0.018)       (0.016) (17.1)      (0.023)       (0.021)
Mean of Pure Control Group                   100        0.767         0.804   134         0.342         0.269
Sample Size                                12867        12977         12978  11186        2398          6216
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years           0.004        0.586         0.878  0.734                      0.327
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years          0.753        0.964         0.666  0.951                      0.970
P‐value: Training effect zero both years   0.003        0.049         0.003  0.247                      0.000

Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                         12.1*         0.004     ‐0.048***       50.3  0.103***   0.102***
                                              (6.1)        (0.021)      (0.017)      (38.0)  (0.033)    (0.028)
Assigned to Training Alone                   12.0**       0.054*** ‐0.054***          24.6    0.030    0.084***
                                              (5.2)        (0.020)      (0.017)      (24.6)  (0.031)    (0.028)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                    0.8         0.000       ‐0.035*        ‐5.3   0.026      0.021
                                              (6.4)        (0.022)      (0.020)      (19.1)  (0.030)    (0.026)
Spillover Group to Training Alone              ‐4.3         0.009        ‐0.002        ‐0.0   0.039      0.022
                                              (6.0)        (0.023)      (0.019)      (20.5)  (0.032)    (0.029)
Sample Size                                   5602          5636          5636        4801    2090       2636
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone           0.992         0.020         0.758       0.558   0.071      0.597
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects.
Opening at set time only asked in round 4 survey and is conditional on business operating.




                                                         33 
 
Table 7: Impacts on Financial Control, Access to Finance, and Capital Levels
                                               Ratio of      Monitors Fraction   Received a Production   Received             Has                     Capital
                                           Worse/Current Sales          Stock Lost      bulk         Cost     Loan from     Business Inventory         Stock
                                                Profit        Trends to spoilage discount Change (%) Bank/MFI Bank Account Value                       Value
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                     0.014        0.112***     ‐0.007       0.009        15.536       0.017                    2475            ‐52
                                               (0.009)        (0.023)    (0.014)      (0.023)     (15.561)      (0.017)                  (2125)         (882)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years                   ‐0.007       0.141***     ‐0.014       0.034        13.954       0.013      0.058**      5889**       3219***
                                               (0.011)        (0.022)    (0.021)      (0.023)     (19.084)      (0.019)      (0.022)     (2978)        (1085)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                        ‐0.004         0.025     0.037**       ‐0.028       7.825        0.014                    ‐339           ‐828
                                               (0.009)        (0.024)    (0.017)      (0.025)     (17.121)      (0.018)                  (1966)         (917)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                       ‐0.011         0.000      ‐0.005       0.013        ‐5.558      ‐0.017       ‐0.003       3350           672
                                               (0.012)        (0.023)    (0.024)      (0.024)     (20.019)      (0.021)      (0.023)     (2829)        (1065)
Mean of Pure Control Group                      0.450          0.269       0.194       0.423        160.4        0.172        0.354      19918         13410
Sample Size                                     10609           6214       4989         5879         5541        5404         3005        6183          6203
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years                0.136          0.263       0.766       0.447        0.935        0.850                    0.107         0.002
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years               0.622          0.355       0.102       0.255        0.526        0.139                    0.093         0.174
P‐value: Training effect zero both years        0.252          0.000       0.767       0.308        0.569        0.583                    0.137         0.005
Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                          ‐0.024*       0.194***     ‐0.038       0.029        ‐8.074       0.004        0.048     15371***      3180**
                                               (0.012)        (0.029)    (0.026)      (0.030)     (23.297)      (0.026)      (0.034)     (4523)       (1504)
Assigned to Training Alone                      ‐0.015       0.070***     ‐0.009       0.002       ‐15.671      0.044*     0.099***      4705*        2561*
                                               (0.013)        (0.024)    (0.028)      (0.030)     (25.575)      (0.026)      (0.025)     (2793)       (1330)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                    ‐0.010        ‐0.012       0.002       ‐0.012       ‐3.198      ‐0.023        0.010      9707**         628
                                               (0.014)        (0.031)    (0.032)      (0.030)     (25.752)      (0.027)      (0.035)     (3770)       (1365)
Spillover Group to Training Alone             ‐0.029**        ‐0.014      ‐0.029       0.010       ‐41.846       0.006        0.023       2649         ‐133
                                               (0.014)        (0.032)    (0.034)      (0.032)     (26.112)      (0.028)      (0.025)     (3198)       (1451)
Sample Size                                      4563           2636       2078         2497         2389        2236         2636        2634         2635
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone             0.515          0.000       0.353       0.432        0.791        0.157        0.137       0.021        0.720
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects. Mentoring regressions only for three year follow‐up.
Business bank account not asked in round 2 follow‐up survey.




                                                                             34 
 
Table 8: Attitudes and Associations
                                          Own Labor Entrepreneurial   GET Ahead   Women's # Discuss Works together  
                                              Hours       Self‐Efficacy   Attitudes Association Business with other women
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                   0.059          ‐0.037         ‐0.018       0.003       0.181          0.035
                                             (1.106)        (0.181)        (0.021)     (0.017)     (0.210)         (0.024)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years              4.596***                                   0.057*** 0.584**              0.033
                                             (1.274)                                   (0.018)     (0.277)         (0.026)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                    ‐2.060*          ‐0.180       ‐0.047**       0.026       0.032         ‐0.000
                                             (1.138)        (0.171)        (0.022)     (0.019)     (0.224)         (0.025)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                    ‐0.192                                     ‐0.013       0.066          0.010
                                             (1.356)                                   (0.017)     (0.308)         (0.024)
Mean of Pure Control Group                     42.6           4.457         3.802        0.115       4.672          0.490
Sample Size                                   6215            3059           3059        5400        5398            5403
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years              0.001                                      0.042       0.259          0.959
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years             0.189                                      0.155       0.934          0.731
P‐value: Training effect zero both years      0.001                                      0.005       0.072          0.242
Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                      4.777***                                    0.055** 0.920**              0.027
                                             (1.642)                                   (0.023)     (0.362)         (0.039)
Assigned to Training Alone                  4.300**                                   0.062***       0.303          0.030
                                             (1.677)                                   (0.023)     (0.329)         (0.032)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                 ‐0.429                                     ‐0.029       0.040         ‐0.016
                                             (1.758)                                   (0.020)     (0.417)         (0.032)
Spillover Group to Training Alone             0.101                                      0.002      ‐0.003          0.041
                                             (1.659)                                   (0.025)     (0.390)         (0.031)
Sample Size                                   2635                                       2234        2235            2236
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone           0.814                                      0.795       0.135          0.940
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 
10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects. Mentoring regressions only for three year follow‐up.
Self‐efficacy and Get Ahead attitudes only asked in round 2.




                                                           35 
 
ONLINE APPENDICES

Appendix 1: Timeline

Appendix 2: Additional Details on Listing and Sample Selection

Appendix 3: Model for a GET Ahead 5-day workshop for entrepreneurs

Appendix 4: Sample Means by Assignment to Mentoring

Appendix 5: Mentoring design and implementation

Appendix 6: Measurement of Key Outcomes

Appendix 7: Data Availability

Appendix 8: LATE Impacts for Primary Outcomes

Appendix 9: Robustness Checks on Primary Outcomes

Appendix 10: Sharpened Q-values for Mechanism Impacts
Appendix 11: No Impact on Market Prices or Purchase Costs




                                           36 
 
Appendix 1: Timeline

Listing and Baseline Survey: June-November 2013

Business Training Intervention: June-November 2013

Round 2 Follow-up: June-October 2014 (One-Year Post-Training)

Round 3 Short Follow-up: November 2014-February 2015

Mentoring Intervention: July-November 2015

Round 4 Follow-up: February-July 2016 (Three-Years Post-Training; 6-10 Months Post-
Mentoring)

Round 5 Follow-up: May-October 2016.




                                             37 
 
Appendix 2: Additional Details on Listing and Sample Selection

Altogether 6,296 female-owned businesses in 161 markets were listed. After the census, three
markets in Kakamega county were dropped because the number of women in these markets was
too few. We then applied an eligibility filter to determine which women to include in the baseline
survey. This filter required the women to have reported profits, and not to have reported profits
that exceeded sales; to have a phone number that could be used to invite them for training; to be
55 years or younger in age; to not be running a business that only dealt with phone cards or m-
pesa, or that was a school; that the person responding not be an employee; that the business not
have more than 3 employees; that the business have profits in the past week between 0 and 4,000
KSH; that sales in the past week be less than or equal to 50,000 KSH; and that the individual had
at least one year of schooling. These criteria were chosen to reduce the amount of heterogeneity in
the sample (thereby increasing our ability to detect treatment effects), and to increase the odds of
being able to contact and find individuals again. Applying this eligibility filter reduced the 6,296
individuals to 4,037 individuals (64%). Baseline surveys took place soon after the listing surveys
in each county, between June and November 2013. Out of a target of 4,037 individuals, we were
able to interview 3,537 (87.6%) in time to consider them for inviting to training.




                                                38 
 
Appendix 3: Model for a GET Ahead 5-day workshop for entrepreneurs

    Day 1                 Day 2                  Day 3              Day 4                Day 5
       Opening              The business          Production,       Finance             Management or
       Gender equality       environment:           services and      Manage of self       networking
        promotion: life       she is not alone       technology         and others          Action
        cycle of people      Business ideas        Marketing         Business             Planning
        and enterprises      Marketing                                 support and         Closing
       The business                                                    networking
        woman: she can
        do it




                                                         39 
 
Appendix 4: Sample Means by Assignment to Mentoring or Training Only

Appendix Table 1: Means by Treatment Status for Mentoring Intervention
                                    Assigned    Training    Spillover   Spillover for  Pure
                                     Mentor       Only     for Mentor Training Only Control       P‐value P‐value
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)       (5)      (1) vs (2) (3) vs (4)
Age                                   35.73      36.39        35.38         35.70     35.80        0.262      0.807
Years of Education                    9.08        8.76         9.00          8.89      9.08        0.019      0.321
Married                               0.69        0.65         0.68          0.64      0.68        0.166      0.999
Household Size                        4.96        4.99         4.93          4.83      4.86        0.962      0.841
Age of Firm                           6.36        6.82         6.53          6.73      6.31        0.310      0.491
Number of Employees                   0.27        0.26         0.27          0.27      0.26        0.985      0.422
Weekly Profits                        1124        1115         1132         1155       1085        0.782      0.643
Weekly Sales                          5657        5054         6028         6016       5247        0.596      0.558
Capital Stock                        37859       24222        39042        27324      26733        0.001      0.005
Ever Received Bank/MFI Loan           0.26        0.26         0.23          0.27      0.23        0.652      0.061
Keeps Records                         0.36        0.37         0.33          0.36      0.34        0.967      0.318
Business Practices Score              0.53        0.52         0.53          0.53      0.52        0.153      0.920
Retail Firm                           0.77        0.81         0.76          0.79      0.75        0.223      0.115
Registered with City Council          0.48        0.36         0.49          0.39      0.40        0.001      0.023
Sample Size                            524        521          459           442       1158
Notes: Means and Sample Sizes are shown for Sample in Non‐Small Markets, for which mentoring intervention applied.




                                                         40 
 
Appendix 5: Mentoring Design and Implementation

The mentoring intervention provided personalized, hands-on problem-solving support and peer
learning to women who had previously received the Get Ahead program with the goal of
reinforcing intended business training outcomes – from improved management skills to business
growth.

The intervention targeted 446 women who had been exposed to the business training in 2013 and
expressed interest in further support through mentorship. Two local, public service providers,
Kenya Industrial Estate (KIE) and the Women Enterprise Fund (WEF), were identified as partners
in the delivery of the mentoring services. KIE implemented the mentoring in Kakamega and Kisii,
while WEF did it in Embu and Kitui.

The design of the mentoring intervention combined group and individual sessions for a period of
five months (July to November 2015). Each female-owned firm (or mentee) received 15 mentoring
sessions: 10 through group sessions and five through one-to-one meetings with the mentor. Group
sessions occurred twice a month, every two weeks, while individual sessions took place once a
month. Each mentor was assigned a group of five mentees. The table below summarizes the topics
covered during the 10 group mentoring sessions. Individual sessions deepened discussions on the
above topics based on the needs of the mentee and her business.

The ILO contracted a mentoring expert for program development and curriculum design, which
was subsequently discussed and delivered to mentors from Kenya Industrial Estate and the Women
Enterprise Fund.

       110 mentors were recruited, only 100 were subsequently trained, and 89 selected for the
        program.
       The program reached out to 446 women who had participated in the Get Ahead Program,
        392 signed up, were inducted and received training. However, only 361 women stayed in
        the program throughout the five months.
       Therefore, while originally 89 mentors were linked to 392 mentees, by the end of the
        program the number of mentees per mentor ranged from 3 to 6.
       Drop out reasons included (i) in most cases lack of interest after realizing there were no
        grants involved in the offer, and (ii) in few cases considerations about the mentoring
        program not being helpful in enhancing skills and business growth.

Monitoring and evaluation of the mentoring was done through (i) monthly meetings with mentors
and implementing partners, (ii) monthly reports per mentor, (iii) tracking of journals filled by
mentors after each session, (iv) visits and phone calls with mentors for follow up and support, (v)
two meetings between the ILO and the implementing partners throughout the duration of the
program, and (vi) one closing forum in each county to gather feedback from all parties.



                                                41 
 
Mentoring approach: group sessions

    Session                        Objective/Module                       Outcome                                                                   Time
    Session 1:                      Introduction of mentor mentees        Knowing each other                                                      2 hrs
    Introduction, objectives and    Definition of objectives              Being clear on the mentorship objective and expectations
    agreement                       Understanding the mentoring           Understanding and signing the mentoring agreement
                                      agreement
    Session 2:                     Goals review                           Mentees goals established                                                 2 hrs
    GROW goal                                                              How the mentees will look like when they are successful
                                                                           How will the business look like after growing, as regards to
                                                                               sourcing, production, marketing, packaging, sales, networking,
                                                                               access to finance and general business management
    Session 3:                     Reality analysis                       Current status established                                                2 hrs
    GROW reality                                                           Where is the mentee right now in view of her personal and
                                                                               business goals
                                                                           Business performance established in terms of; sourcing,
                                                                               production, marketing, packaging, sales, networking, access to
                                                                               finance and general business management
    Session 4:                     Identifying key gaps (goals vis-à-     Gaps identified. This will be done by exploring the difference            2 hrs
    GROW gap analysis              vis current status)                    between the goal and the current reality.
    Session 5:                     Exploring options to addressed         A list of options to close each of the gaps identified (in terms of       2 hrs
    GROW exploring options         identified gaps                        capabilities, skills and assets).
    Session 6:                     Financial analysis                      Exploring the feasibility of filling in the gaps                        2 hrs
    Feasibility assessment                                                 What is the cost of implementing the options
                                                                           What will be the source of finance required to close the gaps
    Session 7:                     Plan of action to address identified    Analysing options and agree on way forward                              2 hrs
    GROW way forward /action       gaps                                    Drawing an action plan with clear timelines and budget
    points
    Session 8:                     Evaluating progress                         Exploring what the mentee has done on the agreed Action Points      2 hrs
    Implementing the way forward                                               Identifying successes, challenges, way forward
    Session 9:                     Evaluating progress                         Exploring what the mentee has done on the agreed action points      2 hrs
    Implementing the way forward                                               Identifying successes, challenges, way forward
    Session 10:                    End of program evaluation, review           Documenting the impact of the mentorship, i.e. how has the          2 hrs
    Evaluation, review of action   of action plan and agreement on              mentee and business benefited from the mentoring sessions
    plan and sustainability        sustainability plan                         Reviewing the action plan based on sessions 8 and 9’s outcomes
                                                                               Agreeing on a sustainability plan after the end formal mentorship




                                                                          42 
 
Appendix 6: Measurement of Key Outcomes

All nominal values were converted into real (August 2013) Kenyan shillings using the consumer
price index for the midpoint of each survey round.
Firm Survival is measured as whether the owner still operates a business, regardless of whether or
not they have changed the business line. For individuals who could not be interviewed, survival
was measured by asking family members and neighbors the status of the owner.
Daily sales are sales of the business in the last day, coded as zero if the business was closed that
day, or is closed for good. It is truncated at the 99th percentile.
Weekly sales are total sales of the business in the last week, coded as zero if the business was
closed that week, or is closed for good. It is truncated at the 99th percentile. When aggregated
across all firms in the market, this forms Total market sales.
Main product sales are obtained by multiplying the number of units of the main product sold in
the last week by the unit price, truncated at the 99th percentile and coded as zero if the business is
closed.
Business Profits are measured using the direct question of de Mel et al. (2009)9, asked about the
last week as a reference period since pre-testing found a weekly rather than monthly recall was
easier for business owners to answer: “what was the total income the business earned during last
week after paying all expenses including wages of employees, but not including any income you
paid yourself. That is, what were the profits of your business during last week?” This is coded as
zero if the business is closed, and truncated at the 99th percentile. When aggregated across all firms
in the market, this forms Total market profits.
Main product profits are obtained by multiplying the mark-up on the main product sold by the
number of units sold of this product in the past week, truncated at the 1st and 99th percentiles, and
coded as zero if the business is closed.
Photo inventories are the value of inventories as assessed by valuing a photograph of the business
inventories. A common set of market prices are used to aggregate products. Two independent
enumerators would count the number of each product they see in the photo (e.g. 53 tomatoes) and
then aggregate by the price per product. If the two valuations differed by more than 5,000 KSH,
they would iterate again until they agreed on a valuation.
Aggregate index of profits and sales is the average of standardized z-scores of the primary profits
and sales measures.
Employed for pay is coded as one if they are self-employed or worked for wages in the past week.
Income from work is the sum of weekly profits and income from wage work in the past week.

                                                            
9
  De Mel, Suresh., McKenzie, David., Woodruff, Christopher., (2009). “Measuring microenterprise profits: Must we
        ask how the sausage is made?” Journal of Development Economics 88(1): 19-31.

 

                                                      43 
 
Empowerment index is the sum of the following outcomes: Compelled to spend money on husband
or family (coded 1 if they answer no); not the only person with access to their firms’ money (coded
as 1 if only they have access); has some money which they have sole control over and can spend
how they like; do not need anyone’s permission to visit a friend, to travel to sell a business asset,
to travel to a new location to work, to stay overnight in a different town, to work later than usual
hours, to take out a loan, or to spend money on an investment for their business.
Life Ladder Today and Life Ladder 5 Years are measured by a standard 10-step Cantril ladder,
where individuals are asked to imagine the best (step 10) and worst (step 1) possible lives for
themselves, and then say which step represents their current position and where they will be in 5
years.
Mental health is measured by the MHI-5 index of Veit and Ware (1983), coded so higher scores
denote better mental health.
Household durables index is the first principal component of dummy variables for ownership of
10 household assets (iron and heaters, fridge or freezer, fan, sewing machine, radio or CD player,
TV or DVD player, motorcycle or scooter, car or van, oven, and gas cooker) and of the number of
cows owned and number of goats owned.
Number of new entrants is the number of firms operating in the market outside of our experimental
sample that have opened since the baseline survey and training intervention.
Total other firms is the total number of other firms operating in the market outside of our
experimental sample (new entrants plus those pre-existing firms that were not included due to
being absent from the market at the time of listing, or being dropped by our eligibility filters).
Other firm profits is the total profits in the market of the other firms outside the survey sample.
Weekly customers is the number of customers the firm has in the past week, truncated at the 99th
percentile. This is coded as zero for firms that are closed. When aggregated to the market level,
this forms Total market customers.
Business knowledge is the number correct out of 7 questions intended to measure whether the firm
owner can calculate sales, expenses, and profits.
Business practices is the proportion of 26 practices in marketing, record-keeping, buying and stock
control, and financial planning used by the firm (McKenzie and Woodruff, 2015). This is only
measured for firms that are surviving at the time of the survey.
Worked with a mentor is a dummy variable for whether they have worked with a mentor to try to
improve their business in the past year (only asked in round 4).
Entrepreneurial self-efficacy is the number out of 10 of business activities that the owner rates
themselves as “very confident” in their ability to do (only asked in round 2). This includes
entrepreneurial tasks like “estimate customer demand for a new product,” “persuade a bank to lend
you money” and “identify good employees.”
Get Ahead Attitudes is the sum of scores on 11 questions designed to measure attitudes Get Ahead
training is meant to encourage. These are scored 1 through 5, where 1=strongly disagree, 5 =

                                                 44 
 
strongly agree. Questions will be coded so that higher scores indicate better entrepreneurial
attitudes. Examples include “Even when my business is going well, I keep my eyes open in case I
find a way to improve it,” “I don’t worry about where my business will be in the future – I just
plan week to week based on what comes up” (negatively coded), and “My business provides about
the same as others/is doing about the same as others, so there’s no need to make it better.”
(negatively coded).




                                              45 
 
Appendix 7: Data Availability

Appendix Table 2 shows data availability by treatment status.

Appendix Table 2: Data Availability by Treatment Status
                       Round 2 Round 3 R2 or R3 Round 4 Round 5 R4 or R5
Panel A: Interviewed
Assigned to Training    0.034*** 0.030*** 0.023*** 0.009        0.023*  0.010
                         (0.012) (0.011) (0.008) (0.013) (0.013) (0.011)
Spillover Group           0.014      ‐0.013   ‐0.003    ‐0.026*  0.002 ‐0.009
                         (0.013) (0.014) (0.010) (0.014) (0.015) (0.012)
Pure Control Mean         0.886       0.889    0.943     0.894   0.876  0.923

Panel B: Data on Survival Available
Assigned to Training      0.011*      0.016**    0.002      0.005      0.010      0.003
                          (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.003)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.007)
Spillover Group           0.015**      ‐0.003    0.002      0.000      0.008      0.004
                          (0.006)     (0.008)   (0.004)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.007)
Pure Control Mean          0.968        0.962    0.991      0.947      0.924      0.970

Panel C: Data on Weekly Sales and Profits Available
Assigned to Training    0.027** 0.031*** 0.016**            0.013     0.031**     0.011
                         (0.012) (0.009) (0.006)           (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.010)
Spillover Group           0.015    ‐0.006      ‐0.003      ‐0.007      0.011      0.006
                         (0.013) (0.012) (0.008)           (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.011)
Pure Control Mean         0.907     0.913       0.964       0.903      0.881      0.939

Sample Size                 3537        3537        3537      3537        3537      3537
Notes: Robust Standard Errors in Parentheses, Clustered at the Market Level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Data on weekly sales and profits availability codes data as available if firm is known to
be closed (since then sales and profits are known to be zero).




                                                   46 
 
Appendix 8: LATE Impacts for Primary Outcomes
Appendix Table 3: LATE Impacts on Primary Outcomes
                                  Firm       Daily       Weekly Main Product Weekly   Main Product             Photo     Aggregate  
                                Survival     Sales        Sales          Sales        Profits   Profits     Inventories      Index
Impact of Receiving Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Received Training*1 Year         0.007      202**          355            187            97        65           597         0.061*
                                (0.012)       (85)        (318)         (370)           (86)     (113)         (421)        (0.032)
Received Training* 3 Years 0.038**          212**       1283***          562*         273**       192          1017       0.108***
                                (0.016)      (104)        (428)          (329)         (108)     (119)        (1087)        (0.039)
Spillover Group * 1 Year         0.002         32         ‐476*           157           ‐65        ‐16          336         ‐0.011
                                (0.011)       (70)        (268)          (327)          (66)      (93)         (343)        (0.026)
Spillover Group * 3 Years        0.013          1           25            181           ‐30         5           670          0.002
                                (0.014)       (85)        (328)          (269)          (79)      (94)         (867)        (0.029)
Sample Size                      13508      12943         12909         12064         12881     11985          5598          12923
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects, the baseline value of the outcome, and  survey round fixed effects.
Receipt of training instrumented with assignment to training.




                                                                47 
 
Appendix 9: Robustness Checks on Primary Outcomes

We carry out three robustness checks on our primary outcomes. First, we use the objective visual
photographic evidence as to whether the business looks bigger or not than it was at baseline
(Appendix Table 4). Second, we report results conditional on survival (Appendix Table 5). Third,
we examine transforms of profits and sales which are less susceptible to outliers (Appendix Table
6). Since our initial screening was intended to create relatively homogeneous firms, our pre-
analysis plan specified that our primary analysis would focus on the outcome variables measured
in terms of levels. However, it indicated that as a robustness check, we would also examine the
impact of treatment on the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of total profits in the last month,
and total sales in the last week: log(y+(y2+1)1/2). This is similar to the log transformation, but
allows for zeros and negative values. We also consider the log transformation, which conditions
on survival. The first column of Appendix Table 6 also considers an alternative definition of
survival, in which we assume which firms that were observed closed in round T, and then not
observed in subsequent waves, remain closed. Our results are robust to this alternative.
In the last two columns of Appendix Table 6, we examine whether training leads to more accurate
reporting. Column 6 measures the treatment impact on the number of reporting errors made. We
consider six errors: reporting sales less than profits, daily sales less than weekly sales, worst week
profits greater than current week’s profits, profits and sales for their main product higher than total
profits and sales, and unit costs higher than prices for their most profitable product. We find no
significant treatment effect on the number of errors made, suggesting that training does not affect
reporting accuracy. Column 7 considers the difference (in log terms) between the value of
inventories reported by the firm, and the value assessed by our team based on their photo. If treated
participants were deliberately reporting their businesses to be bigger, we should expect a
systematic bias in this difference with treatment status. However, we cannot reject that the
difference does not vary with treatment status, suggesting reporting accuracy does not change with
treatment. Together with the physical evidence in Appendix Table 4, this suggests the greater size
of the treatment firms is a real, and not just a reporting, effect.




                                                  48 
 
Appendix Table 4: Is the Business Visually Bigger After Three Years?
                                        All firms Survivors All Firms Survivors
Assigned to Training                     0.042**     0.037
                                         (0.021) (0.023)
Spillover Group                           0.019      0.019
                                         (0.022) (0.023)
Assigned to Mentoring                                          0.059** 0.058*
                                                                (0.028) (0.031)
Spillover Group for Mentoring                                    0.022     0.017
                                                                (0.030) (0.032)
Assigned to Training Only                                        0.034     0.022
                                                                (0.028) (0.029)
Spillover Group for Training                                     0.028     0.023
                                                                (0.026) (0.027)
Sample Size                               2864        2571       2527      2265
P‐value: Mentoring=Training Only                                 0.440     0.286
Notes:
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level. 
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
Outcome is whether photograph of business inventories in Round 4 survey is
shows business to be larger than baseline photograph shows. 
Columns 2 and 4 condition on the firm surviving, columns 1 and 3 code closed
firms as not being bigger.




                                                   49 
 
Appendix 5: Impacts on Primary Outcomes Conditional on Survival
                                               Daily       Weekly Main Product Weekly   Main Product              Photo    Aggregate  
                                               Sales        Sales          Sales      Profits       Profits    Inventories    Index
Panel A: Impact of Assignment to Training, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Training*1 Year                   165**          294            126           69          46            604      0.051*
                                                (77)        (287)          (329)        (75)         (102)        (392)      (0.029)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years                    145       967**            380         182*          124           487     0.080**
                                                (94)        (382)          (294)        (98)         (107)       (1017)      (0.035)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                         30         ‐557*           168          ‐79          ‐23           357      ‐0.012
                                                (78)        (290)          (368)        (70)         (105)        (404)      (0.028)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                        ‐24          ‐46           169          ‐61          ‐17           607      ‐0.001
                                                (95)        (354)          (303)        (86)         (108)        (982)      (0.033)
Mean of Pure Control Group                     1386          6818          3993         1702         1348         10694       0.107
Sample Size                                   11339        11305          10460        11277        10381         4775        11319
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years               0.804        0.027         0.509        0.177        0.567         0.902       0.324
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years              0.574        0.138         0.998        0.840        0.964         0.797       0.733
P‐value: Training effect zero both years       0.097        0.034         0.435        0.180        0.494         0.307       0.068
Panel B: Impact of Mentoring Compared to Training Alone, Allowing for Spillovers
Assigned to Mentoring                            171       1289**           628        295**          132         2081      0.107**
                                               (132)        (529)          (395)       (132)         (142)       (1560)      (0.045)
Assigned to Training Alone                       165         792*           360         233*          183          ‐658      0.087*
                                               (118)        (456)          (383)       (119)         (140)       (1093)      (0.044)
Spillover Group to Mentoring                    ‐124          ‐28           355          ‐68           1          2020       ‐0.015
                                               (120)        (467)          (367)       (102)         (133)       (1414)      (0.039)
Spillover Group to Training Alone                139           26           243           62          66           ‐460       0.046
                                               (118)        (438)          (441)       (110)         (150)       (1220)      (0.042)
Sample Size                                    4862          4843          4772         4828         4767         2193         4845
P‐value: Mentoring = Training Alone            0.967        0.354         0.559        0.674        0.761         0.058       0.693
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level 
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects , for the baseline value of the outcome and for
 survey round fixed effects. Panel B uses only survey rounds 4 and 5, since mentoring intervention was carried out
between round 3 and round 4. Aggregate index is the average of standardized z‐scores of the other variables. See data appendix for 
description of the different outcome variables.




                                                                 50 
 
Appendix Table 6: Robustness of Primary Outcome Results
                                                Alternative Inverse Hyperbolic          Log    Log   Number Inventory
                                                Survival       Sales      Profits      Sales  Profits  Errors Reporting
Assigned to Training*1 Year                         0.006      0.124       0.098     0.094**   0.068   ‐0.014       0.060
                                                   (0.010)    (0.116) (0.101) (0.037) (0.047) (0.026)              (0.063)
Assigned to Training* 3 Years                      0.031** 0.569*** 0.428*** 0.172*** 0.138*** 0.006                0.078
                                                   (0.014)    (0.136) (0.119) (0.048) (0.051) (0.030)              (0.063)
Spillover Group * 1 Year                            0.001     ‐0.015      ‐0.008      ‐0.027   0.010    0.004      ‐0.053
                                                   (0.011)    (0.120) (0.103) (0.040) (0.045) (0.029)              (0.066)
Spillover Group * 3 Years                           0.013      0.237       0.182       0.009   0.043   ‐0.014       0.028
                                                   (0.014)    (0.151) (0.130) (0.047) (0.047) (0.029)              (0.074)
Mean of Pure Control Group                          0.835      7.270       6.240       8.265   6.889    0.542       0.849
Sample Size                                         13666      12909      12881       10420   10790    11541        4391
P‐value: Training 1 year=3 years                    0.046      0.001       0.003       0.036   0.112    0.607       0.836
P‐value: Spillover 1 year=3 years                   0.374      0.069       0.110       0.385   0.463    0.638       0.375
P‐value: Training effect zero both years            0.074      0.000       0.001       0.002   0.027    0.847       0.344
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects, the baseline value of the outcome where available,
and for survey round fixed effects. See test for variable definitions




                                                                      51 
 
Appendix 10: Sharpened Q-values for Mechanism Impacts
To control for multiple hypothesis testing when examining multiple mechanisms, we to construct
sharpened q-values following Anderson (2008) and Benjamini et al. (2006). This process uses a
two-stage procedure to control the false discovery rate when reporting results for specific
outcomes.10 Appendix Table 7 reports the original p-values and corresponding sharpened q-values.
We see that all three year outcomes that have p-values below 0.05 also have sharpened q-values
below this level. In contrast, over the one year horizon, only the impacts on business practices,
introducing new products, and monitoring sales trends are significant after this adjustment.

                                                   1 Year              3 Years
Table               Measure                P‐value Sharpened Q P‐value Sharpened Q
Table 5             Business Knowledge       0.839      1.000    0.175       0.096
Table 5             Business Practices       0.000      0.001    0.000       0.001
Table 5             Worked with Mentor                           0.000       0.001
Table 6             Weekly Customers         0.648      1.000    0.001       0.004
Table 6             Gained New Customer      0.082      0.387    0.040       0.039
Table 6             Lost New Customer        0.025      0.127    0.006       0.011
Table 6             Sales per customer       0.396      0.847    0.138       0.087
Table 6             Open set time                                0.010       0.015
Table 6             Introduce new product    0.000      0.001    0.000       0.001
Table 7             Profit ratio             0.131      0.537    0.530       0.249
Table 7             Monitors Sales Trends    0.000      0.001    0.000       0.001
Table 7             Fraction stock spoiled   0.620      1.000    0.521       0.249
Table 7             Received bulk discount   0.700      1.000    0.141       0.087
Table 7             Production cost change   0.320      0.847    0.466       0.249
Table 7             Received loan            0.323      0.847    0.506       0.249
Table 7             Business bank account                        0.010       0.015
Table 7             Inventory value          0.246      0.847    0.050       0.046
Table 7             Capital stock            0.953      1.000    0.003       0.007
Table 8             Own labor                0.957      1.000    0.000       0.001
Table 8             Self‐efficacy            0.838      1.000    0.293       0.152
Table 8             Get Ahead attitudes      0.396      0.847    0.032       0.036
Table 8             Women's Association      0.870      1.000    0.002       0.006
Table 8             Number Discuss Business 0.388       0.847    0.037       0.039
Table 8             Works with others        0.154      0.544    0.195       0.102




                                                            
10
   Anderson, Michael (2008), "Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention: A 
Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects", Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 103(484), 1481‐1495; and Benjamini, Yoav, Abba M. Krieger, and Daniel Yekutieli (2006) “Adaptive 
Linear Step‐Up Procedures That Control the False Discovery Rate.” Biometrika 93 (3): 491–507. 

                                                               52 
 
Appendix 11: No Impact on Market Prices or Input Costs
The businesses in our sample sell a diverse range of products, making overall analysis of price
changes in the market difficult. We therefore focus on the five most commonly sold products,
which are sold by between 20.9 percent (tomatoes, price per single tomato) and 11.9 percent (price
per kilogram of sugar) of firms. Firms were asked if they sell these products, and if so, the price
they charge for a specified unit, and the purchase price they pay for these inputs. Appendix Table
7 estimates the treatment impacts on these prices. We see no significant treatment impacts or
spillover impacts on these prices and unit costs. Moreover, the point estimates for the training
group are positive for four out of five products. These results are consistent with firms not growing
sales by lowering prices of commonly sold products, but instead by improving customer service
and then increasing the variety of other products sold.

Appendix Table 7: Impacts on Key Market Prices and Unit Costs
                                  Maize      Kale    Sugar Tomatoes              Beans
Panel A: Sale Price Charged 
Assigned to Training             ‐0.217     1.852     2.879    4.971             2.380
                                 (0.952) (2.509) (3.671)      (4.766)           (3.283)
Spillover Group                   0.941    ‐1.993     4.196    1.809             2.407
                                 (1.066) (1.941) (3.297)      (4.829)           (3.636)
Mean of Pure Control Group       67.289    14.382    36.661   59.774            93.435
Sample Size                       1042      1436      1171     1120              1170

Panel B: Unit Cost of Item
Assigned to Training                 ‐0.491      ‐0.888     2.664       2.976      1.807
                                    (0.788) (1.116) (3.254)            (4.039)    (2.976)
Spillover Group                       0.476      ‐1.584     3.523       1.255      2.462
                                    (0.911) (1.062) (2.944)            (4.002)    (3.181)
Mean of Pure Control Group           56.179       8.547    30.053      48.368     69.409
Sample Size                           1036        1420      1169        1115       1169
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the market level.
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively.
All regressions control for randomization strata fixed effects.
Maize and Beans are price per 2 kilogram container, Kale (Sukuma) is price per bunch,
Sugar is price per kilogram, and tomatoes is price per single tomato. Prices and Costs
truncated at the 1st and 99th percentiles.




                                                   53 
 
