                                                      WPS7945


Policy Research Working Paper                        7945




                     Get Rich or Die Tryin’
        Perceived Earnings, Perceived Mortality Rate
and the Value of a Statistical Life of Potential Work-Migrants
                          from Nepal

                                Maheshwor Shrestha




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
January 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7945


  Abstract
  Do potential migrants have accurate information about                              lowers this expectation. Potential migrants without prior
  the risks and returns of migrating abroad? And, given the                          foreign migration experience also overestimate their earn-
  information they have, what is their revealed willingness to                       ings potential abroad, and information on earnings lowers
  trade risks for higher earnings? To answer these questions,                        this expectation. Using exogenous variation in expectations
  this paper sets up and analyzes a randomized field experi-                         for the inexperienced potential migrants generated by the
  ment among 3,319 potential work migrants from Nepal to                             experiment, the study estimates migration elasticities of
  Malaysia and the Persian Gulf countries. The experiment                            0.7 in expected earnings and 0.5 in expected mortality.
  provides them with information on wages and mortality                              The experiment allows the calculation of the trade-off the
  incidences in their choice destination, and tracks their                           inexperienced potential migrants make between earnings
  migration decision three months later. The findings show                           and mortality risk, and hence their value of a statistical
  that potential migrants severely overestimate their mortality                      life. The estimates range from US$0.28 million to US$0.54
  rate abroad, and that information on mortality incidences                          million, which is a reasonable range for a poor population.




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted
  at mshrestha1@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
  Get rich or die tryin’: Perceived earnings, perceived mortality
 rate and the value of a statistical life of potential work-migrants
                            from Nepal
                                              Maheshwor Shrestha∗




      JEL codes: F22, J61, J17, D84, O12
      Keywords: Migration, Value of a Statistical Life, Expectations, Nepal



   ∗ The World Bank. Email: mshrestha1@worldbank.org. I am extremely grateful to my PhD advisers Esther Duﬂo,

Abhijit Banerjee, and Benjamin Olken for their advice and guidance throughout this project. I also thank David Autor, Jie
Bai, Eric Edmonds, Ludovica Gazzè, Michael Greenstone, Seema Jayachandran, Frank Schilbach, Tavneet Suri, seminar
participants at MIT and NEUDC, and the development and applied-micro lunches at MIT, and EPIC lunch series at the
University of Chicago for helpful discussions and feedback. Special thanks to Swarnim Wagle, the then member of the
National Planning Commission of Nepal, for his advice and support for the project. Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs and the
Department of Passport were exceptionally supportive in permitting me to conduct the study within their premises and I
am grateful to them. I thank New ERA Pvt Ltd for data collection, and Kalyani Thapa for supervisory assistance during
ﬁeldwork. All errors are my own. The J-PAL Incubator Fund and the George and Obie Shultz Fund provided funding for
this project. This paper was written as part of the dissertation submitted to the Department of Economics at MIT. The
views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reﬂect the views of The World Bank or MIT.
1      Introduction
The number of workers moving across international borders for work is increasing. By 2013, international
migrants accounted for over 12 percent of the total population in the global North, over six times the
share in 1990 (UNDESA, 2015). The 2011 Gallup poll estimates that more than 1 billion people want
to migrate abroad for temporary work (Esipova, Ray, and Publiese, 2011). Anecdotes and media reports
abound on the risks these migrants are undertaking in search of a better life for themselves or their
families. For example, more than 3,770 migrants died in the Mediterranean Sea in 2015 on their way to
Europe (International Organization for Migration, 2015). In 2014, about 445 people died while trying to
cross the US-Mexico border (Carroll, 2015). A high death toll is not the plight only of those who try
to migrate illegally or who are forced to move. The Guardian reports that almost 1,000 workers, all of
whom were legal migrants from Nepal, India and Bangladesh, died in Qatar in 2012 and 2013 (Gibson,
2014).
    The intense desire to migrate despite the risks has led policymakers to be concerned that potential
migrants may have unrealistic expectations about migration. In countries like Nepal, where more than
7 percent of adult, working-age males leave the country for work abroad in a given year, there is great
concern that they make the decision recklessly.1
    Policymakers and academics often have contradictory views on whether the level of observed migration
is higher or lower than optimal. Policymakers believe that most potential migrants are misinformed –
in particular, that they expect to earn more than they actually do upon migration and underestimate
the risks of working abroad. Many policymakers also believe that potential migrants, knowingly or
unknowingly, are trading oﬀ risks at unreasonably low prices to the extent that their experience is often
termed exploitative.2 Put together, these notions suggest that the observed rate of migration is higher
than is optimal and that accurate information would lower the level.
    Academic studies, on the other hand, ﬁnd migration to be proﬁtable and hugely beneﬁcial for the
marginal migrant and his or her family (see Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak, 2014; McKenzie, Stillman,
and Gibson, 2010, for a few examples). These studies suggest that the level of migration is suboptimal
and that increased migration would be welfare improving. If anything, potential migrants’ beliefs about
earnings and risks are pessimistic, which suppresses migration (as brieﬂy suggested in Bryan, Chowdhury,
and Mobarak, 2014). Alternatively, many academic studies assume that individuals are fully informed
and have rational expectations about the conditions at their destinations, and attribute low levels of
migration to high costs, monetary and otherwise (see Kennan and Walker, 2011; Morten and Oliveira,
2014; Morten, 2013; Shenoy, 2015, for example). This literature argues that the costs, most of which are
ﬁxed, keep migration sub-optimally low and give rise to a large spatial disparity in earnings.
    In this paper, I investigate whether misinformation causes suboptimal levels of migration in the context
of the migration of Nepali workers to Malaysia and the Persian Gulf countries. Given the concerns on
the part of policymakers, I focus on how potential migrants’ beliefs on earnings and the mortality rate
abroad, and the tradeoﬀ between these two factors – the value of a statistical life (VSL) – aﬀect migration.
    Using data collected for this study, I ﬁnd that potential migrants are indeed misinformed about
potential earnings and mortality risk, but not always in a way that policymakers expect. Consistent
with the widely held notions described above, inexperienced potential migrants, meaning those who have
never before migrated abroad for work, overestimate their earning potential. Compared to experienced
migrants – those who are better informed as they have migrated abroad for work before – they expect
to earn 26 percent more. I argue that this estimate is a lower bound on the extent of misinformation
as the pool of experienced migrants in my sample is likely to be selected from the higher end of the
actual earnings distribution. This suggests that, even in a context where 15 percent of the households
have a current migrant in one of these destinations, potential migrants can still be misinformed about
    1 An extreme example of the opinion of many policymakers is the following quote from an expert on Nepali migration:
“They go without asking questions. They are not ready to listen. They just want to go. They never even bother to ask how
much they will earn.” (Pattisson, 2013a). Though this statement may be an exaggeration, the view that potential migrants
lack information or are misinformed is widely held.
   2 Migrants working at high-risk jobs for low wages has been dubbed a form of modern-day slavery. Several newspaper

articles and commissioned research reports express this view (see Deen, 2013; The Asia Foundation, 2013, and other news
articles quoted elsewhere in the paper).


                                                           2
their earning potential abroad. However, contrary to popular belief, potential migrants also overestimate
their mortality risk abroad. The median inexperienced potential migrant expects the mortality rate to
be 7 times the actual mortality rate they face, and the median experienced potential migrant expects the
mortality rate to be 4 times the actual average rate. Misinformation at the mean is even larger at 13 and
21 times the actual rate for the experienced and inexperienced potential migrants, respectively.
    This two-sided misinformation implies that migration decisions are being made ineﬃciently, and that
potential migrants would make diﬀerent choices with accurate information. Whether these ineﬃciencies
cause the aggregate migration level to be too high or too low depends upon two things: the elasticity
of migration with respect to expected earnings abroad and the elasticity of migration with respect to
expected mortality rate abroad. These two elasticities will also pin down the VSL, which will elucidate
whether potential work migrants are making a reasonable trade-oﬀ with the information that they have.
    To estimate these elasticities and the VSL, I conducted a randomized controlled trial that provides
information and observes changes in expectations and subsequent migration decisions. Among 3,319 po-
tential migrants who came to Kathmandu to apply for a passport in January 2015, I randomly provided
information on earnings and/or mortality incidences of Nepali workers in their destination of choice. The
earnings information treatments provided information on the average contractual wages reported to the
oﬃcial authority of Nepal by two cohorts of migrants. The mortality incidence information treatments
consisted of death tolls of Nepali migrants from some pre-determined districts in Nepal. To avoid decep-
tion, I gave individuals information from diﬀerent districts with high and low numbers of deaths. Death
information was cross-randomized with wage information.
    The informational interventions changed the earnings and mortality rate expectations of potential
migrants, particularly of those who were likely to be misinformed. To measure the eﬀect of information
on their expectations, I elicited their beliefs on earnings upon migration and on the mortality risk to
be faced while abroad. The information treatment on deaths, particularly the ‘low’ death information,
lowered their expected mortality rate by 20 percent relative to the expectation of those who did not
receive any information (control group). The eﬀect was larger for inexperienced potential migrants, at 30
percent relative to the expectation of the control group. Information on earnings also lowered earnings
expectations for the inexperienced potential migrants: compared to the control group, those who received
earnings information expected to earn 8 percent less. However, for the experienced, providing wage
information had no eﬀect. This is not surprising, as the experienced migrants had better information
about their earning potential abroad.
    Moreover, these changes in expectations led to changes in migration decisions. Three months after the
interventions, inexperienced potential migrants provided with ‘low’ death information were 7 percentage
points more likely to have migrated, and those provided with wage information were 6 percentage points
less likely to have migrated. The eﬀects are about 30 percent of the migration rates observed in the group
that did not receive any information. This ﬁnding has the clear policy implication that a simple and
well-targeted informational intervention can change perceptions as well as the actual migration decisions
of potential migrants.
    Using the experimental setup, I estimate a binary choice model of the migration decisions of inexperi-
enced potential migrants with randomized information assignments as instruments for mortality risks and
earnings from migration.3 Under the assumption that the information treatments did not change unob-
served amenities associated with migration (which I discuss in the main text), the estimated coeﬃcients
imply an earnings elasticity of migration of 0.7 and an elasticity of migration with respect to expected
mortality rate of 0.5. The (negative) ratio of coeﬃcients on mortality rate and earnings gives the implicit
value of a statistical life (VSL) as revealed by their decision to migrate. These coeﬃcients imply a VSL
of $0.28 million to $0.54 million ($0.97m - $1.85m in PPP). These estimates are lower compared to the
estimates for the US (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003), but these diﬀerences can be accounted for by diﬀerences in
earnings. In both cases, the estimates of VSL are 100 to 300 times the median household income.4 This
suggests that, given the level of information that potential migrants have, the tradeoﬀ they are willing
to make does not appear to be unreasonably low. Furthermore, this level of VSL and the estimated
  3 Since the information treatments did not change earnings expectations of experienced potential migrants, this strategy

would not work for this group.
  4 In per-capita terms, the estimate for Nepal would be higher given the larger household sizes.




                                                            3
earnings and mortality elasticities of migration suggest that misinformation along these two dimensions
has indeed lowered migration overall. This result is driven by the fact that misinformation on mortality
rate dwarfs misinformation on earnings, whereas the migration response to changes in these expectations
are roughly the same.
    These ﬁndings raise the question of how such a large level of misinformation on mortality rate can
persist despite high migration ﬂows. To investigate this, I infer the change in the perceived mortality
rate for potential migrants following an actual death of a migrant. I take the migration response to an
actual migrant death from my other work (Shrestha, 2017), and use the estimated earnings elasticity and
the VSL to translate the migration response into an induced change in beliefs on mortality rate. This
exercise suggests that potential migrants update their beliefs on mortality rate by a considerable amount
following death events. Additionally, the response is greater when there have been more migrant deaths
in the recent past. As explored in Shrestha (2017), these patterns are inconsistent with models of rational
learning. Models of learnings fallacy, such as the law of ‘small’ numbers, combined with some heuristic
decision rules may explain the observed high levels of overestimation as well as the sensitivity to recent
information about migrant deaths (see Rabin, 2002; Tversky and Kahneman, 1971, 1973; Kahneman and
Tversky, 1974, for related literature). Therefore, a fallacious belief-formation process, which leads to high
overestimation of mortality rate abroad among potential migrants, has kept migration levels lower than
optimal in this context.
    Apart from providing an important insight into how beliefs can aﬀect migration, this paper makes
a methodological contribution to the literature estimating the VSL from revealed preferences. Thus
far, much of the empirical literature has taken the route of estimating the wage hedonic regression (see
Thaler and Rosen (1976) for a theoretical foundation, and Viscusi and Aldy, 2003 and Cropper, Hammitt,
and Robinson, 2011 for reviews). One key issue with this literature is that in many settings, mortality
risks are correlated with unobserved determinants of wages confounding identiﬁcation (see Ashenfelter,
2006; Ashenfelter and Greenstone, 2004a, for critiques). In this study, the use of randomized treatments
as instruments eﬀectively solves the omitted variables and endogeneity problem. Further, by directly
measuring individual perceptions on earnings and mortality risk, I overcome the bias resulting from
measurement error of the risks or the issue of decision-makers being unaware of the true risks (see Black
and Kniesner, 2003, for eﬀects of biases from measurement errors).5 To the best of my knowledge, this is
the ﬁrst study to estimate the VSL using exogenous variations in perceived risks and rewards generated
from a randomized experiment.6
    This paper also contributes to the relatively scant literature seeking to quantify the extent of mis-
information on earnings in context of international migration. McKenzie, Gibson, and Stillman (2013)
and Seshan and Zubrickas (2015) ﬁnd that those who do not migrate, including family members, have
diﬀerent expectations about earnings abroad. However, contrary to the current study, these studies ﬁnd
that potential migrants and their family members underestimate the potential earnings from migration.
In a context similar to these studies, Beam (2015) ﬁnds that attending a job fair increases expectations of
earnings abroad, but does not induce them to take any actions towards migrating abroad. This study also
adds to the literature on the eﬀectiveness of providing information on improving outcomes for migrants.
Shrestha and Yang (2015) ﬁnd that informing Filipino maids working in Singapore about the legal pro-
cesses for changing jobs improves their working conditions and, for those with worse job characteristics,
facilitates job transition. On the other hand, Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak (2014) ﬁnd that providing
job related information in the context of seasonal migration within Bangladesh has absolutely no eﬀect
on migration or other outcomes. To the best of my knowledge, there are no other rigorous studies that
quantify the extent of misinformation on risks associated with migration.
    This paper builds on and adapts the literature on eliciting probabilistic expectations in developing
    5 Though I elicit subjective perceptions on earnings and wages, it is diﬀerent from the strand of literature that estimates

VSL by eliciting subjective willingness to pay directly. See Cropper, Hammitt, and Robinson (2011) for a review of this
literature.
    6 This paper is closest in approach to Greenstone, Ryan, and Yankovich (2014) and Leòn and Miguel (2017) who use

a discrete-choice framework to study re-enlistment decisions of US soldiers and transportation choices of travelers to the
Sierra Leone airport, respectively. While the institutional settings in their respective contexts drive identiﬁcation in these
studies, the identiﬁcation of this study comes from the randomized assignment of information treatments. See Section 6 for
a detailed discussion.


                                                              4
countries to the current context. Many studies in developing countries have used some variant of the
elicitation methodology developed in Manski (2004) and Dominitz and Manski (1997) and have adapted
it to diverse contexts (see Attanasio, 2009; Delavande, Giné, and McKenzie, 2011, for recent reviews).
Speciﬁcally, this study adapts the approach used in Attanasio and Kaufmann (2009) to elicit the range of
subject beliefs, and the approaches used in Dizon-Ross (2014) and Delavande and Kohler (2009) to elicit
a coarse measure of the entire probability distribution of the subjects’ beliefs. While the latter studies
elicit probability density function (pdf) of beliefs within a pre-determined and wide range of values, I
allow for the range of values to be determined by the range of beliefs of the respondents themselves.
This allows for a more precise estimate of the p.d.f. of their beliefs. As far as I know, in a developing
country context, McKenzie, Gibson, and Stillman (2013) remains the only other study to elicit subjective
expectations of potential earnings from migration abroad, and Delavande and Kohler (2009) is the only
other study to elicit subjective expectations on mortality rate.
    Finally, this paper relates to a growing literature on the eﬀectiveness of targeted information in
ameliorating information failure. Some examples of studies where information interventions have proven
to be quite successful include Jensen (2010), Nguyen (2008), and Dinkelman and Martínez A (2014) on
improving schooling; Dizon-Ross (2014) on parental investment in the schooling of their children; Duﬂo
and Saez (2003) on better planning for retirement; De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruﬀ (2011) on better
access to credit; Dupas (2011a) and Godlonton, Munthali, and Thornton (2015) on safer sexual behaviors;
Madajewicz, Pfaﬀ, Van Geen, Graziano, Hussein, Momotaj, Sylvi, and Ahsan (2007) on choices of safe
drinking water; and Shrestha and Yang (2015) on improving job satisfaction among migrant workers.
This study shows another context where providing credible information can be a powerful policy tool to
enable potential migrants to make informed decisions.7
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the context and the study setting,
Section 3 outlines the intervention design and empirical strategy, Section 4 discusses the eﬀect of the
interventions on perceptions, Section 5 describes the follow-up survey and presents the eﬀect of the
interventions on migration and other outcomes, Section 6 outlines the methodology for VSL estimation
and presents the results, Section 7 uses the VSL and the elasticity estimates to understand the large
extent of misinformation on mortality risks, and Section 8 concludes.


2     Context and study setting
With remittances from abroad comprising almost a third of the national GDP, international migration
for work is tremendously important for Nepal. In this section, I ﬁrst describe the national context of
migration to Malaysia and the Persian Gulf countries. I then describe the context speciﬁc to this study
and compare the study sample with the population of migrants in the country along a few observable
characteristics.

2.1     Context
In recent years, Nepal has been one of the biggest suppliers of low-skill labor to Malaysia and the Persian
Gulf countries. This phenomenon, however, is quite recent. As Appendix Table A.1 shows, historic
migrant-to-population ratio hovered slightly above 3 percent and was driven mostly by migration to
India, with which Nepal maintains an open border. However, between 2001 and 2011, the share of non-
India migrants exploded six-fold with only a small change in the share of India migrants. The rising
Maoist conﬂict in the early 2000s and the economic instability during the conﬂict and in years following
the end of that conﬂict are often cited as key reasons behind this surge. However, in Shrestha (2016),
I ﬁnd that migration ﬂows to non-India destinations are more responsive to shocks in the destination
economies than to incomes at the origin. This suggests that the booming demand for low-skill labor in
Malaysia and the Persian Gulf countries in the 2000s is key in attracting many Nepali workers.
   7 Providing information may not be suﬃcient to change behaviors in other contexts (see Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak,

2014, for instance), especially when other constraints are more binding. In addition, the content of the information, its
manner of presentation, the identity of the information provider, and the identity of the recipient may matter in determining
the eﬀectiveness of providing information (see Dupas, 2011b, for a review of the role of information in the context of health).


                                                              5
    By 2011, one out of every four households had an international work migrant and almost a ﬁfth
(18 percent) had a migrant in destinations outside India. More than a ﬁfth (22 percent) of Nepal’s
male working-age population (15-45) is abroad, mostly for work. This surge has been driven by work-
related migration to these primary destinations: Malaysia, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab
Emirates. This type of migration is typically temporary with each episode lasting 2-3 years.8 In many
of the countries, especially in the Persian Gulf, a work visa is tied to speciﬁc employment with a speciﬁc
employer.9 It is rare that such migrants eventually end up permanently residing in the destination
countries.
    The outﬂow of Nepali workers to these countries has continued to increase in recent years. Appendix
Figure A.1 shows the numbers of work permits granted by the Department of Foreign Employment
(DoFE) for Nepali workers seeking employment abroad.10 In 2013 alone, the share of males acquiring
work permits was about 7 percent of the adult working-age population in the country. As a result,
remittance income as a share of national GDP increased from a mere 2.4 percent in 2001 to about 29
percent in 2013 (The World Bank).
    The process of ﬁnding jobs in these destination countries is heavily intermediated. Potential migrants
typically contact (or are contacted by) independent local agents who link them to recruitment ﬁrms,
popularly known as “manpower companies”, in Kathmandu. These local agents are typically fellow
villagers with good contacts in the manpower companies who recruit people for foreign employment from
their own or neighboring villages. In addition, most local agents also help potential migrants obtain
passports and other related travel documents. The manpower companies receive job vacancies from ﬁrms
(or employment agencies) abroad. They are responsible for screening (if at all) and matching individuals
with job openings, processing contracts, obtaining necessary clearances from the DoFE, obtaining medical
clearances, arranging for travel, visa and other related tasks. Both local agents and the manpower
companies receive a commission, which potential workers pay prior to departure. It is unclear what
fraction of the total costs of intermediation is borne by the employer, the employee, and what portions
of the service charge go to the local agents and the manpower companies.11
    With a large share of the adult male population working mostly in a handful of destination countries,
one might expect that information about the risks and rewards of migration would ﬂow back home.
Information, especially about earnings abroad, would be expected to ﬂow well among potential work
migrants though information about mortality rate, due to its rare occurrence, may be harder to learn.
The potential migrants could even use the social network of current migrants to ﬁnd work abroad (as in
Munshi, 2003).
    However, there is a growing sense among policymakers that potential migrants do not have proper
information about the rewards of migration. Anecdotes abound on how migrants discover the true nature
of their jobs to their frustration and dissatisfaction only upon arrival at their destination. Since the
intermediaries are paid only when people migrate, they have ﬁnancial incentives to distort the information
they provide, drawing potential migrants abroad. Though migrants need contracts from employers to
receive clearances prior to migration, recruitment agents and agencies commonly acknowledge that many
of these contracts are not honored (the potential migrants may or may not be aware of this). Further,
a large share of the potential migrant earnings comes from over-time compensation, which may not be
explicitly mentioned in the contracts that workers receive. Because of these varied and biased sources
of information, and because of somewhat fraudulent paperwork practices, potential migrants are often
misinformed about their potential earnings.
    Similarly, policymakers and journalists alike are of the opinion that potential migrants are submitting
   8 The modal migration duration to the Persian Gulf countries is 2 years and to Malaysia is 3 years.
   9 Naidu, Nyarko, and Wang (2014) study the impact of relaxing such a constraint in Saudi Arabia.
  10 The Government of Nepal has allowed private recruitment of workers to certain countries since the mid 90s upon

clearance from the Ministry of Labor. The Department of Foreign Employment was established in December 2008 to handle
the increased ﬂow of migrant workers to these destinations. The DoFE numbers presented here exclude work migrants to
India and to other developed countries.
  11 Though the Government of Nepal has agreements with some countries that employers, not potential workers, must

pay the cost of migration (including travel costs and intermediation fees), the agreements do not seem to hold in practice.
The amounts potential work migrants expect to pay is, in reality, higher than the cost of travel and reasonable levels of
intermediation fees.



                                                            6
themselves to high risk of mortality by migrating to these countries. In recent years, national and
international media have given considerable attention to the numbers of Nepali workers who die abroad,
and to the exploitative conditions they work under. (see Pattisson, 2013b, and several ensuing articles in
The Guardian, for instance). With a distinctly humanitarian perspective,they portray the system, as a
‘modern-day slavery’. This focus could give potential migrants a misleading impression of mortality rates,
as the stocks of Nepali migrants in these countries are rarely included in these reports. Further, deaths
of men of the same age group in Nepal rarely receive media or policy attention unless they are a result
of some horriﬁc accident. Such biases in reporting could make it much harder for potential migrants to
be accurately informed about the underlying death rates from migration abroad.
    All of this culminates in a belief among policymakers that potential migrants, knowingly or unknow-
ingly, are trading high risks at unreasonably low prices. However, policymakers’ beliefs are, after all,
beliefs – not often fully guided by rigorous evidence. For instance, there is no evidence on potential mi-
grants’ actual beliefs on mortality rate and whether they actually respond to media coverage of deaths.
The higher death tolls could, in fact, simply reﬂect increased migration to those destinations as a result
of increased opportunities abroad.

2.2     Study setting and sample
The baseline survey for this study and the experiment was conducted at the Department of Passport
(DoP) in Kathmandu in January, 2015. Though Nepali citizens can obtain a new passport from the
oﬃce of the Chief District Oﬃcer in their respective district headquarters at a cost of US $50, it takes
almost 3 months to receive a passport. On the other hand, if they apply for their passports at the DoP
in Kathmandu, they can opt for the ‘fast-track’ option and obtain their passport within a week at a cost
of US $100. Many potential migrants, who are often guided by local agents, use this expedited service to
obtain their passports. DoP oﬃcials estimated that during the period of the study, an average of 2,500
individuals applied for passports every day. However, not everyone who has a passport will eventually
migrate.12 In fact, many of the study subjects mentioned that they were not sure whether they would
eventually go for foreign employment and were applying for passports just to have the option of going
abroad.
    For this study, passport applicants who just ﬁnished submitting their applications were approached
and screened for eligibility for the study. Any male applicant who expressed an intention of working in
Malaysia or the Persian Gulf countries was eligible. Enumerators explained the purpose of this study,
and those who consented to be interviewed were taken to a designated section on the premises of DoP
for the full interview.13 At this stage, the passport applicants were told that the purpose of the study
was to ﬁnd out how well informed potential migrants were about work migration abroad, and to see how
information aﬀected their migration decision. They were not told the exact nature of the information
treatment.
    The DoP oﬃce is a busy environment, yet the study was conducted in an area reserved exclusively for
the study, free from outside interference. The DoP restricts non-applicants from entering the premises
of the oﬃce, due to the volume of applicants, so no family members, friends, or local recruitment agents
interfered with the interviews.14
    Between January 4, 2015 and February 3, 2015, we interviewed 3,319 eligible potential migrants.
Though the study was conducted in the DoP in Kathmandu, it appears to be representative of the
population of current migrants in the country (Appendix Table A.2). The average potential migrant in
the study sample is 27.6 years of age and has 7.5 years of schooling, quite similar to the age and schooling
of current migrants in the 2011 census (top panel, columns 1 and 2). It is important to note that the study
sample is predominantly low-skilled. Only 15 percent of the sample had completed more than 10 years of
   12 The estimates of the number of Nepali leaving the country hovers around 1,000 to 2,000 per day, many of whom may

have old passports.
   13 Due to the large volume of people submitting their applications, the enumerators could not systematically keep a record

of how many people they approached in a day. Though the oﬃce accepted applications from 8:00 AM until 4:00 PM, most
eligible applicants chose the morning hours. On most days, the eligible applicants stopped coming in by 2:00 PM.
   14 The DoP made an exception for this study by letting the enumerators inside the premises and allowing them to conduct

the interviews.


                                                             7
schooling, and only 2 percent had any college education. The study sample is predominantly rural and
participants are equally likely to be from the southern plains (Terai) as from the hills and mountains –
again, similar to the distribution of migrants in the census (second panel, columns 1 and 2). Compared
to the migrants in the census, the study sample is slightly more likely to be from the mid-western and
far-western regions. However, this diﬀerence could reﬂect a change in the actual trend as migration has
become more ubiquitous in 2014 than it was in 2011. Similarly, the distribution of migrants looks similar
across Malaysia and the Gulf countries in both the samples (third panel, columns 1 and 2).
    There are three distinct groups of potential migrants in the study sample. There are 1,411 “inexperi-
enced” potential migrants who have not yet migrated abroad for foreign employment. Of the remainder,
1,341 are “experienced” potential migrants, those who have migrated abroad for work abroad, but do not
have an existing employment contract abroad. That is, these individuals have to search for employment
again. The remaining 567 potential migrants are “on leave” from their work abroad. That is, they have
an existing employment contract abroad and do not have to look for work. They are back in Nepal on
a holiday and must renew their passports. For the remainder of the paper, I will use this classiﬁcation
unless explicitly noted otherwise.
    The average inexperienced potential migrant is younger and slightly more educated than the expe-
rienced one, is 6.4 years younger and has 0.7 more years of schooling (Appendix Table A.2, columns 3
and 4). The diﬀerence in schooling is likely to represent the national cohort trend in schooling more
than anything else. The geographic distribution of these two groups is quite similar, except that the
inexperienced are more likely to be from mid-western and far-western regions than are the experienced
ones – again possibly reﬂecting a geographic trend as migration became more ubiquitous over the years.
In terms of destination choices, the inexperienced are more likely to want to go to Malaysia than the
experienced.


3     Survey design and empirical strategy
The ﬁrst part of this section describes the nature of the information provided, along with the experimental
design. I then describe the process by which expectations on earnings and mortality were measured. The
second part of this section discusses balance checks, and the third part presents the empirical speciﬁcation.

3.1    Design of the informational intervention
Each of the eligible male subjects who consented to be interviewed was asked questions on basic de-
mographics, location and previous migration experience. They were also asked to name the destination
country they were most likely to go to. They were given some information relevant to their chosen des-
tination. The information was provided verbally by the enumerators as well as in the form of a card
that the respondents could keep for the duration of the interview. The precise content of the information
depended upon a random number generator built into the data-collection devices.
    There were three types of information that could be provided to the individuals: basic information,
wage information, and death information. When individuals were selected to receive either the wage or
the death information, they could get either the ‘high’ variant of the information or the ‘low’ variant. I
picked two diﬀerent information treatment arms because there was no pre-existing information on the
beliefs of potential migrants. Providing two diﬀerent information treatments would ensure that at least
one of them would serve as new information to the potential migrants. Since deliberate misinformation
was already a concern in this context, I chose not to deceive them. For the wage information, the only
source of information available was the wage reports made by previous cohorts of migrants to the DoFE
in their application to receive the permit for employment abroad. Therefore, two diﬀerent years were
chosen to generate the ‘high’ and the ‘low’ variant of the wage information, and the year the information
was pertinent to was stated clearly when providing the information. For the death information treatment
arms, I provided information on the death toll from a reference district. I varied the reference district to
generate the ‘high’ and ‘low’ variants. Death toll was provided instead of death rates to emulate the kind
of information they would see in reality. Further, providing respondents with numbers prevents them


                                                     8
from repeating the same rates when they were asked about their mortality beliefs later in the survey.
   The following lays out the precise wording and the content of the information treatments:

   1. Basic information: This information was provided to everybody. This contained information on the
      number of people leaving Nepal for work in the subject’s destination of choice. For example:

             Every month, XXXX people from Nepal leave for work in DEST

   2. Wage information: A randomly chosen third of the respondents did not receive any information on
      wages. Another third received the ‘high’ variant with information for 2013, net earnings of $5,700,
      whereas the remainder received the ‘low’ variant with information for 2010, net earnings of $3,000,
      using the exchange rate at the time of the survey. However, simply adjusting the ‘low’ 2010 numbers
      for the observed exchange rate increase of 30 percent and yearly inﬂation rate of 10 percent, would
      bring the estimate quite close to the ‘high’ 2013 numbers. As the year of the statistic was clearly
      mentioned in the information provided to them, many seemed to have accounted for the changes
      themselves. Therefore, the manipulation within the two groups is not too large. In any case, the
      exact wording of the information was:

             In YYYY, migrants to DEST earned NRs. EEEE only in a month

   3. Death information: As with the wage information treatment, a randomly chosen third of the respon-
      dents received no information on deaths, another third received the ‘high’ variant and the remainder
      received the ‘low’ variant. The information provided was the number of deaths of Nepali migrants
      in their chosen destination from some pre-determined district. For the ‘high’ variant, the district
      was chosen from the top 25th percentile of the mortality distribution in the country, whereas for
      the ‘low’ variant, the district was chosen from the bottom 25th percentile.15 If the national migrant
      stock in the destination countries was evenly distributed throughout all the districts, the ‘high’
      death information translated to an annual mortality rate of 1.9 per 1000 migrants and the ‘low’
      death information translated to a mortality rate of 0.5 per 1000 migrants. The exact wording of
      the information was:

             Last year, NN individuals from DIST, one of Nepal’s 75 districts, died in
             DEST

A built-in random number generator determined what wage and death information (if any) would be
provided to each of the respondents. The assignment of wage information treatments was independent
of the assignment of death information treatments. Figure 1 shows two examples of the cards shown
to respondents. On the left is an example of the card shown to a respondent intending to migrate to
Malaysia for work and who is chosen to receive a ‘high’ wage information and a ‘low’ death information.
On the right is an example of the card shown to a respondent intending to migrate to Qatar for work and
who is chosen to receive the ‘high’ death information and no wage information. The full set of information
provided is shown in Appendix Table A.3. Table 1 shows the breakdown of the sample by randomization
group.

3.2     Eliciting beliefs on earnings and mortality rate
After the cards were shown to the respondents, they were asked questions designed to elicit their beliefs on
earnings and mortality upon migration.16 As discussed in the Introduction, the approach and questions
  15 Only 1.4 percent of the candidates that received any death information were from the same district as the reference

district. 6.8 percent were from a neighboring district of the reference district.
  16 During the pilot, I tried a variant of the questionnaire that elicited expectations both before and after the information

intervention. The elicitation of expectations constituted the bulk of the questionnaire, and therefore respondents resorted
to anchoring their answers when the same question was asked after the information intervention. Hence, I decided to elicit
expectation only once in the survey after the information intervention. Consequently, I compare expectations across people
of diﬀerent groups.



                                                              9
derive from the probabilistic expectations elicitation method of Manski (2004) and Dominitz and Manski
(1997) adapted to eliciting subjective probability with visual aids in developing countries. At ﬁrst, the
respondents were asked to mention a range of possible monthly earnings from migration:
      If you worked in this job, what is the min/max earnings that you will make in a month?

When enumerators entered the range in their data-collection devices, the software uniformly divided the
range into ﬁve categories. Enumerators then asked a more detailed question to elicit the entire probability
distribution of their beliefs across the ﬁve categories spanning the range of their expected earnings. The
script for the question to elicit the probability density function was:
      Now I will give you 10 tokens to allocate to the 5 categories in the range that you mentioned. You
      should allocate more tokens to categories that you think are more likely and fewer tokens to categories
      that you think are less likely. That is, if you think that a particular category is extremely unlikely,
      you should put zero tokens. Similarly, if you think that a particular category is certain, you should
      put all the tokens in that category. If you think all of the categories are equally likely, you should put
      equal number of tokens in all of them. There are no right and wrong answers here, so you should place
      tokens according to your expectation about your earnings abroad. Note that each token represents a
      1 in 10 chance of that category being likely.

This process of using tokens is similar to that of using beans by Delavande and Kohler (2009) to elicit
subjective probability distribution on mortality.
   To elicit the range of their beliefs on mortality rates abroad, the following leading question was asked:
      Suppose that 1000 people just like you went to [DEST] for foreign employment for 2 years. Remember
      that these individuals are of the same age, health status, education, work experience and have all
      other characteristics as you do. Suppose all of them work in the same job. Now think about the
      working conditions and various risks they would face during their foreign employment. Many people
      will be ﬁne but some get unlucky and get into accidents, get sick or even die. You may have heard
      about such deaths yourself. Taking all this into account, of the 1000 people that migrate for foreign
      employment, at least (most) how many will die within 2 years upon migrating to [DEST]?

The data-collection devices again automatically divided the range uniformly into ﬁve categories based
on the range of expected mortality.17 Enumerators then asked the subjects to distribute the ten tokens
across the ﬁve categories based on their beliefs, using a script very similar to the one described above.
Enumerators were trained extensively on the scripts and were instructed to be patient with the respon-
dents. They were instructed to repeat the script as well as give additional explanations if the respondents
seemed unclear on what was being asked.
    To minimize any confusion among respondents, a few conﬁrmatory follow-up questions were added to
ensure that the question captured their true beliefs. For instance, if someone answered “50” to the ﬁrst
question, a follow-up question would conﬁrm whether they mean 1 out of 20 individuals would die. If,
in response to the follow-up question, the respondent felt that his initial answer was not in line with his
beliefs, he would reconcile his estimate.

3.3     Balance
Individuals in the initial survey were randomly assigned to various treatment groups based on a random
number generator built into the software of the data-collection devices. Based on the random number,
an appropriate intervention message would appear on the screens, which the enumerators would read
out to the subjects after giving them the corresponding information cards. A few characteristics of the
respondents were collected prior to randomization: their age, years of schooling, prior migration experi-
ence, location and their intended destination. I check for balance by comparing means for each of these
   17 In cases where respondents gave a range less than 5, they were asked to place tokens in the integer values that they

mention. For instance, if they mentioned 1 and 4 as their range, they were asked to place token in categories: 1, 2, 3, and
4.




                                                            10
characteristics between any two arms of each type of intervention. The results show that randomization
balances these characteristics across treatment cells.18
    Since most of my analysis focuses on subgroups of inexperienced and experienced migrants, I also
check for balance within these subgroups. Within each subgroups, the joint test across all outcomes fails
to reject equality across the treatment arms at conventional levels.19

3.4        Empirical speciﬁcation
The randomized nature of the intervention implies that the basic empirical speciﬁcation to estimate the
eﬀect of the programs is quite straightforward. I estimate

                 yi =δ1 DeathLoi + δ2 DeathHii + α1 W ageLoi + α2 W ageHii + Xi β + εi                                (1)

where yi is the outcome for individual i, DeathLoi , DeathHii , W ageLoi and W ageHii are indicators of
whether individual i receives any of these treatments. Xi are a set of controls which includes full set of
interactions between education categories, age categories and location, indicators for the chosen destina-
tion, and enumerator ﬁxed eﬀects. εi represents the error term, and I allow arbitrary correlation across
individuals at the date of initial survey × enumerators level. The standard errors remain quantitatively
similar with alternative clustering speciﬁcations.


4     Does providing information aﬀect perceptions?
Using data from the control group (which does not receive any information on wages or deaths), the
ﬁrst part of this section establishes that potential migrants are indeed misinformed about earnings and
mortality risks of migration. To do so, I only use the data on the subjects that did not receive any
informational intervention. In the second part of this section, I estimate the impact of the informational
treatment on perceptions about mortality and earnings.

4.1        Descriptive evidence on the extent of misinformation
Misinformation in expected earnings
Misinformation about earnings abroad may persist even in cases where a large share of the population is
a migrant. As discussed earlier, local agents and recruitment companies have an incentive to exaggerate
earnings information to induce potential migrants to go. Moreover, previous migrants may also provide
biased information. They may lie about their earnings to their social network if they fear social taxation,
or feel pressure to maintain any social prestige they gain from having migrated abroad (as in McKenzie,
Gibson, and Stillman, 2013, Seshan and Zubrickas, 2015, and Sayad, Macey, and Bourdieu, 2004). This
has fueled concern among policymakers that potential migrants may overestimate their earning potential
abroad.
    However, systematic evidence on the degree of such misinformation is rare. To date, there are no
credible surveys of migrants in the destination countries to determine the actual earnings of Nepali mi-
grants.20 Further, the government does not have a way to track actual earnings abroad. The Department
of Foreign Employment only receives reports of contractual earnings from potential migrants when they
apply for permits to work abroad, and even this data is not publicly available. In this section, I use the
survey data I collected to compare potential migrants’ expectations with a few benchmarks to establish
that potential migrants are misinformed on their earning potential.
  18 The joint tests across all comparisons have a p-value of 0.65 for comparisons within death information treatment arms
and 0.48 for comparisons within wage information treatment arms. Detailed results available on request.
  19 Results available upon request.
  20 The closest to this approach is the Nepal Migration Survey of 2009 conducted by the The World Bank (2011), which

asked household members about the earnings of the foreign migrants. It also asked the returnees the actual earnings they
made during their migration episode. Other than the fact that this data was collected almost six years ago, it also suﬀers
from reporting biases of the household members, and reﬂects the misinformation within the household as highlighted in
Seshan and Zubrickas (2015).


                                                           11
    An inexperienced potential migrant expects to earn more than the experienced ones (those who have
migrated before).21 On average, an inexperienced potential migrant expects to earn $12,300 (net) from
one migration episode, which is 26 percent more than the expectation of those who have migrated before
(Figure 2). This pattern holds for most of the distributions of earnings expectations. Above the 20th
percentile, each quantile of expected earnings of inexperienced potential migrants is higher than the
corresponding quantile for those who have migrated before. For instance, the median inexperienced
potential migrant expects to earn 23 percent more compared to the median migrant with prior migration
experience, and the extent of the discrepancy remains about the same even at the 95th percentile.
    It is quite striking that the inexperienced migrants expect to earn more than those with greater
experience and arguably better training. However, the sample of experienced migrants in this study is
non-random: it only includes those who want to migrate again. If good experience in migration makes
them more likely to migrate again (as in Bryan, Chowdhury, and Mobarak, 2014), then the extent of
misinformation presented here is likely to be a lower-bound estimate of the actual gap in information.
If experienced migrants migrate for lower earnings abroad because their outside option of staying home
is much worse, then the extent of misinformation here is likely to be an upper bound. In the current
context, however, the former channel is more likely to be predominant.22
    The expectations of potential migrants are also much higher compared to the information provided to
them. As Figure 2 shows, only 15 percent of the inexperienced potential migrants and 10 percent of those
who have migrated before expect to earn less than the ‘high’ information provided of $5,700. Virtually
no one expects to make less than the ‘low’ information provided of $3,000. However, the oﬃcial ﬁgures
may not reﬂect the actual earnings of migrants abroad as it does not include over-time pay, which is often
a large share of a migrant worker’s compensation abroad.
    In any case, these comparisons, though not perfect, are suggestive of large information gaps between
the earnings expectations of the inexperienced potential migrants and the actual earnings they are likely
to accrue once abroad. The actual extent of misinformation for inexperienced potential work migrants is
likely to be bigger than 26 percent but smaller than that suggested by the comparison with the oﬃcial
ﬁgure.

Misinformation on expected mortality rate
Contrary to the popular notion, potential migrants seem to overestimate their mortality rate abroad by
a large factor. The average expected two-year mortality rate of inexperienced migrant is 28 per 1000,
which is 68 percent higher than the expectations of those who have migrated before. Figure 3 shows that
not just the mean, but every quantile of expected mortality rate of inexperienced potential migrants is
higher than the corresponding quantile for those who have prior migration experience. For instance, the
median expected mortality rate for the experienced is 10 per thousand, whereas it is 5.8 for those who
have migrated before. However, these expectations are much higher compared to the actual mortality
rate faced by the migrants once abroad. The deaths data from the Foreign Employment Promotion
Board, the authoritative data source for mortality of Nepali workers abroad, and migration data from
the Census and the Department of Foreign Employment show that the two-year mortality rate of Nepali
workers in these destination countries is 1.3 per thousand.23 Only 3 percent of inexperienced potential
migrants and 11 percent of those who have migrated before expect the mortality rate to be lower than
what it actually is. The overestimation at the mean is 21 times the actual ﬁgure for the inexperienced
ones and 13 times for those who have migrated previously. The extent of overestimation is smaller at the
median, but still 8 and 4 times the actual rate for both inexperienced and experienced (those who have
  21 Note the change in deﬁnition of experienced migrants for this part. For this part, experienced also includes those who

are back on vacation and have an existing employment contract abroad.
  22 In the data collected by The World Bank (2011), returnees who earned more are more likely to express a desire to

migrate again in the near future. Those who earned above the median during their foreign-migration experience are 18
percent more likely to express a desire to migrate again.
  23 To put this number in perspective, the mortality rate of average Nepali men with the same age distribution as the

sample is 4.7 per 1000 for a two-year period. The mortality rate of average US men with the same age distribution as the
sample is 2.85 per 1000 for a two-year period. Note that this information on relative risks was not provided to the potential
migrants.



                                                             12
migrated before), respectively.24
    The diﬀerence between the actual and reported mortality rates raises the question of whether the
reports are errors in the reporting of their underlying beliefs or a truthful reporting of their mistaken
beliefs. Reporting of the beliefs could be wrong because, despite measures taken during the interview
process, subjects may not be able to articulate very small probabilities well (though they say the risk is
5 per 1000, it may be the same for them as 5 per 900, for instance). On the other hand, beliefs could be
inaccurate because of biases in information sources as discussed above or because of the way potential
migrants form beliefs. For most of the paper, I treat the reported beliefs as a true reporting of their
(biased) beliefs, and I return to address this issue in Section 7 with evidence which is consistent with
this.

4.2     Impact of information on beliefs
In this section, I discuss the eﬀect of information on the beliefs about earnings and mortality risk. To the
extent that potential migrants (especially the inexperienced ones) overestimate their mortality risks and
earning potential, information, when eﬀective, would lower their perceived mortality risks and earning
potential.25

Eﬀect on perception of mortality risks
As expected, Table 2 shows that the ‘low’ death information lowers potential migrants’ perceived mortality
risk of migration by 4 per thousand which is 20 percent of the control group mean (column 1). The
eﬀect with the controls (column 2) is only slightly larger. Other information treatments do not seem
to alter the perceived mortality rate of migration by a substantive amount. For inexperienced potential
migrants, providing the ‘low’ death information lowers their perceived mortality risk of migration by 7.4
per thousand, which is 27 percent of the control group mean (column 3). Adding controls (column 4)
slightly increases this point estimate. The ‘high’ death information lowers expected mortality rate by 1.8
per thousand (3.9 with control), but the eﬀect is not very precise (columns 3 and 4). These eﬀects are
consistent with the fact that potential migrants, especially the inexperienced, overestimate their expected
mortality rate relative to the truth as well as relative to the information provided to them.26
    Furthermore, the ‘low’ death information treatment also lowers the perceived mortality risk of the
experienced by 2.2 per thousand (3 with controls), which is 13 percent (17 with controls) of the control
group mean (columns 5 and 6). These eﬀects, though large, are estimated imprecisely. The ‘high’
death information treatment has an imprecisely estimated positive eﬀect on expected mortality rate for
this group. This could be because the experienced group has a prior much higher compared to the
inexperienced group.

Eﬀect on perceptions of earnings
As can be expected from the direction of misinformation, Table 3 shows that the information interventions
reduced the expected net earnings for the inexperienced potential migrants.27 The ‘high’ wage information
  24 The ﬁnding that (young) adults overestimate their mortality expectation is not uncommon. Delavande and Kohler

(2009) ﬁnd that males aged under 40 in rural Malawi have median mortality expectations that are over 6 times the true
mortality rate with higher bias for younger cohorts. Similarly, Fischhoﬀ, Parker, de Bruin, Downs, Palmgren, Dawes, and
Manski (2000) ﬁnd that adolescents aged 15-16 in the US overestimate their mortality rate by a factor of 33 even after
excluding the “50 percent” responses.
  25 A simple Bayesian learning model with normally distributed priors and signals can guide the empirical analysis of the

impact of information treatments. A slightly detailed and speciﬁc discussion in light of such a model is available upon
request.
  26 I also ﬁnd that the inexperienced potential migrants update more drastically when the reference district happens to be

their own or a neighboring one, suggesting that potential migrants consider signals from their own or neighboring districts
as more precise. In fact, among those provided ‘low’ death information from a reference district that happens to be their
own or a neighboring district, the average expected mortality rate for those is only 15 per 1000, almost half of the control
group mean. But since there are only 30 individuals in this group, I do not conduct further analysis using this variation.
  27 The net earnings from migration is their expected monthly earnings multiplied by the modal duration of a migration

episode to their chosen destination after subtracting the expected fees of migrating abroad to that destination. All the



                                                            13
reduced the expected net earnings by $1,100, which is 8 percent of the control group mean (column 3).
The ‘low’ wage information reduced expected earnings by $860, only slightly smaller than the eﬀect of
the ‘high’ wage information treatment. As discussed in Section 3.1, the information treatments diﬀered
in terms of the year of the statistic, but were similar after the numbers were adjusted for the inﬂation
and the increase in exchange rate of the destination countries. Therefore, it is not surprising that the
eﬀects of these information treatments are also quite similar. In fact, this suggests that inexperienced
potential migrants are quite sophisticated in the way they treat the wage information treatment.
    Neither of the wage information treatments had any eﬀect on the earnings expectation of the experi-
enced potential migrants (Table 3, columns 5 and 6). The estimated eﬀects are both small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. The lack of eﬀect for the experienced potential migrants is expected as they
have better source of information about their earnings potential.


5     Does information aﬀect migration and other outcomes?
The initial survey in January 2015 collected phone numbers for the respondent, his wife and a family
member (when available). These subjects were contacted again in April 2015 through a telephone sur-
vey. The primary purpose of the telephone survey was to determine the migration status of the initial
respondent. Upon contact and consent, enumerators administered a short survey, collecting information
on migration-related details, job search eﬀorts, and debt and asset positions. The ﬁrst part of this section
describes the follow-up survey protocols and discusses attrition. The second part discusses the eﬀect of
information on migration choices and robustness to various deﬁnitions of migration. The last part of
this section describes the impact of informational interventions on other outcomes measured during the
follow-up survey.

5.1     Follow-up survey and attrition
Follow-up survey and protocol
These April 2015 follow-up telephone surveys were conducted from the data collection ﬁrm’s oﬃce under
close supervision of two supervisors. Enumerators were given speciﬁc SIM cards to be used during
the oﬃce hours for the purposes of the follow-up survey. A protocol was developed to reach out to
as many initial respondents (or their family members) as possible. Enumerators would ﬁrst call the
initial respondent’s phone number followed by the wife’s and the family member’s phone number if the
former could not be contacted. If anyone picked up the phone, enumerators conﬁrmed the identity of the
initial respondent or their family members and made sure that they were talking about the correct initial
respondent. Then enumerators noted the migration status of the initial respondent: if he was available,
they administered the follow-up survey to him; if he had already migrated, they administered it to the
telephone respondent (usually the wife, siblings or parents). In case the initial respondent was known to
be in the country, enumerators made up to three attempts to administer the follow-up survey to him,
before resorting to the telephone respondent.
    If no one could be contacted on any of the phone numbers, then the enumerators would try the set
of phone numbers again at another time or day. Enumerators attempted to call each set of numbers
for six days with at least one attempt every day before giving up on contacting the subjects. If the
telephone respondents were busy at the time of the call, enumerators made an appointment with them
and contacted them at a time of their choosing. This protocol was designed to ensure that the subjects,
or their family members, were contacted whenever possible and the failure to contact them either meant
that the telephone numbers provided were either wrong or that the subjects had already migrated.
eﬀects of the interventions are concentrated in expected monthly earnings with no eﬀect in expected fees (monetary costs)
to migrate. The results are almost identical if the analysis is repeated on the (gross) earnings from migration. I use net
earnings simply for ease of interpretation.




                                                           14
Attrition
Following this protocol, the enumerators were able to conduct detailed follow-up survey with 2,799 initial
respondents (or their family members) between March 26 and April 24, 2015.28 This represents 84 percent
of the overall sample, 85 percent of the inexperienced potential migrants, 86 percent of the experienced
potential migrants, and only 78 percent for those who had an existing contract abroad and were back
only on a leave. Since the main outcome of interest of the study is migration, attrition from the survey
is also potentially an outcome to the extent that I am less likely to obtain information about a migrant.
    I consider three separate measures of attrition. The ﬁrst, Attrition-F, considers whether the full
follow-up survey was conducted or not. The second, Attrition-M, considers whether it was possible to
determine the migration status of the initial respondent. This measure diﬀers from the ﬁrst measure when
enumerators were able to determine the migration status of the individuals but were not able to conduct
the full follow-up interview. The attrition rate, according to this measure, is 13 percent for the overall
sample, 12 percent each for the samples of inexperienced and experienced potential migrants. Among the
13 percent of the subjects with unknown migration status, it is possible to know about the attempted
calls to the numbers provided by them. The phones of many in this group were switched oﬀ or not in
operation, but for a few, the numbers provided were wrong (conﬁrmed either by the telephone operator or
by the person who answered the phone). In very few cases, the respondents refused to identify themselves
or provide any information on the study subjects. Hence, my third measure of attrition (Attrition-W)
indicates conﬁrmed wrong numbers or refusal to interview. According to this measure, the attrition rate
is about 3 percent in the overall sample as well as the subgroups.
    The ﬁrst measure of attrition, Attrition-F, is correlated with the information treatments. As the top
panel of Table 4 shows, this measure of attrition is higher for death information treatments (marginally
signiﬁcant) and lower for wage information treatments (columns 1 and 2). For the inexperienced potential
migrants, the ‘high’ wage information reduces this measure of attrition by 4 percentage points, signiﬁcant
at 10 percent level (columns 3 and 4). For the experienced potential migrants, the ‘low’ death information
increases attrition by 6 percentage points (column 5).
    The second measure of attrition, Attrition-M, is also correlated with information treatments. As the
second panel of Table 4 shows, this measure of attrition matches the correlation pattern observed for
Attrition-F. For the overall sample, death information treatments increase attrition whereas wage infor-
mation treatment reduce it (columns 1 and 2). For the inexperienced potential migrants, in particular,
the ‘high’ wage information treatment lowers this measure of attrition by 4 percentage points (columns 3
and 4). Whereas, for the experienced potential migrants, the ‘low’ death information treatment increases
attrition by 6 percentage points (column 5).
    The third measure of attrition, Attrition-W, is not correlated with any of the information treatments
(bottom panel, Table 4). This measure of attrition is low and, more importantly, not correlated with the
treatment status. Particularly for the inexperienced migrants, even the direction of the eﬀects does not
match the pattern observed for other measures of attrition.
    Furthermore, attriters look broadly similar to non-attriters except for a few characteristics.29 Attrit-
ers, by all three measures, have similar characteristics as non-attriters in except for completed years of
schooling. For both the subgroups, I cannot reject the joint null that attriters and non-attriters have the
same age, geography and locations. However, attriters have lower completed schooling by more than 1
year compared to non-attriters. This also makes some intuitive sense as those who have fewer years of
schooling are likely to have fewer cellphones in the family or could be more likely to misreport phone
numbers. However, as seen in Table 4, correlation patterns between treatments and attrition measures
remain the same despite adding controls, including schooling.
    More importantly, attriters, as classiﬁed by the ﬁrst measures, Attrited-F and Attrited-M, had an-
ticipated earlier migration even during the initial survey in January. In the initial survey, respondents
were asked to assign 10 tokens to ﬁve bins representing their likely time of migration: 0-3 months, 4-6
  28 Follow-up surveys ended after a 7.8 magnitude earthquake struck Kathmandu on April 25, 2015, one day ahead of the

planned end date. In the last working day (April 24), only 26 interviews (0.9 percent of total successful follow-up interviews)
were conducted. When the follow-up interviews were in full swing, about 120 successful follow-up interviews were conducted
in a day.
  29 Results not shown, but available on request.




                                                              15
months, 8-9 months, 10-12 months, and 12+ months. Compared to non-attriters, attriters by those ﬁrst
two measures were more likely to indicate certainty of migrating within three months or a much quicker
expected migration time. However, attriters by the third measure, Attrited-W, did not have diﬀerent
expectations than non-attriters.
    This suggests that attriters by the ﬁrst two measure attrited precisely because they have migrated. To
incorporate, I deﬁne my migration outcome based on diﬀerent assumptions on the attriters. In measures
of migration and other outcome that suﬀer from missing variables problem, I also estimate the Lee (2009)
bounds of eﬀects.
    Since the two wage information treatments seem to have similar eﬀects on the expected mortality
and earnings as well as attrition, I pool the two treatments into a single wage information treatment
group from this point forward. The results remain essentially the same with the more disaggregated
speciﬁcation as well.

5.2       Eﬀect on migration
As discussed above, I have various measures of migration status based on various assumptions that I
make about the attriters. For those whose migration status is observed, I treat them as migrants if they
have already left or are conﬁrmed to leave within two weeks of the follow-up survey.30 For my preferred
measure of migration (Migrated-P), I assume all attriters are migrants except those subjects who provided
wrong phone numbers or refused to provide any information to the enumerators. That is, this measure of
migration treats Attrition-W as missing and considers those with switched oﬀ or unavailable phones as
migrants. With this measure, as shown above, missing data is uncorrelated with information treatment
and hence the estimates of equation 1 are unbiased. Furthermore, those with phones switched oﬀ or
unavailable during the follow-up had expected to migrate earlier and are indeed more likely to be actual
migrants.
    For the inexperienced potential migrants, migration decision is consistent with the change in expecta-
tions about earnings and mortality rate. As Table 5 shows, ‘low’ death information increased migration
by 7 percentage points whereas the wage information treatments lowered migration by 6 percentage points
(top panel, columns 3 and 4). These eﬀects are over 20 percent of the migration rate observed in the
control group. The eﬀects are also what one would expect, given the change in expectations that the
treatments induced. The ‘low’ death information lowered the expected mortality rate abroad, making the
destinations more appealing and inducing more them to migrate. On the other hand, the wage informa-
tion treatments lowered the expected earnings abroad, making destinations less attractive and inducing
fewer of them to migrate.
    The eﬀect on expectations also resonate on migration decision of the experienced potential migrants.
As Table 5 shows, the ‘low’ death information, which lowered expected mortality rates abroad increased
migration by 9 percentage points (top panel, columns 5 and 6). On the other hand, the wage information
treatments, which failed to induce a change in expectations, also failed to induce a migration response.
    The eﬀect of information treatments remain qualitatively and quantitatively similar for the second
measure of migration (Migrated-A). This measure of migration treats all attriters as having migrated.
As the second panel of Table 5 shows, the eﬀect of information treatments on this measure of migration
is quite similar to the eﬀect on the preferred measure (Migrated-P).
    Because of the missing variables problem, the eﬀect of the information treatments on the basic measure
of migration (Migrated-B) is biased. This measure treats all those individuals with unconﬁrmed migration
status (Attrited-M) as missing. For the inexperienced potential migrants, ‘low’ death information is not
correlated with Attrited-M, and hence, as Table 5 shows, the eﬀect on this measure of migration is almost
the same as for the previous two measures of migration (bottom panel, columns 3 and 4). However, the
eﬀect of wage information treatment is two-thirds the size of the eﬀect for other measure of migration.
This is precisely what one would expect if wage interventions led the potential migrants to not migrate
and therefore more likely to be found during the follow-up survey.
    The third panel of Table 5 shows the results for this measure of migration (Migrated-B). For the
 30 The   results are essentially the same if the conﬁrmed departure time is changed to 1 week or 0 week instead of 2.



                                                             16
inexperienced potential migrants, ‘low’ death information treatment increased migration by 7 percentage
points. This eﬀect, signiﬁcant at 5 percent level, is almost 30 percent of the migration rate in the control
group. For this group, death ‘high’ information also increases migration slightly (9 percent) but the
eﬀect is insigniﬁcant. Note that since missing data (Attrition-M) is not correlated with death interven-
tions, these points estimates similar to the preferred measure of migration. However, since missing data
(Attrition-M) is correlated with wage information treatments, the point estimate for wage information
treatments is lower and not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at conventional levels. This is precisely what
one would expect if wage interventions led the inexperienced potential migrants to not migrate and there-
fore more likely to be found during the follow-up survey. Similarly, for the experienced migrants, ‘low’
death information, which increased attrition, has a smaller eﬀect than for other measures. Again, this is
what one would expect if ‘low’ death information led the experienced potential migrants to migrate more
and therefore less likely to be found during the follow-up survey.
    Lee (2009) bounds on eﬀect of the information treatments on the basic measure of migration (Migrated-
B), also supports that attrition (Attrited-M) captures unobserved migration. As Table 6 shows, the
bounds on the eﬀects of the death information treatments for inexperienced potential migrants are tight
and similar in magnitude as the eﬀect on the preferred measure of migration (second panel, columns
1 and 2). However, the lower bound on the eﬀect of wage information on migration is similar to the
eﬀect on the preferred measure (Migrated-P) whereas the upper bound on the eﬀect is similar to the
eﬀect on the basic measure (Migrated-B). That is, selectively dropping a random subset of those who
migrated and are from the wage information treatment group, in order to balance attrition, produces
an estimate not too diﬀerent from the eﬀect on the basic measure (Migrated-B). However, selectively
dropping a random subset of those who did not migrate and are from the wage information treatment
group to balance attrition produces an estimate diﬀerent from the eﬀect on the basic measure and very
similar to the eﬀect on the preferred measure (Migrated-P). This also suggests that attrition is likely to
be more among migrants than non-migrants.

5.3        Eﬀect on other outcomes
I also investigate the eﬀect of the information treatments in other outcomes that were collected using
the full follow-up survey.31 I ﬁnd that the information treatments did not aﬀect whether the potential
migrants choose the same country or region (Persian Gulf versus others) as they did during the initial
survey. Furthermore, none of the information treatments changed whether households, particularly those
of inexperienced migrants took out new loans, paid back old loans, or bought new assets (bottom panel).
    However, I ﬁnd that wage information increases the chance that inexperienced potential migrants
seek new manpower companies. The inexperienced migrants receiving wage information are 6 percentage
points more likely to consult diﬀerent manpower companies after the initial survey. This eﬀect is 26
percent of the likelihood in the control group. This probably reﬂects an action that inexperienced potential
migrants can take upon realizing that they had been misinformed. However, none of the information
treatments aﬀect whether they consult with family members or friends. Similarly, none of the information
treatments aﬀects any of these outcomes for the experienced potential migrants.


6     Estimates of VSL
Since the information treatments are eﬀective in changing the expectations of inexperienced potential
migrants concerning both earnings and mortality rate associated with migration, I estimate the value
of a statistical life (VSL) for this group by using the information treatments as instruments. The ﬁrst
part of this section describes the methodology and the contribution of this paper in estimating VSL, the
second presents the estimates for the pool of inexperienced potential migrants, and the third explores
robustness. The ﬁnal part estimates the VSL for various subgroups.
 31 Full   result on these available on request.




                                                    17
6.1     Methodology and contribution
Schelling (1968) shaped the way economists think about VSL as the willingness to trade-oﬀ wealth W
for a marginal change in the probability of death d holding everything else constant. That is,
                                                                   dW
                                                         V SL =
                                                                    dd
holding everything else, including utility, constant.
   The empirical approach to estimating VSL in this context can be motivated by a simple binary choice
framework. The utility that a potential migrant i receives from migrating can be written as

                                                 UiM = α + βdi + γWi + εi

where Wi is the expected earnings from migration, di is the expected mortality risk from migration, and
εi represents the unobserved individual speciﬁc factors that inﬂuence the utility from migration. The
utility that the potential migrant i receives from not migrating is unobserved and can simply be written
as UiH = α + ui . Then the migration decision Mi of potential migrant i is given by

                                       Mi =1 UiM > UiH
                                              =1 (ui − εi < α − α + βdi + γWi )

with
                                   Ei [Mi ] = P r (ui − εi < α − α + βdi + γWi )
By making assumptions on the distribution of i ≡ ui − εi , β   ˆ and γˆ could be consistently estimated
if di and Wi are not correlated with i . But because of omitted variables (such as inherent ability or
carefulness), Wi and pi are likely to be correlated with i (which includes, among other things, earning
option and mortality risks of not migrating). To solve this problem, I use the exogenous variation in
di and Wi generated by the informational interventions as instruments for di and Wi for the pool of
inexperienced migrants.
    Hence, I estimate the following system of equations

                            E i [ Mi ] = P r (   i   < α − α + βdi + γWi )
                               di =µ1 DeathLoi + µ2 DeathHii + µ3 W ageInf oi + ηi                                     (2)
                              Wi =δ1 DeathLoi + δ2 DeathHii + δ3 W ageInf oi + νi

where DeathLoi , DeathHii and W ageInf oi indicate whether potential migrant i receives the ‘low’ death
information or the ‘high’ death information or any of the wage information.
    To make progress in estimation, I assume that ( i , ηi , νi ) are individually and jointly normally dis-
tributed. Randomization guarantees that (ηi , νi ) is independent of the informational treatments. Fur-
thermore, with the assumption that the treatments did not change unobserved amenities associated with
migration, the information treatment is also uncorrelated with .32 Given the random assignment of
treatment and the assumption on error terms, maximum likelihood estimation of equation (2) yields the
most eﬃcient estimator of β and γ up to scale. Given this setup, VSL is simply the ratio of two estimates
                                                                   ∂E [M ]
                                                        dW       ∂d        β
                                              V SL =        = − ∂E [M ]
                                                                        =−
                                                         dd                γ
                                                                    ∂W

                                          ˆ
and can be estimated by V SL = − β  ˆ.
                                    γ
    I estimate this equation using both the levels and logarithm of expectations to allow η and ν to be
log-normally distributed. I also estimate the model with 2SLS assuming linear probability model and
  32 One way to check this assumption is to see whether the information treatments changed their occupation choices, and it

does not. Furthermore, for the inexperienced potential migrants the wage information treatments do not change mortality
rate expectations and the death information treatments do not change earnings expectations (columns 3 and 4 of Table 2
and Table 3). These results suggest that the exclusion assumption is likely to hold in this context.


                                                              18
ﬁnd that the point estimates for the VSL are similar. The advantage of estimating equation (2) over
estimating 2SLS is that it gives the ratio of coeﬃcients an utility constant interpretation as the deﬁnition
of the VSL implies. The results with 2SLS estimates are presented in the appendix.
    This method of estimating VSL by observing choices of individuals is quite novel in the rich literature
on the subject. Most estimates follow the wage hedonic approach following seminal work by Thaler
and Rosen (1976) (see Viscusi and Aldy, 2003; Cropper, Hammitt, and Robinson, 2011, for review of
empirical estimates). Thaler and Rosen (1976) show that the slope of the observed market locus in the
wage-mortality risk plane gives the willingness to pay of the workers to avoid marginal increments in
mortality risks (i.e. the VSL). But getting consistent estimate of the market locus (or its slope) has been
diﬃcult because of two key problems.
    First, in most estimations using the wage hedonic approach, mortality risk is correlated with unob-
served determinants of wages (see Ashenfelter, 2006, for a critique). This introduces a selection bias in
the estimates with an unknown direction and magnitude of the bias. The current study overcomes this
problem by using exogenous variation in (expected) earnings and (expected) mortality risks generated
by randomly provided information.33
    The second issue with the wage hedonic approach is that mortality risks are measured with errors
and may be known imperfectly to agents. Black and Kniesner (2003) emphasize that the measurement
errors are non-classical in nature and leads to large biases in either direction.34 In this study, I directly
measure expectations on earnings and mortality risks without the need to worry about whether they (as
well as the econometrician) know the actual mortality rate and the earnings involved.35 Rather than
the actual risks involved with the occupation, it is the perceived risks that is actually relevant in the
decision-making process.
    The second, and somewhat new, approach to estimating VSL is by modeling the choices made by
individuals or populations. In this vein, Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004b) model the decision of states
to adopt a higher speed limit to compute VSL. In their setting, states choose to adopt a higher speed limit
if the monetary value of time saved per marginal fatality is higher than the VSL. The authors estimate the
monetary value of time saved per marginal fatality by instrumenting fatalities with a plausibly exogenous
increase in speed limits in rural interstate roads in the US from 55 mph to 65 mph in 1987. Though this
gives them a well identiﬁed upper bound estimate of the VSL, their estimates of actual VSL suﬀer from
lack of exogenous variation in modeling the decision of the states to adopt the speed limit. Furthermore,
this VSL is the tradeoﬀ by the state (or the median voter if the preference of the states represent the
policy choices of the median voter) and could be diﬀerent from the tradeoﬀ made by individuals.
    In a more reﬁned modeling of individual choices, Greenstone, Ryan, and Yankovich (2014) study
the reenlistment decision (and occupation choices within the military) of US soldiers when faced with
varying monetary incentives and mortality risks. In a methodology similar to this paper, the authors
infer the VSL of US soldiers by looking at the ratio of coeﬃcients on mortality risk and monetary
incentives of a discrete choice model of occupation choice. The identifying variation in their study comes
from the institutional process that determines compensation for reenlistment and variety of occupations
undergoing diﬀerent mortality risks as the US engages in various military actions. Another study that
employs the discrete choice framework to estimate the VSL is Leòn and Miguel (2017), which examines
the transportation choices made by travelers to the international airport in Sierra Leone. The identifying
variation in this study comes from the availability of diﬀerent options at diﬀerent periods over which the
data were collected.
    This study is methodologically similar to Greenstone, Ryan, and Yankovich (2014) and Leòn and
Miguel (2017), as it infers VSL from the ratio of coeﬃcients in a model of migration choices of potential
migrants, but it extends the approach with a randomized information experiment that introduces exoge-
nous variation in perceptions of earnings and mortality risks. To the best of my knowledge, this is the
ﬁrst study to employ a randomized controlled trial in estimating the VSL.
  33 Lee and Taylor (2014) is one of the rare studies to estimate VSL using an exogenous variation in plant level risk. They

exploit the random assignment of federal safety inspection to instrument for plant level risk to estimate the equilibrium
relationship between wages and risks.
  34 In fact, they estimate VSL to be negative in half their speciﬁcations.
  35 This, of course, is assuming that the respondents are able to articulate the risks accurately during the survey.




                                                            19
6.2     Estimates of VSL for inexperienced potential migrants
Both the logarithmic and the levels speciﬁcations estimate migration elasticities that are quite similar
across speciﬁcations. As Table 7 shows, across all three measures of migration, an increase in (logarithm
of) expected mortality rate lowers probability of migration and an increase in (logarithm of) expected
earnings increases migration probability as expected (top panel). For the preferred measure of migration
(Migrated-P), an increase in one percent in expected mortality rate reduces migration by 0.16 percentage
points (column 1). This translates to an elasticity of migration to expected mortality risk of 0.5. Similarly,
an increase in one percent in expected earnings increases migration by 0.22 percentage points, which
translates to an elasticity of migration to expected earnings of 0.7. The bottom panel of the table estimates
similar elasticities with the levels speciﬁcation. An increase in expected mortality rate by 1 percentage
points reduces migration rate by 6 percentage points (column 1). This point estimate translates to an
elasticity of 0.5, which is exactly the same elasticity from the logarithmic speciﬁcation. An increase in
expected earnings by $1000 increases migration rate by 1.1 percentage points which implies an elasticity of
0.5 which is only slightly smaller compared to the elasticity estimated using the logarithmic speciﬁcation.
Since expected mortality and expected earnings are more likely to follow a log-normal distribution than
a normal distribution, I prefer the estimates with logarithms rather than levels.36
    These estimates suggest that misinformation has actually lowered the migration rate because poten-
tial migrants overestimate mortality more than they overestimate earnings. If inexperienced potential
migrants had true information on the mortality risk (1.3 per 1000 for two-year period instead of 27.57),
migration would increase by 47 percentage points from its current level (assuming the eﬀect are the
same for large changes in perceptions). Similarly, if inexperienced potential migrants had the same net
earnings expectations as the experienced ones ($9,660 instead of $12,270), migration would decrease by
5 percentage points. The net eﬀect on migration would therefore be an increase of 42 percentage points
– a remarkable 140 percent. Even assuming a much lower actual earnings of $6,000 for the inexperienced
(since the expectations of the experienced are likely to be an upper bound on the counterfactual earnings),
migration would still go up by by 31 percentage points (102 percent from the current level).
    The VSL implied by this choice is the ratio of the marginal eﬀect of the expectations on migration
decision. For the logarithmic speciﬁcations, the estimates of VSL range from $0.28 million to $0.63
million, depending upon the diﬀerent measures of migration used (top panel, Table 7). The VSL using the
preferred measure of migration (Migrated-P) is estimated more precisely than others but the estimated
magnitudes are quite similar. For the levels speciﬁcation, the estimates of the VSL range from $0.43
million to $2.35 million for various measures of migration (bottom panel). The levels speciﬁcation yields
larger and noisier estimates than the logarithmic speciﬁcations. Except for the measure of migration with
attrition problem (Migrated-B), all the estimates are statistically diﬀerent from zero and qualitatively
similar to their logarithmic counterparts. The VSL from the preferred measure with the levels speciﬁcation
is $0.54 million and its logarithmic counterpart is within one standard error from this estimate. 37

Comparison with estimates in the literature
It is hard to compare these estimates of VSL, estimated for the pool of potential international migrants
from Nepal, to most estimates in the literature, which apply to the US labor market. As reviewed in
Viscusi and Aldy (2003) and Cropper, Hammitt, and Robinson (2011), typical US estimates range from
$5.5 million to $12.4 million (in 2014 US$).38 The preferred estimates in this study ranges from $0.28
million to $0.54 million ($0.97 million to $1.85 million in PPP$).39 It is reasonable to expect a lower VSL
in the context of Nepal compared to the US as the average Nepali potential migrant has a much lower
income: US GDP per capita is 23 times the GDP per capita of Nepal in PPP terms. In fact, several
studies ﬁnd the developing country estimates of the VSL are in general lower than the estimates from
  36 I cannot reject the null of normality for the log of both expectations in the untreated group using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov

test. However, the more stringent forms of the test reject normality.
  37 The 2-SLS estimation of equation (2) produces very similar point estimates for VSL but are estimated with larger

standard errors (results in Appendix Table A.4).
  38 Deﬂated using Urban CPI series.
  39 Using PPP conversion factor (US$ to PPP$ for Nepal) of 3.45 from The World Bank.




                                                             20
the US (in Viscusi and Aldy, 2003, for example).40 Nevertheless, the VSL estimates in this paper are a
comparable proportions of the median household income in Nepal as the estimates in the US: 150 to 300
times the median household income in Nepal versus 100 to 250 times that in the US.
   Estimates for populations outside the US, especially for developing countries, is quite rate and vary
widely. For instance Kremer, Leino, Miguel, and Zwane (2011) estimate the VSL of less than $1000 based
on the revealed willingness of Kenyan households to travel further for cleaner water. Leòn and Miguel
(2017) estimate a VSL of $0.6m to $0.9m from the revealed choices on transportation options while
traveling to the international airport in Sierra Leone. Greenstone and Jack (2015) highlight the paucity
of VSL estimates in developing countries and call for more research in developing revealed preference
measures of the willingness to pay for lower mortality (through improving environment quality).

6.3      Robustness to various points on the belief distribution
If potential migrants have uncertain priors about earnings and mortality rate while abroad, then they
may not act as expected utility maximizers who maximize the probability weighted average of utilities in
various states of the world. In such cases, the expected value of their beliefs may not be the right measure
that inﬂuences their migration decision. It could be possible that people behave in an uncertainty-averse
manner and use a diﬀerent utility maximization rule. For instance, Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) propose
a max-min rule where agents maximize utility assuming the worst possible state. In this part, I explore
robustness of the VSL estimates to using alternative points in their belief distribution.
    Table 8 shows that the estimates in Section (6.2) are robust to a few alternative decision-making rules.
In column 1, I assume that individuals are extremely cautious about migrating and assume the worst.
That is, they assume that the actual mortality risk is the highest end of their belief distribution and
the actual earnings, at the lowest. With this assumption, the estimated VSL is $0.16 million using the
logarithmic speciﬁcation and $0.37 million using the levels speciﬁcation. These estimates are smaller than
those in Table 7 but are unlikely to be statistically diﬀerent. Similarly, column 3 assumes the opposite of
column 2: that the individuals take the most optimistic view in making their migration decision. They
assume that earnings are the highest end of the belief distribution and mortality is the lowest end of their
belief distribution. With this assumption, the estimated VSL is slightly higher but statistically similar to
the corresponding estimates in Table 7. Column 2 performs this exercise assuming that the midpoint of
their belief distribution are the relevant parameters and column 5 does the same assuming that their most
strongly held beliefs are the relevant parameters. Both of these exercises produce slightly lower estimates
than Table 7, but well within a margin of statistical errors. This table suggests that the estimates of VSL
are quite robust to alternative decision-making rules on migration with the estimates ranging between
$0.16 million to $0.32 million with the logarithmic speciﬁcation and $0.35 million to $0.61 million with
the levels speciﬁcations.


7      Why is expected mortality rate so high?
Section 6.2 establishes that the estimated VSL are reasonable and that misinformation actually has led
to lower migration in this context. At the implied willingness to trade oﬀ earnings for mortality rate,
migration is suppressed because of extremely high expectations of mortality rate relative to the truth.
In this section, I show that the high mortality rate expectation is a consequence of over-inference by
potential migrants in response to actual migrant deaths rather than misreporting or an artifact of data
collection method.
    The instrumental variables estimate of the VSL and the migration elasticities are consistent even
though the expectations are measured with error. The instrumental variables estimate also solves any
measurement issue that can be modeled as an additive component (either in logarithmic or in levels of
  40 Interestingly,
                 the estimates of VSL from Greenstone, Ryan, and Yankovich (2014) ($0.18 million to $0.83 million in
2014 US$) are more in line with those from this study. However the VSL is expected to be much lower among US soldiers,
who probably have higher preference for risky activities, than the average American. In fact, even within the soldiers, the
authors ﬁnd a lower VSL for those taking risky jobs.



                                                            21
the expectations). Hence, I use the VSL and the elasticity estimates, along with my estimates from
Shrestha (2017) to infer the change in perceived mortality rate for potential migrants in response to a
single migrant death.
    In Shrestha (2017), I ﬁnd that, after controlling for an array of confounding ﬁxed eﬀects, one migrant
death in a district reduces monthly migrant ﬂow from that district by 0.9 percent for 12 months. This
represents a total of 11 percent reduction of monthly migrant ﬂow (albeit over a year) in response to
a single death. I then calculate a one-time increase in migrant earnings necessary to induce the same
number of potential migrants to migrate so that the net eﬀect on migration is zero. Using the earnings
elasticity of migration estimate of 0.7 from Section 6.2, I ﬁnd that migrant earnings need to increase by
15 percent. That is, a one-time increase in migrant earnings of 15 percent will oﬀset the reduction in
migrant ﬂows caused by a single migrant death.
    Finally, I use the estimate of VSL from Section 6.2, to translate the change in earnings to change in
perceived mortality rate. I use the following discretized formulation of the VSL and the elasticities to do
so,
                                              ∆W         1       1
                                       ∆d =         =       ·β· ·W                                       (3)
                                              V SL     V SL      ε
where d represents the perceived probability of death and W is the average potential earnings from
migration, β is the migration eﬀect of the death, and ε is the earnings elasticity of migration. Using
the preferred estimate of VSL and β  ε = 0.15 from above, I ﬁnd that the change in perceived probability
following a single death in the district is 6.7 per thousand.41
    The high perceived mortality rates expressed by the potential migrants are consistent with the eﬀect
on perceptions generated by a single death and their exposure to migrant deaths. The inexperienced
potential migrants expect the mortality rate to be 27.6 per thousand per migration episode. From the
estimates above, they only need 4.1 deaths in their district to generate this level of expected mortality
rate starting form a prior of zero. In 2013, an average district experienced 4.3 deaths in ﬁve months,
suggesting that such high level of mortality perception can be generated even if potential migrants are
making decisions about mortality risks only based on past ﬁve months of migrant mortality incidences
in their districts.
    In Shrestha (2017), I also ﬁnd evidence that potential migrants react more adversely when there have
been more migrant deaths in the recent past. Subsequent migrant ﬂow falls more drastically in response to
a migrant death in districts which have experienced many migrant deaths in the recent past compared to
the response in districts which have experienced few migrant deaths in the recent past. That is, potential
migrants seem to be over-weighting recent deaths in forming their priors on mortality rate. In Shrestha
(2017), I show that the amount of updating following a migrant death, and the responsiveness of updating
recent deaths cannot be generated by a rational Bayesian learnings model. A model of a learning fallacy,
the law of ‘small’ numbers, correctly predicts the over-inference result as well as the dependence on the
number of deaths in the recent past (see Rabin, 2002, for mathematical formulation). Belief in the law
of ‘small’ numbers, in conjunction with availability or other heuristic decision rule could also explain the
high observed overestimation of mortality rate (as in Tversky and Kahneman, 1971, 1973; Kahneman and
Tversky, 1974). One such heuristic explanation could be that potential migrants do not pay attention to
migrant deaths unless they are actively thinking about migrating abroad, in which case they form their
priors by observing migrant deaths in their districts in the past few months. Since they also commit the
fallacy of believing in the law of ‘small’ numbers which makes them over-infer from recent information
such as actual migrant deaths in the district or even the information provided in this study.
    Hence, the high expectation of mortality rate among potential migrants is consistent with the ex-
perience potential migrants probably have and the way they appear to process it. The large extent of
misinformation seems to be driven by the fallacious way they form their priors on mortality rate abroad.
  41 Assuming that each component of equation (3) is normally distributed with the estimated mean and variance, and also

that these components are uncorrelated with each other, the standard error for the change in perceived mortality rate is
3.72. The calculation is robust to using VSL and elasticity estimate from the levels speciﬁcation, which results in a change
in perceived mortality rate of 5.8 per thousand.




                                                            22
8    Conclusion
The gain from international migration is expected to be huge, but there could still be important non-
institutional barriers to migration. I show that misinformation about both the rewards and risk associated
with migration could be an important deterrent, even in a context where a large share of population mi-
grates for work. I ﬁnd that potential international work migrants from Nepal overestimate their earnings
potential as well as the mortality rate abroad. Contrary to the prevalent belief among policymakers ,
the extent of overestimation of mortality rate far outweighs the extent of overestimation of earnings.
Individuals are not migrating recklessly by trading oﬀ high mortality risk for small increase in earnings:
the estimated VSL of $0.28 million to $0.63 million, revealed from their decision to migrate, is quite
reasonable for a poor population. Therefore, at their current willingness to trade oﬀ mortality risk with
earnings, they would be more willing to migrate abroad if they had accurate information about the
earnings and mortality risk abroad.
    However, the reason for low migration in this study is distinct from those seen in the literature.
Though misinformation on earnings has been documented previously in other contexts, most notably in
McKenzie, Gibson, and Stillman (2013), misinformation on the risks of migration has not. This ﬁnding
suggests that information frictions, particularly about risks that workers face abroad, could suppress
migration substantially. Failing to take these into account could lead researchers to estimate high (ﬁxed)
costs of migration. In this regard, the estimated costs of migration have to be interpreted not just as
monetary and psychic, but also as perceived cost, stemming from misinformation on earnings and, more
importantly, risks.
    Furthermore, in conjunction with my ﬁndings in Shrestha (2017), I show that such misinformation
on mortality rate may arise because of fallacious inference by potential migrants. I ﬁnd they seem to
drastically update their beliefs about the mortality rate in response to an actual death of a migrant.
Furthermore, the response to a migrant death is larger when potential migrants have seen more migrant
deaths in recent months. While models of rational Bayesian learning fail to generate the magnitude of
updating or the dependence on recent migrant deaths, models of learning fallacy, such as the law of ‘small’
numbers, combined with some heuristic decision rules can explain the large observed overestimation.
    Finally, this paper presents a novel way to estimate the VSL. Among a pool of inexperienced poten-
tial migrants, I estimate the VSL by exploiting the exogenous variation in expectation of earnings and
mortality risks generated by randomly provided information in a model of migration decision. Two fea-
tures of this setting make this approach feasible. First, inexperienced potential migrants are misinformed
about the mortality rate as well as their earnings potential. Second, they are responsive to information
provided to them and their migration choices reﬂect the changed perceptions induced by the information
treatments. This approach could potentially be applied to other settings that meet the two criteria.




                                                    23
References
Ashenfelter, O. (2006): “Measuring the Value of a Statistical Life: Problems and Prospects,” The
 Economic Journal, 116(510), C10—-C23.
Ashenfelter, O., and M. Greenstone (2004a): “Estimating the value of a statistical life: The impor-
 tance of omitted variables and publication bias,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
 94(2), 454–460.
          (2004b): “Using mandated speed limits to measure the value of a statistical life,” Journal of
  Political Economy, 112(1), pS226—-S267.
Attanasio, O., and K. Kaufmann (2009): “Educational choices, subjective expectations, and credit
 constraints,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Attanasio, O. P. (2009): “Expectations and perceptions in developing countries: Their measurement
 and their use,” The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 87–92.
Beam, E. (2015): “Do job fairs matter? Experimental evidence from the Philippines.,” Journal of
 Development Economics.
Black, D. A., and T. J. Kniesner (2003): “On the measurement of job risk in hedonic wage models,”
 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(3), 205–220.
Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2014): “Underinvestment in a proﬁtable technol-
 ogy: The case of seasonal migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 82(5), 1671–1748.
Carroll, R. (2015): “Bodies at the border: ‘Many Mexicans have no option. This ﬂow will not cease’,”
 The Guardian.
Cropper, M. L., J. K. Hammitt, and L. A. Robinson (2011): “Valuing mortality risk reductions:
 Progress and challenges,” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 3(1), 313–336.
De Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2011): “Getting credit to high return microen-
 trepreneurs: The results of an information intervention,” The World Bank Economic Review, 25(3),
 456–485.
Deen, T. (2013): “The Dark Side of International Migration,” Nepali Times.
Delavande, A., X. Giné, and D. McKenzie (2011): “Measuring subjective expectations in developing
 countries: A critical review and new evidence,” Journal of Development Economics, 94(2), 151–163.
Delavande, A., and H.-P. Kohler (2009): “Subjective Expectations in the Context of HIV/AIDS in
 Malawi,” Demographic Research, 20, 817.
Dinkelman, T., and C. Martínez A (2014): “Investing in schooling in Chile: The role of information
  about ﬁnancial aid for higher education,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(2), 244–257.
Dizon-Ross, R. (2014): “Parents’ perceptions and children’s education: Experimental evidence from
  Malawi,” Unpublished.
Dominitz, J., and C. F. Manski (1997): “Using expectations data to study subjective income expec-
 tations,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92(439), 855–867.
Duflo, E., and E. Saez (2003): “The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan
 decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3),
 815–842.
Dupas, P. (2011a): “Do teenagers respond to HIV risk information? Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment
 in Kenya,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1), 1–34.


                                                  24
        (2011b): “Health behavior in developing countries,” Annual Review of Economics, 3(1), 425–449.
Esipova, N., J. Ray, and A. Publiese (2011): “Gallup World Poll: The many faces of global migra-
  tion,” IOM Migration Research Series, 43.
Fischhoff, B., A. M. Parker, W. B. de Bruin, J. Downs, C. Palmgren, R. Dawes, and C. F.
  Manski (2000): “Teen expectations for signiﬁcant life events,” Public Opinion Quarterly, pp. 189–205.
Gibson, O. (2014): “Qatar government admits almost 1,000 fatalities among migrants,” The Guardian.

Gilboa, I., and D. Schmeidler (1989): “Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior,” Journal of
 Mathematical Economics, 18(2), 141–153.
Godlonton, S., A. Munthali, and R. Thornton (2015): “Responding to risk: Circumcision, infor-
 mation, and HIV prevention,” Review of Economics and Statistics.
Greenstone, M., and B. K. Jack (2015): “Envirodevonomics: A research agenda for an emerging
 ﬁeld,” Journal of Economic Literature, 53(1), 5–42.
Greenstone, M., S. Ryan, and M. Yankovich (2014): “The value of a statistical life: Evidence from
 retention incentives and occupational mortality,” Working paper.
International Organization for Migration (2015): “Missing Migrants Project,” .

Jensen, R. (2010): “The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(2), 515–548.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky (1974): “Subjective probability: A judgment of representativeness,”
 in The Concept of Probability in Psychological Experiments, pp. 25–48. Springer.

Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): “The eﬀect of expected income on individual migration deci-
 sions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211–251.
Kremer, M., J. Leino, E. Miguel, and A. P. Zwane (2011): “Spring cleaning: Rural water impacts,
 valuation, and property rights institutions,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 145–205.
Lee, D. S. (2009): “Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment
  eﬀects,” The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071–1102.
Lee, J. M., and L. O. Taylor (2014): “Randomized safety inspections and risk exposure on the job:
  Quasi-experimental estimates of the value of a statistical life,” US Census Bureau Center for Economic
  Studies Paper No. CES-WP-14-05.

Leòn, G., and E. Miguel (2017): “Risky transportation choices and the value of a statistical life,”
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(1), 202–28.
Madajewicz, M., A. Pfaff, A. Van Geen, J. Graziano, I. Hussein, H. Momotaj, R. Sylvi,
 and H. Ahsan (2007): “Can information alone change behavior? Response to arsenic contamination
 of groundwater in Bangladesh,” Journal of Development Economics, 84(2), 731–754.

Manski, C. F. (2004): “Measuring expectations,” Econometrica, 72(5), 1329–1376.
McKenzie, D., J. Gibson, and S. Stillman (2013): “A land of milk and honey with streets paved with
 gold: Do emigrants have over-optimistic expectations about incomes abroad?,” Journal of Development
 Economics, 102, 116–127.

McKenzie, D., S. Stillman, and J. Gibson (2010): “How important is selection? Experimental vs
 non-experimental measures of the income gains from migration,” Journal of the European Economic
 Association, 8(4), 913–945.


                                                  25
Morten, M. (2013): “Temporary migration and endogenous risk sharing in village India,” Working
 Paper.
Morten, M., and J. Oliveira (2014): “Migration, roads and labor market integration: Evidence from
 a planned capital city,” Working Paper.
Munshi, K. (2003): “Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the US labor market,”
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 549–599.
Naidu, S., Y. Nyarko, and S.-Y. Wang (2014): “Worker mobility in a global labor market: Evidence
 from the United Arab Emirates,” NBER Working Paper.
Nguyen, T. (2008): “Information, role models and perceived returns to education: Experimental evi-
 dence from Madagascar,” Unpublished manuscript.
Pattisson, P. (2013a): “Nepalese workers in Qatar: Exploitation of migrants starts at home,” The
  Guardian.
         (2013b): “Revealed: Qatar’s World Cup ‘slaves’,” The Guardian.
Rabin, M. (2002): “Inference by believers in the law of small numbers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 117(3), 775–816.
Sayad, A., D. Macey, and P. Bourdieu (2004): The suﬀering of the immigrant. Polity Cambridge.
Schelling, T. C. (1968): “The life you save may be your own,” in Problems in Public Expenditure
  Analysis, ed. by Chase, Samuel B., Jr., pp. 127–162. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Seshan, G. K., and R. Zubrickas (2015): “Asymmetric information about migrant earnings and
  remittance ﬂows,” World Bank Economic Review.
Shenoy, A. (2015): “Expectations and incentives among domestic labor migrants in Thailand,” Job
  Market Paper.
Shrestha, M. (2016): “Push and pull : A study of international migration from Nepal,” Working Paper,
  Available at: http://economics.mit.edu/files/11477.
        (2017): “Death scares: How potential work-migrants infer mortality rates from migrant deaths,”
  World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series WPS7946, The World Bank.
Shrestha, S., and D. Yang (2015): “Facilitating worker mobility: A randomized information inter-
  vention among migrant workers in Singapore,” Unpublished.
Thaler, R., and S. Rosen (1976): “The value of saving a life: Evidence from the labor market,” in
 Household Production and Consumption, pp. 265–302. NBER.
The Asia Foundation (2013): “Labour migration trends and patterns: Bangladesh, India, and Nepal
 2013,” Discussion paper, The Asia Foundation.
The World Bank, . (2011): “Large-scale migration and remittance in Nepal: Issues, challenges and
 opportunities,” Discussion Paper 55390-NP, The World Bank, Poverty Reduction and Economic Man-
 agement Sector Unit, South Asia Region.
         (2016): “World Development Indicators,” .
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman (1971): “Belief in the law of small numbers,” Psychological Bulletin,
 76(2), 105.
         (1973): “Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability,” Cognitive Psychology,
  5(2), 207–232.

                                                   26
UNDESA (2015): “Trends in International Migrant Stock: The 2015 Revision,” Discussion paper, United
 Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, Population Division.

Viscusi, W. K., and J. E. Aldy (2003): “The value of a statistical life: A critical review of market
  estimates throughout the world,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1), 5–76.




                                                27
Figures and Tables
Figures


                                 Figure 1: Sample information cards shown to respondents




Note: This ﬁgure shows samples of two cards shown to the respondents.




                                    Figure 2: Earnings expectations of potential migrants
                 1




                               Information provided
                 .8
                 .6
                 .4




                                                                          mean
                 .2




                                                              log(9.74)          log(12.27)
                 0




                          1               1.5            2           2.5            3                           3.5
                                           Log(Net earnings from migration, '000 USD)

                                                      Inexperienced                  Experienced

Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project.
Note: This ﬁgure shows the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of expected net earnings from migration for potential migrants in
the control group (they do not receive any information on wages or deaths). The solid blue line plots the cdf for the inexperienced ones
whereas the dashed red line plots the cdf for the experienced potential migrants.
“Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who have not yet migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential
migrants who have migrated in the past for foreign employment.
The means for these two groups are indicated in the ﬁgure by vertical lines and are labeled accordingly. The black vertical lines to the
left show the level of information that was provided to the ‘high’ and ‘low’ wage treatment groups.



                                                                  28
                      Figure 3: Misinformation on expected mortality rate among potential migrants




                 1
                                 Actual
                 .8              log(1.3)

                                   'Low' info     'High' info
                 .6
                 .4




                                                                              mean
                 .2




                                                                log(16.35)           log(27.57)
                 0




                            0               1           2          3           4                         5          6
                                                Log(Expected migrant deaths per 1000)

                                                    Inexperienced                          Experienced

Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: The ﬁgure shows the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of expected mortality rate abroad for potential migrants in the control
group (they do not receive any information on wages or deaths). The solid blue line plots the cdf for the inexperienced ones whereas
the dashed red line plots the cdf for the experienced potential migrants.
“Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who have not yet migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential
migrants who have migrated in the past for foreign employment.
The means for these two groups are indicated in the ﬁgure by vertical lines and are labeled accordingly. The short-dashed green verticle
line represents the true mortality rate faced by the migrants. True mortality rate is computed using deaths data from the Foreign
Employment Promotion Board and the migrant stock data from Census 2011. The black vertical lines to the left show the level of
information that was provided to the ‘high’ and ‘low’ wage treatment groups and are labeled accordingly.


Tables


                                        Table 1: Sample size by randomization groups
                                                       Death Information treatment
                                                                None     ‘Low’          ‘High’      Total
                                Wage              None           376         354          384       1,114
                                information       ‘Low’          339         359          352       1,050
                                treatment        ‘High’          382         410          363       1,155
                                                  Total         1,097        1,123       1,099      3,319
Note: This table shows the sample size in each of the information treatment cells. Within each of death and wage information,
respondents were equally likely to receive no information, ‘low’ information, and ‘high’ information with equal probability. Death
information was cross-randomized with wage information.




                                                                        29
              Table 2: Eﬀects of information treatments on expected mortality rate (per 1000 migrants)
                                             All                Inexperienced          Experienced
                                        (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)
             Death info: ‘high’       0.221       -0.743       -1.849    -3.889        1.598    1.150
                                     (1.587)     (1.644)      (3.047)   (3.013)      (2.124) (2.146)
             Death info: ‘low’      -4.327** -4.843***       -7.413** -8.081**        -2.250    -3.020
                                     (1.733)     (1.708)      (3.247)   (3.221)      (2.071) (2.344)
             Wage info: ‘high’        -0.843      -1.218        2.098    1.781        -2.899    -4.198
                                     (1.678)     (1.680)      (2.931)   (3.179)      (2.586) (2.812)
             Wage info: ‘low’         -0.626      -0.699        2.209    2.580        -3.125    -2.817
                                     (1.843)     (1.846)      (2.991)   (3.028)      (2.889) (2.955)

             Controls                       NO           YES                NO          YES              NO          YES
             Observations                  3319          3319               1411        1411            1341         1341
             R-squared                     0.003         0.087             0.005        0.112           0.004        0.118
             Control group mean           21.276                           27.570                      17.417
             SD                          (39.973)                         (51.029)                    (28.786)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows the impact of information treatments on expected mortality rate (per 1000 migrants) estimated using equation
(1). Odd numbered columns do not have any controls, even numbered columns control for a full set of interaction of age categories,
education categories, location and geography, full set of interaction of location, geography and administrative regions, destination ﬁxed
eﬀects, and surveyor ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level.
“Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who have not yet migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential
migrants who have migrated in the past, but do not have an existing job contract abroad; it excludes those who are back home on leave
from their work abroad. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                 Table 3: Eﬀects of information treatments on expected net earnings                   (in USD ‘000)
                                            All               Inexperienced                             Experienced
                                       (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)                             (5)      (6)
              Death info: ‘high’    -0.498* -0.461*          -0.647    -0.357                          -0.500   -0.339
                                    (0.279)    (0.263)      (0.432)   (0.393)                         (0.342) (0.288)
              Death info: ‘low’      -0.160     -0.069       -0.604    -0.193                           0.157    0.118
                                    (0.243)    (0.229)      (0.433)   (0.333)                         (0.327) (0.299)
              Wage info: ‘high’      -0.280 -0.459**       -1.071** -0.988***                          0.238    -0.034
                                    (0.260)    (0.211)      (0.426)   (0.339)                         (0.297) (0.251)
              Wage info: ‘low’        0.072     0.007      -0.858**    -0.402                           0.557   0.241
                                    (0.270)    (0.213)      (0.416)   (0.328)                         (0.342) (0.312)

              Controls                      NO          YES                NO          YES              NO         YES
              Observations                 3319         3319               1411        1411            1341        1341
              R-squared                    0.002        0.251             0.008        0.333           0.005       0.335
              Control group mean          10.851                          12.268                       9.656
              SD                          (8.183)                        (11.122)                     (4.396)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows the impact of information treatments on expected net earnings from migration (in USD ‘000) estimated using
equation (1). The net earnings from migration is their expected monthly earnings multiplied by the modal duration of a migration
episode to their chosen destnation after subtracting the expected fees of migrating to that destination.
Odd numbered columns do not have any controls, even numbered columns control for a full set of interaction of age categories, education
categories, location and geography, full set of interaction of location, geography and administrative regions, destination ﬁxed eﬀects, and
surveyor ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level. “Inexperienced”
refers to potential migrants who have not yet migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential migrants who have
migrated in the past, but do not have an existing job contract abroad; it excludes those who are back home on leave from their work
abroad. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                    30
                Table 4: Correlation between information treatments and various attrition measures
                                           All               Inexperienced              Experienced
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)       (6)
                                Attrition F - did not conduct full follow-up survey
            Death info: ‘high’      0.006       0.004       -0.001       0.010         0.016    0.011
                                   (0.016)     (0.015)     (0.023)      (0.025)      (0.023)   (0.023)
            Death info: ‘low’      0.031*       0.024        0.013       0.010      0.063*** 0.048**
                                   (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.025)      (0.026)      (0.021)   (0.022)
            Wage info: ‘high’     -0.031** -0.030**        -0.040*      -0.039*       -0.021    -0.011
                                   (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.023)      (0.023)      (0.023)   (0.023)
            Wage info: ‘low’        0.003       -0.002       0.008       -0.002       0.011     0.000
                                   (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.025)      (0.025)      (0.024)   (0.024)

            Controls                       NO         YES            NO      YES                    NO          YES
            Control group mean            0.162                     0.152                          0.149
            SD                          (0.369)                   (0.360)                         (0.357)
                                          Attrition M - do not know migration status
            Death info: ‘high’           0.018        0.016         0.005   0.017                  0.025        0.020
                                        (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.022)  (0.023)                (0.020)      (0.021)
            Death info: ‘low’          0.037**      0.029**         0.013   0.009                0.068***     0.056***
                                        (0.015)     (0.014)       (0.023)  (0.023)                (0.020)      (0.020)
            Wage info: ‘high’          -0.031** -0.030**         -0.044** -0.042**                 -0.015       -0.012
                                        (0.014)     (0.014)       (0.021)  (0.021)                (0.021)      (0.021)
            Wage info: ‘low’             -0.003      -0.005        -0.013   -0.024                  0.015       0.004
                                        (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.023)  (0.023)                (0.022)      (0.023)

            Controls                  NO      YES           NO        YES             NO                        YES
            Control group mean       0.130                 0.127                     0.112
            SD                     (0.337)               (0.334)                   (0.316)
                               Attrition W - Wrong numbers or refused to interview
            Death info: ‘high’      0.002     0.001       -0.002     0.001          -0.003                      -0.000
                                   (0.008)   (0.008)     (0.012)    (0.012)        (0.013)                     (0.013)
            Death info: ‘low’       0.004     0.002       -0.003     -0.003          0.014                       0.013
                                   (0.009)   (0.009)     (0.013)    (0.013)        (0.014)                     (0.013)
            Wage info: ‘high’       -0.001    0.000       -0.011     -0.005         -0.001                       0.005
                                   (0.007)   (0.008)     (0.011)    (0.011)        (0.012)                     (0.013)
            Wage info: ‘low’         0.003    0.004        0.009     0.014          -0.006                      -0.010
                                   (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.013)    (0.013)        (0.011)                     (0.011)

            Controls                      NO          YES               NO         YES              NO          YES
            Control group mean           0.040                         0.036                       0.043
            SD                          (0.196)                       (0.188)                     (0.205)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table checks whether the three measures of attrition are correlated with information treatments using equation (1). The
heading of each panel indicates and deﬁnes the measure of migration. Odd numbered columns do not have any controls, even numbered
columns control for a full set of interaction of age categories, education categories, location and geography, full set of interaction
of location, geography and administrative regions, destination ﬁxed eﬀects, and surveyor ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level. “Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who have not yet
migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential migrants who have migrated in the past, but do not have an
existing job contract abroad; it excludes those who are back home on leave from their work abroad. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05;
∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                 31
                            Table 5: Eﬀects of information treatments on actual migration
                                         All                  Inexperienced              Experienced
                                    (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)       (6)
                            Eﬀect on preferred measure of migration, Migrated-P
            Migrated or will do so in 2 weeks, or reasonable attriters, excludes Attrited-W
         Death info: ‘high’       0.036*     0.040**         0.019      0.034          0.056     0.044
                                 (0.020)     (0.019)        (0.029)    (0.030)        (0.034)   (0.038)
         Death info: ‘low’      0.062*** 0.071***           0.069**    0.072**       0.095*** 0.088***
                                 (0.021)     (0.020)        (0.031)    (0.031)        (0.030)   (0.032)
         Wage info: any           -0.008      -0.015       -0.057** -0.067**           0.022     0.018
                                 (0.019)     (0.018)        (0.027)    (0.029)        (0.029)   (0.031)

         Controls                     NO           YES           NO         YES            NO                     YES
         Observations                3210         3210          1364        1364          1297                    1297
         R-squared                   0.003        0.240         0.007       0.136         0.007                   0.168
         Control group mean           0.410                     0.308                     0.370
         SD                        (0.493)                    (0.463)                   (0.484)
                                  Eﬀect on alternative measure of migration, Migrated-A
                                    Migrated or will do so in 2 weeks, or all attriters
         Death info: ‘high’         0.036*       0.040**        0.017       0.033         0.052                    0.043
                                    (0.019)      (0.018)       (0.029)     (0.030)       (0.034)                  (0.037)
         Death info: ‘low’         0.062***     0.071***       0.064**     0.068**      0.100***                 0.094***
                                    (0.020)      (0.019)       (0.031)     (0.031)       (0.030)                  (0.031)
         Wage info: any              -0.008       -0.015      -0.056**    -0.062**        0.019                    0.016
                                    (0.019)      (0.018)       (0.027)     (0.029)       (0.028)                  (0.030)

         Controls                    NO           YES             NO         YES                      NO           YES
         Observations                3319         3319           1411        1411                    1341          1341
         R-squared                  0.003        0.226           0.006       0.138                   0.007         0.163
         Control group mean         0.434                        0.333                               0.398
         SD                        (0.496)                     (0.473)                              (0.491)
                                    Eﬀect on basic measure of migration, Migrated-B
                                  Migrated or will do so in 2 weeks, excludes Attrited-M
         Death info: ‘high’         0.028       0.032*           0.016       0.023                  0.039          0.026
                                   (0.020)      (0.019)        (0.028)     (0.030)                 (0.034)        (0.038)
         Death info: ‘low’         0.045**     0.060***        0.063**     0.069**                 0.063**        0.068*
                                   (0.021)      (0.020)        (0.030)     (0.030)                 (0.032)        (0.035)
         Wage info: any             0.004        -0.004         -0.039      -0.044                  0.023          0.020
                                   (0.019)      (0.018)        (0.025)     (0.028)                 (0.030)        (0.031)

         Controls                      NO           YES                 NO         YES                NO           YES
         Observations                 2877          2877               1242        1242              1181          1181
         R-squared                    0.002         0.264              0.006       0.132             0.004         0.177
         Control group mean           0.349                            0.236                         0.322
         SD                          (0.477)                          (0.426)                       (0.469)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows the impact of information treatments on various measures of migration, estimated using equation (1). The
heading of each panel indicates and deﬁnes the measure of migration. Odd numbered columns do not have any controls, even numbered
columns control for a full set of interaction of age categories, education categories, location and geography, full set of interaction
of location, geography and administrative regions, destination ﬁxed eﬀects, and surveyor ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level. “Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who have not yet
migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential migrants who have migrated in the past, but do not have an
existing job contract abroad; it excludes those who are back home on leave from their work abroad. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05;
∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                 32
                    Table 6: Lee (2009) bounds of treatment eﬀect on basic migration (Migrated-B)
                                                      Death Info              Wage info
                                                High             Low              Any
                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                     Sample: All
                            Lower bound         0.021            0.030           -0.006
                                               (0.024)         (0.024)          (0.022)
                            Upper bound        0.043*         0.073***            0.013
                                               (0.025)         (0.025)          (0.021)
                            95 % CI        [-0.019 0.085] [-0.010 0.115]    [-0.043 0.048]
                                              Sample: Inexperienced
                            Lower bound         0.015          0.063**         -0.063**
                                               (0.030)         (0.031)          (0.032)
                            Upper bound         0.022          0.077**           -0.031
                                               (0.035)         (0.036)          (0.028)
                            95 % CI        [-0.041 0.088] [0.006 0.143]     [-0.117 0.016]
                                                Sample: Experienced
                            Lower bound         0.027            0.040            0.023
                                               (0.036)         (0.037)          (0.031)
                            Upper bound         0.056         0.121***            0.029
                                               (0.039)         (0.041)          (0.033)
                            95 % CI        [-0.035 0.122] [-0.022 0.189]    [-0.035 0.092]
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows the estimated Lee (2009) bounds for the basic deﬁnition of migration (Migrated-B). See Table 5 and the text for
the deﬁnition of Migrated-B. Each column in each panel represents a separate estimation of the bounds. Each estimation is performed
on the sample of the treatment group indicated by the column heading and the control group. For each estimation a lower bound,
an upper bound is reported with standard errors in parentheses. The 95% conﬁdence interval on the bounds is reported in brackets.
“Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who have not yet migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential
migrants who have migrated in the past, but do not have an existing job contract abroad; it excludes those who are back home on leave
from their work abroad. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                 33
        Table 7: Binary choice instrumental variable estimates of VSL for inexperienced potential migrants
                                                      Migrated - P Migrated - A Migrated - B
                                                         Preferred      Alternative        Basic
                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)
                                          Logarithmic speciﬁcation
                                                   Coeﬃcients
             Log(expected mortality per 1000)            -0.485***       -0.460***       -0.513***
                                                          (0.040)          (0.068)        (0.043)
             Log(expected net earnings, USD ’000)        0.699***         0.768***       0.332***
                                                          (0.099)          (0.137)        (0.087)
                                                 Marginal Eﬀects
             Log(expected mortality per 1000)            -0.155***       -0.149***       -0.160***
                                                          (0.011)          (0.020)        (0.012)
             Log(expected net earnings, USD ’000)        0.224***         0.248***       0.103***
                                                          (0.031)          (0.046)        (0.027)

               VSL (in ’000 USD)                         282.412***                    245.497***         632.501***
                                                           (50.938)                     (75.040)           (188.667)
                                                Levels speciﬁcation
                                                    Coeﬃcients
               Expected    mortality (per 1000)           -0.017***                     -0.016***          -0.017***
                                                            (0.002)                      (0.001)            (0.002)
               Expected    net earnings (USD ’000)         0.031**                      0.038***             0.007
                                                            (0.013)                      (0.007)            (0.013)
                                                   Marginal Eﬀects
               Expected    mortality (per 1000)           -0.006***                     -0.006***          -0.006***
                                                            (0.001)                      (0.000)            (0.001)
               Expected    net earnings (USD ’000)         0.011**                      0.013***             0.003
                                                            (0.005)                      (0.003)            (0.005)

               VSL (in ’000 USD)                                  538.220**            430.156***          2354.663
                                                                  (264.302)             (94.444)          (4471.196)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows instrumented probit estimates of the eﬀect of expected earnings and expected mortality rate on migration
choices of inexperienced potential migrants, estimated using equation (2). Information treatments are used as instruments for expected
earnings and expected mortality. The heading of each column indicates the measure of migration used as the outcome variable. See text
and Table 5 for the deﬁnition of these measures. The heading of each panel indicates whether the logarithm or levels of expectations is
used in the estimation. Coeﬃcients of estimations as well as marginal eﬀects are reported with standard errors in parentheses. Standard
errors are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level. The bottom of each panel presents the VSL, which is estimated as the
ratio of two marginal eﬀects. Standard errors for the VSL are computed using the delta method. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                   34
             Table 8: Robustness in estimates of VSL under some alternative utility maximization rule
                                   Least optimistic      Median   Most optimistic Most likely (modal)
                                           (1)             (2)           (3)                 (4)
                                            Logarithmic speciﬁcation
                                                    Coeﬃcients
         Beliefs on mortality risk     -0.484***       -0.477***     -0.431***           -0.438***
         per 1000                       (0.113)          (0.028)       (0.053)             (0.047)
         Beliefs on net earnings,      0.767***         0.807***      0.781***            0.824***
         USD ’000                       (0.166)          (0.107)       (0.071)             (0.113)
                                                 Marginal Eﬀects
         Beliefs on mortality risk     -0.155***       -0.152***     -0.139***           -0.139***
         per 1000                       (0.033)          (0.008)       (0.015)             (0.013)
         Beliefs on net earnings,      0.246***         0.257***      0.251***            0.262***
         USD ’000                       (0.057)          (0.032)       (0.022)             (0.035)

         VSL (in ’000 USD)                   157.360**      238.197***   322.092***                         215.996***
                                              (68.405)        (36.457)     (54.377)                          (46.097)
                                                     Levels speciﬁcation
                                                         Coeﬃcients
         Beliefs on mortality risk           -0.013***       -0.017***    -0.021***                         -0.016***
         per 1000                              (0.001)         (0.003)      (0.002)                          (0.001)
         Beliefs on net earnings,             0.034**         0.048***     0.034***                         0.051***
         USD ’000                              (0.014)         (0.015)      (0.010)                          (0.006)
                                                       Marginal Eﬀects
         Beliefs on mortality risk           -0.005***       -0.006***    -0.007***                         -0.006***
         per 1000                              (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)                          (0.000)
         Beliefs on net earnings,             0.012***        0.017***     0.012***                         0.018***
         USD ’000                              (0.005)         (0.005)      (0.003)                          (0.002)

         VSL (in ’000 USD)                   368.865**           353.220**         613.984***               320.578***
                                             (158.346)           (154.951)          (196.121)                (35.699)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows instrumented probit estimates of the eﬀect of beliefs on earnings and mortality rate on migration choices
of inexperienced potential migrants, estimated using equation (2). The preferred measure of migration (Migrated-P) is used as the
dependent variable. Information treatments are used as instruments for beliefs on earnings and mortality rate. Instead of using
the expected value of their beliefs as the variables of interset, this table takes diﬀerent points in these belief distributions based on
assumptions on the relevant decision-making parameters.
The ﬁrst column assumes that potential migrants are least optimistic about migration while making their migration decision. They take
the maximum of their belief distribution on mortality rate and the minimum of their belief distribution on net earning as the relevant
parameter in their migration decision.
The second column assumes that potential migrants make migration choices by taking the median of their belief distributions.
The third column assumes that potential migrants are most optimistic about migration while making their migration decision. They
take the minimum of their belief distribution on mortality rate and the maximum of their belief distribution on net earnings as the
relevant parameter in their migration decision.
The fourth column assumes that potential migrants take the most likely points in their belief distribution as the relevant parameters
for their migration decision.
The heading of each panel indicates whether the logarithm or levels of expectations is used in the estimation. Coeﬃcients of estimations
as well as marginal eﬀects are reported with standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the surveyor × date
of interview level. VSL is estimated as the ratio of two marginal eﬀects and its standard error computed using the delta method.
∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                   35
Appendix A                                Figures and Tables
A.I     Figures


                                                 Figure A.1: Permits granted by DoFE for work abroad
                           400     300
                Total outflow in '000
                      200  100
                           0




                                          2005     2006         2007      2008     2009   2010     2011      2012   2013

                                                  Malaysia                  Qatar                S. Arabia           UAE
                                                  Kuwait                    Bahrain              Others

Source: Author’s calculation on the data provided by Department of Foreign Employment (DoFE).
Note: This ﬁgure shows the number of work-permits issued by DoFE for work abroad by year and destination country.


A.II     Tables


                                         Table A.1: International migration from Nepal and remittance income
                                                        Migrant/Population share          Remittance Income
                                                 Year     All     India     Non-India        % of GDP
                                                 1961   3.49
                                                 1981   2.68      2.48           0.19
                                                 1991   3.56      3.17           0.37             1.5
                                                 2001   3.41      2.61           0.78             2.4
                                                 2011   7.43      2.80           4.63            22.4
Source: Migrant/Population share from the Census reports for respective years, Remittance as a share of GDP from the World
Development Indicator database (The World Bank)
Note: This table shows the migrant to population share for each of the census years since 1961. It also shows the share broken down
by destination. The last column shows the personal remittance income as a share of national GDP for the years available.




                                                                                 36
              Table A.2: Population comparison between absentees in Census 2011 and survey sample
                                     Census                           Survey Data
                                      (2011)        All      Inexperienced Experienced       On leave
                                   mean/(SD) mean/(SD)        mean/(SD)       mean/(SD) mean/(SD)
                                        (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)
        Demographics
        Age                           27.171      27.573         23.502         29.966        32.040
                                     (6.944)      (7.148)        (5.883)        (6.402)      (6.433)
        Completed Education            7.189       7.469          7.777          7.046         7.706
                                     (3.418)      (3.532)        (3.409)        (3.582)      (3.618)
        Geography and Location
        Hills and Mountain             0.495       0.501          0.517          0.472        0.530
                                     (0.500)      (0.500)        (0.500)        (0.499)      (0.500)
        Southern Plain (Terai)         0.505       0.499          0.483          0.528        0.470
                                     (0.500)      (0.500)        (0.500)        (0.499)      (0.500)
        Urban                          0.113       0.083          0.073          0.088         0.093
                                     (0.317)      (0.275)        (0.260)        (0.283)      (0.291)
        Eastern Region                 0.333       0.276          0.245          0.293         0.315
                                     (0.471)      (0.447)        (0.430)        (0.455)      (0.465)
        Central Region                 0.281       0.373          0.413          0.366         0.287
                                     (0.450)      (0.484)        (0.493)        (0.482)      (0.453)
        Western Region                 0.292       0.159          0.074          0.180         0.324
                                     (0.455)      (0.366)        (0.261)        (0.384)      (0.468)
        Mid/Far Western Region         0.094       0.192          0.269          0.160         0.074
                                     (0.291)      (0.394)        (0.443)        (0.367)      (0.262)
        Destination Country
        Malaysia                       0.264       0.255          0.359          0.204         0.118
                                     (0.441)      (0.436)        (0.480)        (0.403)      (0.323)
        Qatar                          0.296       0.232          0.201          0.231        0.310
                                     (0.457)      (0.422)        (0.401)        (0.421)      (0.463)
        Saudi Arabia                   0.245       0.198          0.135          0.212         0.319
                                     (0.430)      (0.398)        (0.342)        (0.409)      (0.466)
        U.A.E.                         0.138       0.230          0.232          0.239         0.208
                                     (0.345)      (0.421)        (0.422)        (0.427)      (0.406)
        Other destinations             0.056       0.085          0.073          0.115        0.046
                                     (0.231)      (0.279)        (0.260)        (0.319)      (0.209)
Source: Author’s calculations using 2011 Housing and Population Census Public Use Microdata Sample and the survey data collected
for this project
Note: This table presents the descriptive statistics of the absentee population in the 2011 Housing and Population Census (column 1)
and the study sample (columns 2 - 5). The Housing and Population Census of Nepal deﬁnes absentee population as “persons away or
absent from birth place or usual place [of residence] for employment or study or business purpose [abroad]”.
Columns 3-5 presents the descriptive statistics by subgroups of the study sample. “Inexperienced” refers to potential migrants who
have not yet migrated for foreign employment. “Experienced” refers to potential migrants who have migrated in the past, but do not
have an existing job contract abroad. “On leave” refers to potential migrants who are back home on leave from their work abroad.




                                                                37
                              Table A.3: Description of information provided to the subjects
                                                                    Destination Countries
                                                 Malaysia      Qatar Saudi Arabia U.A.E                Kuwait
                       Monthly ﬂow                14,100        8,300        6,500       4,200          700
                       Wage ‘High’ (NPR)          24,500       25,000       23,000      26,000         26,500
                       Wage ‘Low’ (NPR)           12,500       15,500       13,500      19,000         15,000
                       Death ‘High’                 9             8            9           3              2
                       Death ‘Low’                   2            1            2           1              1
Note: This table presents the exact nature of information provided to the participants. Each row lists the information provided in each
of the treatment groups for potential migrants to the Destination countries listed in the columns. Monthly ﬂow is the average number of
work-reated migrants leaving Nepal every month in 2013. Wage information is provided as monthly wages in Nepali Rupees (exchange
rate US$ 1= NPR 100). Death information provided indicates the number of deaths that occured in a pre-determined district in 2013.




                      Table A.4: 2-SLS estimates of VSL for inexperienced potential migrants
                                  Migrated - P                Migrated - A                Migrated - B
                                    Preferred                  Alternative                    Basic
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
                                           Logarithmic speciﬁcation
      Log(expected           -0.247**      -0.246**       -0.240**    -0.246**       -0.221**      -0.243**
      mortality per 1000)     (0.115)       (0.104)        (0.116)     (0.109)        (0.102)       (0.096)
      Log(expected net         0.344         0.576          0.386       0.494          0.148         0.290
      earnings, USD ’000)     (0.350)       (0.503)        (0.385)     (0.516)        (0.286)       (0.468)

      VSL (in ’000 USD)           292.658         173.893            255.377       204.275            612.548        342.367
                                 (322.218)       (161.486)          (275.531)     (218.349)         (1210.549)      (573.157)

      Controls                       NO             YES             NO               YES                NO             YES
                                                      Levels speciﬁcation
      Expected mortality           -0.011*        -0.010**        -0.011*          -0.010*           -0.010*         -0.009*
      (per 1000)                   (0.006)         (0.005)        (0.006)          (0.005)           (0.006)         (0.005)
      Expected net                  0.024           0.050          0.028            0.050             0.007           0.012
      earnings (USD ’000)          (0.033)         (0.050)        (0.036)          (0.054)           (0.026)         (0.039)

      VSL (in ’000 USD)           462.442         199.412            383.485       195.258           1340.595       773.284
                                 (699.784)       (217.430)          (527.758)     (226.762)         (4917.707)     (2680.114)

      Controls                       NO             YES                NO            YES                NO             YES
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows 2SLS estimates of the eﬀect of expected earnings and expected mortality rate on migration choices of inexpe-
rienced potential migrants. Information treatments are used as instruments for expected earnings and expected mortality rate. The
heading of each column indicates the measure of migration used. See Table 5 and the text for the deﬁnition of these measures. The
heading of each panel indicates whether the logarithm or levels of expectations is used in the estimation. Standard errors, reported
in parentheses, are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level. VSL is estimated as the ratio of two marginal eﬀects and its
standard error computed using the delta method. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                  38
                         Table A.5: 2-SLS estimates of VSL for inexperienced potential migrants
                                       Least optimistic  Median      Most optimistic Most likely (modal)
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                              Logarithmic speciﬁcation
          Beliefs on   mortality risk     -0.237**        -0.228*        -0.215**            -0.204*
          per 1000                         (0.115)        (0.123)         (0.105)            (0.116)
          Beliefs on   net earnings,        0.343          0.352           0.377              0.352
          USD ’000                         (0.371)        (0.359)         (0.339)            (0.340)

          VSL (in ’000 USD)                    172.549        261.089     332.398                           236.049
                                              (206.176)      (303.309)   (339.636)                         (263.643)
                                                     Levels speciﬁcation
          Beliefs on mortality risk            -0.008*        -0.011*     -0.014*                            -0.012
          per 1000                             (0.004)        (0.006)     (0.008)                           (0.007)
          Beliefs on net earnings,              0.026          0.034       0.024                             0.039
          USD ’000                             (0.038)        (0.043)     (0.028)                           (0.045)

          VSL (in ’000 USD)                    303.364           331.859           560.740                  303.301
                                              (476.418)         (460.645)         (687.942)                (374.685)
Source: Author’s calculations on the survey data collected for this project
Note: This table shows 2SLS estimates of the eﬀect of beliefs on earnings and mortality rate on migration chioces of inexperienced
potential migrants. The preferred measure of migration (Migrated-P) is used as the dependent variable. Information treatments are
used as instruments for beliefs on earnigns and mortality rate. Instead of using the expected value of their beliefs as the variables of
interest, this table takes diﬀerent points in these belief distribution based on assumptions on the revelant decision-making parameters.
See Table 8 for the various decision-making choices based on the column headings.
The heading of each panel indicates whether the logarithm or levels of beliefs is used in the estimation. Standard errors are reported
in parentheses and are clustered at the surveyor × date of interview level. VSL is estimated as the ratio of two coeﬃcients and its
standard error computed using the delta method. ∗∗∗ : p < 0.01; ∗∗ : p < 0.05; ∗ : p < 0.1




                                                                  39
