                                                     WPS7995


Policy Research Working Paper                       7995




           Deliberative Democracy in India
                              Ramya Parthasarathy
                                Vijayendra Rao




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7995


  Abstract
 This paper traces the evolution of deliberative institu-                           including Gandhi and Ambedkar, on participatory democ-
 tions in India to understand the role of deliberation in                           racy in India. The discussion then highlights the continued
 democratic life, as well as the ways in which deliberative                         dialogue between Indian and Western ideas in the push for
 bodies influence, and are influenced by, entrenched social                         greater participatory development. Finally, the paper probes
 inequality. The paper first unpacks the historical roots of                        the current incarnation of state-sponsored deliberation in
 Indian deliberation in the pre-colonial and colonial peri-                         India—namely, village assemblies known as gram sabhas
 ods, emphasizing the ways in which religious traditions                            under the constitutionally mandated system of Indian
 fostered a culture of debate and dialogue. The paper then                          village democracy or Panchayati Raj—and reviews the grow-
 explores the interplay between Western liberal philosophers,                       ing empirical scholarship about these village assemblies.
 most notably Henry Maine, and Indian political thinkers,




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at vrao@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                Deliberative Democracy in India1




                                          Ramya Parthasarathy
                                      Department of Political Science
                                           Stanford University


                                             Vijayendra Rao
                                       Development Research Group
                                             The World Bank




                                   JEL Codes: D70, D71, O10, D72
                                Keywords: Deliberation, Democracy, India


1 This paper is forthcoming in the Oxford Handbook of Deliberative Democracy. We are indebted to André Bächtiger,

John Dryzek and David Laitin for valuable comments on a previous draft.
Introduction

        India, as is well known, has a resilient democracy. Indian elections have been hotly

contested, widely inclusive, well conducted, and integrated into a robust and active political sphere.

The consistency and quality of Indian democracy is not only anomalous in the post-colonial world,

but also stands as rebuttal to much of Western liberal democratic theory, which posits a set of

preconditions to democracy that India sorely lacks. As historian Sudipta Kavira j has noted, “Viewed

from the angle of conventional political theory, Indian democracy is inexplicable. It defies all the

preconditions that theory lays down for the success of de mocratic government” (Kaviraj 2011, p. 2).

These preconditions are defined by those that were present at the rise of Western democracy —

“namely, the presence of a strong bureaucratic state, capitalist prod uction, industrialization, the

secularization of society (or at least the prior existence of a secular state), and relativ e economic

prosperity” (Kaviraj 2011, p.2) — but are relatively absent in contemporary India, where poverty

and illiteracy are still widely prevalent. Despite these conditions, however, India has sustained

democracy, and done so in ways that are distinctly Indian (Khilnani 1999).

        A large body of literature has sought to understand why democracy has thrived in the Indian

context (e.g. Khilnani 1999; Kaviraj 2011; Keane 2009; Chatterjee and Katznelson 2012). One

proposed and contested component of that explanation has been the long history of public

reasoning and debate on the subcontinent — an “argumentative tradition” that is intimately

connected with the development of democracy (Sen 2005, Guha 2005). Indeed, deliberation has its

roots in classic normative conceptions of democracy; it derives from the premise that “democracy

revolves around the transformation rather than simply the aggregation of preferences” (Elster 1998).

Whether or not this deliberative tradition has helped to sustain its democracy, the very presence of a

robust deliberative sphere in India is itself puzzling. Contemporary articulations of deliberation,



                                                     2
drawing largely on John Rawls and Jurgen Habermas, see deliberation as rooted in equality,

rationality, and the free exchange and weighting of ideas; deliberation, on this understanding, is a

mechanism for resolving reasonable differences within a pluralistic society. These theories

emphasize at least three necessary preconditions for deliberation: first, parties in deliberation are

formally and substantively equal; second, deliberation is based on reason rather than coercion, such

that “no force except that of the better argument is exercised” (Habermas 1975, p. 108); and lastly,

that the object of deliberation ought only to be the common good, rather than individual interests. 1

        On its face, contemporary India lacks these conditions too, and yet, it boasts the most widely

used deliberative institution in human history — the village assembly, known as the gram sabha ,

which was instituted in 1992 as a part of the 73rd amendment to the Indian constitution, and now

affects 840 million people living in approximately one million villages in rural India. These bodies

are only the most recent in a long tradition of deliberative institutions in India, which date back to at

least the fifth century BC (Sen 2005). How does India, with its deep social and economic inequality, illiteracy,

and entrenched identity politics, sustain a robust deliberative democracy? We argue that deliberation in India has

taken equality and social inclusion as one of its objectives, rather than a precondition; that is,

deliberative institutions have served as a medium by which communities and peoples have come to

assert their dignity and demand their social equality. Backed by state policies aimed at inclusion,

these institutions have become a mechanism by which to empower those who have been historically

sidelined from politics.

        In this paper, we trace the evolution of deliberative institutions in India — in terms of their

scope, participants, and objectives — to understand both the role of deliberation in democratic life,

as well as the ways in which deliberative bodies influence, and are influenced by, entrenched social

inequality. We first unpack the historical roots of Indian deliberation in the pre-colonial and colonial

periods, emphasizing the ways in which religious traditions fostered a culture of debate and dialogue.



                                                        3
We then explore the interplay between Western liberal philosophers, most notably Henry Maine,

and Indian political thinkers, including Gandhi and Ambedkar, on participatory democracy in India.

After outlining the fraught debate around local village democracy at Independence, we highlight the

continued dialogue between Indian and Western ideas in the push for greater participatory

development. Finally, we probe the current incarnation of state-sponsored deliberation in India –

namely, village assemblies known as gram sabhas under the constitutionally mandated system of

Indian village democracy or Panchayati Raj – and review the growing empirical scholarship about

these village assemblies.



Historical Roots of Indian Deliberation

        While Indian electoral democracy was only instituted in its current form at independence,

the practice of public reasoning and deliberation is a much older phenomenon, dating back to

Buddhist, Jain, and Hindu traditions as early as the fifth century BCE. Religious councils hosted by

early Indian Buddhists, for example, often focused on resolving debates within and across religious

traditions; importantly, they “also addressed the demands of social and civic duties, and furthermore

helped, in a general way, to consolidate and promote the tradition of open discussion on contentious

issues” (Sen 2005, p. 15). In the third century BCE, such practices became celebrated under the

reign of Ashoka, who sought to codify rules for public discussion that emphasized mutual respect

and honor. By the 16 th century, under the reign of Akbar, interfaith dialogues were explicitly aimed

at the pursuit of reason rather than reliance on tradition. The priority given to equality and reason in

deliberation echo standards in contemporary deliberative theory; perhaps even more significantly,

their explicit sponsorship by the state reveals the extent of their importance to early Indian culture.

        Early deliberation, however, was not confined to state-sponsored discourse; it was also used

as a vehicle to criticize the state, particularly during the early colonial period, and established



                                                     4
religious doctrine. After the arrival of Christian missionaries, for example, Muslim religious leaders

published placards and pamphlets to rebut Christian attacks on the Prophet; “such works often

contained covert critique of the Company as a secular ruler and were not limited to the veracity of

the Koran and Bible” (Bayly 2000, p. 191). Similar debates took place between Hindu philosophers

and missionaries, on matters both religious and worldly. This critical dialogue in the Indian ecumene

is hardly surprising, given openness to debate within India’s religious varied systems — from

Buddhism and Jainism to Hinduism and Islam (Bayly 2000). Within Hinduism, for example,

discussions of apadharma, which outlined the conditions under which the Hindu moral order did not

hold, and the Bhakti movement, which provided an individual path to spiritual fulfillment regardless

of birth or caste, pushed people to question the prevailing social order, often using the systems of

logic and argumentation prominent in the orthodox Nyaya tradition. Within Islam, religious leaders

actively interrogated the sultan’s power and its limitations under Sharia law; moreover, the growth of

Sufi mysticism in South Asia challenged orthodoxy of mainstream sects.

        Even in this early period, participants in such public debates extended beyond just the

intellectual, political, and religious elite. Early debates — in sabhas, kathas, panchayats, and samajs —

often included both notable big men and peasants, in contestation with each other and in opposition

to the state. Indeed, “the t erm sabha (association) itself originally indicated a meeting in which

different qualities of people and opinions were tested, rather than the scene of a pronunciamento by

caste elders” (Bayly 2000, p. 187). Evidence from collective literary biographies demonstrates this

diverse body of peoples known to the critical public — from washermen to tailors and even women.

While much of this public discourse took place via written letters and placards, oral communication

played a large role in constructing a “highly effective information order,” with gossip and news

disseminated outside druggist stalls and mosques, analogous to the smoking dens and coffee shops

in the Middle East. Beyond this explicitly political oral culture, cultural performances, such as skits,



                                                     5
fables, and plays, provided yet another venue for elites and masses to link together to express

political messages. Of course, the inclusiveness and accessibility of such public debates should not

be overstated; like other emergent publ ic spheres, India’s growing deliberative institutions were

uneven in their reach and were still predominantly the province of the educated. Despite their

limited scope, however, the presence of a bounded, but critical public sphere suggests an important

foundation for future participatory and democratic politics.



In Dialogue with the West

        By the late 19th century, Western liberal philosophers had begun to articulate a vision of

participatory democracy in which equal citizens could collectively make decisions in a deliberative

and rational manner. Thinkers such as John Stuart Mill advanced theories of democratic

participation in which deliberation came to be more than a mere method of decision-making; it

served an important educative function — teaching individuals how to engage as public citizens.

These ideas, among others, would profoundly shape and be shaped by the British presence in India.

        Of particular relevance for the trajectory of Indian deliberation was Henry Maine, who was

sent to India in the 1860s to advise the British government on legal matters. While serving in the

subcontinent, he came across several accounts by British administrators of thriving indigenous

systems of autonomous village governments, whose structure and practice shared many

characteristics of participatory democracy (Maine 1876). Maine had been influenced by J.S. Mill,

who argued that universal suffrage and participation in a democratic nation would greatly benefit

from the experience of such participation at the local level (Mill 1869). Observing Indian village

governments, Maine came to articulate a theory of the village community as an alternative to the

centralized state; these village communities, led by a council of elders, were not subject to a set of




                                                    6
laws articulated from above, but had more fluid legal and governance structures that adapted to

changing conditions, while maintaining strict adherence to traditional customs (Mantena 2010).

        This argument had a profound impact on colonial administration: As India became fertile

territory for experiments in governance, the liberal British Viceroy Lord Ripon instituted local

government reforms in 1882 for the primary purpose of providing “political education, ” and

reviving and extending India’s indigenous system of government (Tinker 1967). The

implementation of these reforms followed an erratic path, but an Act passed in 1920 set up the first

formal, democratically elected village councils, with provinces varying widely in how councils were

constituted, in the extent of their jurisdiction, and in how elections were held (Tinker 1967).

        Beyond influencing colonial policy, Maine’s description of self -reliant Indian village

communities came to shape the thinking of Mohandas Gandhi, who made it a central tenet of his

vision for an independent India (Rudolph and Rudolph 2006, Mantena 2012). Gandhi’s philosophy

of decentralized economic and political power, as articulated in his book Village Swaraj, viewed the

self-reliant village as emblematic of a “perfect democracy,” ensuring equality across castes and

religions and self-sufficiency in all needs. These villages would come to form “an alternative

panchayat raj, understood as a non-hierarchical, decentralized polity of loosely federated village

associations and powers” (Mantena 2012, p. 536). Stressing non-violence and cooperation, this

Gandhian ideal elevated local participation — not just for the political education of India’s new

citizens, but as a form of democratic self-governance.

        Gandhi’ s proposal, however, was defeated during the Constituent Assembly Debates. The

debates themselves, which reflected many deliberative ideals, instead led to the creation of a

constitutional order that de-emphasized village democracy — largely out of B.R. Ambedkar’s

concern that the hierarchical and largely illiterate society of rural India would not allow the

downtrodden to exercise their voice, regardless of any constitutional guarantee of formal political



                                                    7
equality (Austin 1972). Ambedkar2, the principal architect of the Constitution and a fierce advocate

for the rights of Dalits (formerly untouchables), was deeply skeptical of village democracy, arguing:

“What is the village but a sink of localism, a den of ignorance, narrow -mindedness and

communalism?” (Immerwahr 2015 , p. 86). In many ways, his thinking was consistent with

contemporary liberal theorists, who suggest that deliberation and participatory democracy are only

possible when citizens see each other as equals, deserving of voice in decision-making. Ambedkar’s

recognition of entrenched social and economic inequality ruled out the possibility of a robust,

participatory democracy in India; he suggested that India would enter democracy in a “life of

contradictions” — in which political equality would be in conflict with persistent social and

economic inequality. This animated his belief that the constitution should guarantee more than just

formal equality via the vote; it should also play a major role in the nation’s development agenda —

via the guarantee of education and employment, the abolition of caste and other social ills, and the

provision of certain forms of group representation.

         Village democracy did not entirely disappear from the Indian constitution, however; Article

40 stated that “the State shall take steps to organize village panchayats and endow them with such

powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.”

Though this article was a mere “directive principle , ” or non-judiciable guidepost for policy, some

state governments did set up formally constituted village democracies. In 1947, India’s largest state ,

Uttar Pradesh, pioneered the approach of instituting a deliberative body that it called a gaon sabha,

which met twice a year to discuss and prioritize the concerns of the village (Retzlaff 1963; Tinker

1967).

         By the 1950s, a confluence of both domestic and international factors led to resurgent calls

for greater citizen voice in development. On the international stage, USAID and the Ford

Foundation had taken up a strongly communitarian vision of human progress and had begun



                                                   8
promoting participatory development programs throughout the developing world (Immerwahr

2015). India became a particularly fertile ground for such policies, not only because of Gandhi’s

earlier vision for India’s village democracies, but because India’s first prime minister Jawaharlal

Nehru himself had to contend with the failure of his state-led, top-down Grow More Food

program. The resulting community development program, financed by a bilateral aid agreement with

the United States, thus grew from a mere pilot to a national program within just one decade

(Immerwahr 2015). A government committee, led by a senior politician Balwantray Mehta, was

formed to spearhead the initiative; it released a report in 1957 that set the foundation of Panchayati

Raj, a government-led plan to decentralize democracy into three tiers of local government, which

would be empowered to direct the local development agenda (Mehta 1957).



Deliberation under Panchayati Raj

        As states came to adopt the panchayati structure, most were far from realizing the Gandhian

ideal of egalitarian self-governance. Deliberation and participation under this new structure was

meant to elicit the “felt needs” of the village, which depended on the ability of the village to be a

cohesive body which was capable of articulating a general will. In practice, however, “the tendency

of the spokesmen for the village to come from the powerful, landed classes within rural life was

widely acknowledged,” and any “actual felt needs that threate ned village solidarity — such as a

desire for land reform, the abolition of caste hierarchies, or sexual equality — were quickly ruled

out” (Immerwahr 2015, p. 92). Even S.K. Dey, the first Union Cabinet Minister for Cooperation

and Panchayati Raj, admitted that many villages had nominal success, with paper forms completed

but no actual programs implemented (Immerwahr 2015, p. 94). The gradual adoption of panchayat

implementation thus proceeded unevenly across the country, with relatively more success in some

states than others.



                                                    9
        The modern gram sabha was pioneered by the Government of Karnataka, which passed an

act in 1985 establishing democratically elected mandal panchayats (a mandal consisted of several

villages), with clearly delineated functions and appropriate budgets. Gram sabhas played a central role

in the Karnataka mandal panchayat system. All eligible voters in a mandal were members of the sabha,

which would be held twice a year. The sabhas were tasked with discussing and reviewing all

development problems and programs in the village, selecting beneficiaries for anti-poverty

programs, and developing annual plans for the village (Aziz 2007). In practice, the sabhas were

resented by village councilors because they were subject to queries and demands for explanations

from citizens, and their answers often elicited heated reactions. Consequently, gram sabhas were

largely abandoned after the first year of the implementation of the 1985 act. If the meetings were

held, they were conducted without prior announcement, or were held in the Mandal office, which

could not accommodate more than a few people (Crook and Manor 1998).

        Despite this, the Karnataka reforms were seen as an important innovation in village

government and received wide support across the political spectrum. Consequently, a movement to

amend the Indian constitution to strengthen Article 40 with the tenets drawn from the Karnataka

Act gained momentum. This resulted, in 1992, in the passage of the 73rd Constitutional

Amendment to the Indian constitution, which gave several important powers and functions to

village governments. The three-tier system of decentralization and its accompanying forum for

deliberation, the gram sabha , were formally codified. It mandated that all Indian villages would be

governed by an “executive,” elected village council, and a “legislature” formed by the gram sabha , to

which every citizen of the village would be a member, with meetings held at least two times a year.

Lastly, the Amendment required that at least 33 percent of seats in village councils would be

reserved for women, and a number proportionate to their population in the village reserved for

disadvantaged castes.



                                                   10
        Following the passage of this amendment, Kerala, India’s most literate state , which had a

long history of progressive politics, initiated a radical program of participatory decentralization

(Isaac and Franke 2000), where the gram sabha played a central role. The program rested on three

pillars. It devolv ed 40 percent of the state’s development budge t to village panchayats, gave

substantial powers to these councils, and instituted a People’s Campaign – a grassroots program to

raise awareness and train citizens about how to exercise their rights and become active participants

in the panchayat process, primarily by participating in gram sabhas.

        Gram sabhas have become central to Kerala’s village planning process , which is based on a set

of nested piecemeal stages (Isaac and Heller 2003). Working committees and “development

seminars” are held in conjunction with gram sabhas to make them practical spaces of deliberative

decision making and planning. Instead of open deliberation, attendees are divided into resource-

themed groups or committees and the discussions within each group yield consensual decisions

regarding the designated resource. This structure is geared towards increasing the efficiency of

consensual decision making, and is facilitated by various training programs to instruct both citizens

on deliberative planning and local bureaucrats on methods for turning plans into effective public

action. Heller, Harilal and Chaudhuri (2007) study the impact of the People’s Campaign in Ker ala

with qualitative and quantitative data from 72 gram sabhas , and find that the campaign has been

effective, with positive effects on the social inclusion of lower-caste groups and women in decision

making. Furthermore, Gibson (2012), examining the same data, argues that the key explanation for

the effectiveness of gram sabhas in Kerala is the high level of participation by women.

        Over the last two decades, all other Indian states have implemented the various tenets of the

73 rd amendment, but with varying levels of intensity – and none as effectively as Kerala. The effects

of several aspects of the amendment (including the strength of electoral democracy, the impact of

quotas for women and lower-castes, and the implications of elections for distributive politics and



                                                   11
clientalism) have been the subject of a large body of research (e.g. Chattopadhyay and Duflo 2004;

Besley et al. 2004, 2005; Bardhan and Mookherjee 2006; Beaman et al. 2008; Ban and Rao 2008).

        A small and growing body of scholarship has examined the sabha itself, and whether it serves

as a mere “talking shop,” or constitutes a true deliberative forum in which citizens are able to raise

and resolve issues of public relevance. Besley et al. (2005) examine survey data from 5,180 randomly

chosen households drawn from 537 villages in the four South Indian states of Andhra Pradesh,

Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu. They find, like Crook and Manor (1998), that with the

exception of Kerala, gram sabhas are often not held as scheduled; however, when they are held,

governance sharply improves. Focusing on a specific policy administered at the local level – access

to a Below Poverty Line (BPL) card, which provides an array of public benefits – they find that

policies were more effectively targeted to landless and illiterate individuals when a gram sabha was

held. And these effects were large, raising the probability of receiving a BPL card by 25 percent.

        The reason why gram sabhas result in better poverty targeting is related to one of their

primary roles in village government. BPL lists are first determined on the basis of a census

conducted by the government which identifies poor households with a given set of criteria.

However, in many states these lists have to be ratified by the gram sabha , which allows the

quantitative definitions of poverty to be deliberatively interrogated by the community. Rao and

Sanyal (2009) examine transcripts of deliberation from 290 gram sabhas from a subset of villages

studied by Besley et al. (2005) and find that this process acts as a vehicle for questioning

governmental definitions of poverty and creating a shared, intersubjective 3 understanding of what it

means to be poor. They argue that gram sabhas “become sites for the joint production of an

understanding of what it means to be official ly classified as poor,” and that “these exchanges…

foster the future capability of the poor to engage in a critical dialogue with the state on definitional

matters.”



                                                   12
        Rao and Sanyal’s (2009) other contribution is to highlight the important role that gram sabhas

play shaping the discursive styles of the poor. Since they are embedded within a democratic system

that is also subject to electoral accountability, they are a relatively safe space for open speech. Things

that cannot be said in private discourse become possible in a gram sabha , because political elites may

face electoral costs by taking action against a citizen for something said in a gram sabha . This allows

lower castes to use the space to transgress social norms and make claims for dignity; margina l groups

voice their concerns and previously “hidden transcripts” become public – forcing public discussion

on sensitive social issues that people would rather avoid. While deliberation can thus become a tool

for social inclusion, such dignity claims may simply reflect the low levels of literacy characteristic of

rural India that result in low “oratory competence” (Sanyal et al. 2015). As literacy increases to reach

Kerala ’s level , gram sabhas are likely to become spaces to have a dialogue on topics of public interest.

        Such publicly relevant discussions are most effective, of course, when citizens are well

informed and can demand accountability from public officials. Limited information and media

coverage, however, often leave citizens at a “disadvantage when negotiating with local governments”

(Bhattacharjee and Chattopadhyay 2011, p. 46). Analyzing transcripts from sabhas in West Bengal,

Bhattacharjee and Chattopadhyay find that villagers do try to use information from media to

negotiate with elected officials and inquire about entitlements; these requests, however, are easily

ignored or dismissed by GP members, who can evade requests by claiming that the media is

misleading or incorrect. The authors attribute this to the “thinness” of news coverage, which does

little to empower citizens to confront officials. Despite this troubling picture, however, the authors

acknowledge that the very act of demanding entitlements – even seemingly small and selfish claims

for rice or pensions – reflects citizens’ “capacity to aspire” for a better life (Appadurai 2004).

        Low literacy also results in emotions playing an important role in deliberative discourse

(Sanyal 2015). They can play a constructive role as a form of “rude accountability” (Hossain 2009)



                                                    13
but they can also disrupt the ability of gram sabhas to make rational collective decisions. In other

words, deliberation in low literacy settings raises the possibility that gram sabhas are simply “talking

shops” that bear no relationship to democratic dialogue. This hypothesis is explicitly tested by Ban,

Jha, and Rao’s (2012) quantitative analysis of coded versions of the same gram sabha transcripts

examined by Rao and Sanyal (2010). Deriving hypotheses from rational choice models of group

decision making under uncertainty, they analyze the transcript data to test three competing

hypotheses of the types of equilibrium that characterize gram sabha interactions: (a) “cheap talk,” in

which discussions are not substantive even though they may appear equitable; (b) elite capture, in

which discussion is dominated by the interests of landowning and wealthy citizens; and (c) “efficient

democracy,” in which meetings follow patterns of good democ ratic practice. They find that in

villages with more diversity in caste groups, and less village-wide agreement on policy priorities, the

topics discussed track those of interest to the median household. In villages with less caste

heterogeneity, the priorities of landowners are more likely to dominate the discourse (consistent with

elite domination). The authors conclude that gram sabhas are more than mere opportunities for cheap

talk, that they more closely follow patterns observed in a well-functioning “efficient” democracy.

        In addition to elite domination by landed and wealthy classes, scholars have also begun to

examine whether deliberation in gram sabhas is gendered in nature, and how policies aimed at

inclusion might mitigate gender biases. This question is explored in a working paper by

Palaniswamy, Parthasarathy, and Rao, who use text-as-data methods on an original sample of

transcripts from Tamil Nadu to evaluate whether and how women participate in village assemblies.

They find that despite the rel atively high rates of attendance, women are the “silent sex” (Karpowitz

and Mendelberg 2014); however, they also show that a state intervention which builds women’s

networks and trains them to engage with village government dramatically increases both women’s

presence and frequency of speech at the sabha . Though the authors are optimistic about the potential



                                                    14
of such policies to make deliberative spaces more inclusive, they also caution that the intervention

shifts the topic of conversation toward the program itself – potentially crowding out organic

demands and requests.



Conclusion

        The sheer scale of deliberation practiced through the Indian gram sabha has been remarkable

– not only because these forums are vibrant despite illiteracy and inequality, but be cause they have

been a key site where citizens can challenge entrenched social hierarchies and demand improved

governance from elected officials. By providing an open space for citizens – both men and women,

high and low castes – to exercise voice, the gram sabha has served an important role in the Indian

democratic experiment. Moreover, these forums have underscored the idea that deliberation is not

merely a Western democratic phenomenon, but rather, an integral part of the cultures all over the

world. Particularly in India, the rich interplay between Western democratic ideas and local thinkers

through the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries truly “Indianized” deliberative democracy –

ultimately resulting in the 73 rd Amendment’s constitutional mandate to create the gram sabha . Though

the quality and integrity of implementation has varied considerably across the Indian states, the

constitutional mandate has provided an invaluable blueprint for participation and deliberation over

matters of public interest. At their best, as in Kerala, the sabhas have allowed citizens to generate

consensual decisions on how the state should allocate resources; even in weaker incarnations, the

sabhas capture aspects of “efficient” democracy, in which discussion cent ers around issues of broad

public relevance.

        Despite these successes, however, the empirical scholarship also provides evidence for the

concerns articulated by Ambedkar – both the challenges of rural illiteracy and that of elite

domination and gender bias. First, evidence shows that organic deliberation within the sabhas can be



                                                   15
“noisy,” filled with identity claims, emotional rhetoric, and demands for individual entitlements.

Second, discourse often reflects the existing patterns of social standing and hiera rchy, with elites

dominating discussion in less fractionalized villages, and women remaining relatively silent even

when they attend en masse. While these inequalities are undoubtedly concerning, three sets of

empirical findings reveal the ways in which deliberation in India still thrives. First, these inequalities

have been challenged from within the deliberative forums, with lower castes using the open

discursive space to make claims of dignity that cannot be ignored by those in power. The use of

such dignity claims, while not traditionally considered “rational deliberation,” still plays a vital role in

enabling citizens to generate credibility, create empathy, and trigger a sense of injustice (Mansbridge

2015). Second, state policies and intervention have been shown to help lessen the extent of

inequality within the deliberative sphere. Programs to train and empower citizens, like the People’s

Campaign in Kerala or the women-centered Pudhu Vaazvhu Project in Tamil Nadu, suggest that

facilitated deliberation can usher the sabhas closer to the deliberative ideal – in which citizens of

equal standing arrive at consensual decisions on matters of public interest. And third, literacy in

India is on the rise; over the past decade alone, adult literacy has grown by roughly 10 percent to 74

percent, with the strongest gains in rural regions and among women (Census of India 2011). 4 Given

these gains, one could speculate that the quality of deliberation should improve. The Kerala’s

People’s Campaign has not translat ed well in other, less literate, parts of India (Ananthpur et al.

2014); thus, secular improvements in literacy levels should improve the efficacy of attempts to make

deliberative democracy a more practical tool for collective action.

        The deepening of democracy via deliberation, however, has also faced meaningful

limitations. Perhaps most obviously, the 73 rd Amendment only applies to rural India, leaving urban

India devoid of any mandated deliberative institutions. This focus on rural rather than urban

democracy is not surprising given the profound influence of Gandhi’s Village Swaraj even on



                                                    16
contemporary politics, but it remains a huge limitation for Indian democracy, especially as India

rapidly continues to urbanize.

        Nevertheless, gram sabhas, with all their warts, provide an important counter-example to the

notion that meaningful deliberation necessarily requires equality of voice. The Indian example

shows, on the other hand, that deliberative institutions can help societies move toward greater equality

of agency and social inclusion. Moreover, the sheer scale of the network of gram sabhas demonstrates

that governments, when they are persuaded of the added value of deliberation, can help create

deliberative institutions with intrinsic and instrumental value – even in conditions of high inequality

and poverty.

        None of this would have happened if gram sabhas were not constitutionally mandated. By

being enshrined in the 73 rd amendment, they have become permanent structures that are difficult, if

not impossible, to dislodge. Consequently, with time, gram sabhas are likely to become even more

effective tools in India’s quest to give its citizens a better life. In this sense , they demonstrate the

potential value of deliberation for development and poverty reduction, a subject that is becoming

increasingly important in the developing world (Heller and Rao, 2015).




                                                     17
References

Appadurai, A., 2004. “The capacity to aspire.” In Culture and Public Action, ed. V. Rao and M. Walton,

        Stanford University Press, 2004.

Ananthpur, K., Malik, K., and Rao, V., 2014. The anatomy of failure: an ethnography of a

        randomized trial to deepen democracy in rural India. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper

        No. 6958.

Austin, G., 1966. The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Aziz, A., 2007. “The Decentralization Experience in Karnataka,” In Decentralization: Institutions and

        Politics in Rural India ,” eds. S. Singh and P. Sharma, Delhi, Oxford University Press.

Ban, R. and Rao, V., 2008. Tokenism or a gency? The impact of women’s reservations on village

        democracies in south India. Economic Development and Cultural Change , 56 (3): 501-530.

Ban, R., Jha, S. and Rao, V., 2012. Who has voice in a deliberative democracy? Evidence from

        transcripts of village parliaments in south India. Journal of Development Economics , 99 (2): 428-

        438.

Bardhan, P. and Mookherjee, D., 2006. Pro-poor targeting and accountability of local governments

        in West Bengal. Journal of development Economics , 79 (2): 303-327.

Bayly, C.A., 1998. Origins of Nationality in South Asia: Patriotism and Ethical Government in the Making of

        Modern India . Delhi.

Bayly, C.A. and Bayly, C.A., 2000. Empire and Information: Intelligence gathering and social communication in

        India, 1780-1870 (Vol. 1). Cambridge University Press.

Bhattacharjee, S. and Chattopadhyay, R., 2011. The Information Deficit: Use of Media in a

        Deliberative Democracy. Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. XLVI, No. 52 : 45-52.




                                                     18
Census of India. 2011. Rural Urban Distribution of Population. Retrieved November 2, 2016 from:

        http://censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-

        results/paper2/data_files/india/Rural_Urban_2011.pdf

Crook, R.C. and Manor, J., 1998. Democracy and decentralisation in South Asia and West Africa:

        Participation, accountability and performance. Cambridge University Press.

Beaman, L.A., Chattopadhyay, R., Duflo, E., Pande, R. and Topalova, P., 2008. Powerful women: does

        exposure reduce bias? (No. w14198). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Besley, T., Pande, R., Rahman, L. and Rao, V., 2004. The politics of public good provision:

        Evidence from Indian local governments. Journal of the European Economic Association , 2 (2‐3):

        416-426.

Besley, T., Pande, R. and Rao, V., 2005. Participatory democracy in action: Survey evidence from

        South India. Journal of the European Economic Association , 3 (2‐3): 648-657.

Chatterjee, P., and Katznelson, I., eds. Anxieties of Democracy: Tocquevillean Reflections on India and the

        United States . Oxford University Press, 2012.

Chattopadhyay, R. and Duflo, E., 2004. Women as policy makers: Evidence from a randomized

        policy experiment in India. Econometrica , 72 (5): 1409-1443.

Constituent Assembly Debates. (1948). Constituent assembly debates (proceedings), volume vii,

        November 4 1948. URL http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/ vol7p1m.htm.

Dryzek, J.S., 2000. Deliberative democracy and beyond: Liberals, critics, contestations. Oxford University

        Press.

Elster, J., 1998. Deliberative democracy (Vol. 1). Cambridge University Press.

Gandhi, M., 1963. Village swaraj. Ahmedabad, India: Navajivan Publishing House.

Gibson, C., 2012. Making redistributive direct democracy matter development and women’s

        participation in the Gram Sabhas of Kerala, India. American Sociological Review, 77 (3): 409-434.


                                                      19
Guha, R., 2005. “Arguments with Sen, Arguments about India,” Economic and Political Weekly, 40(41):

        4420-4425.

Habermas, J., 1975. Legitimation Crisis Pa Txt (Vol. 519). Beacon Press.

Heller, P. and Rao, V. eds., 2015. Deliberation and Development: Rethinking the Role of Voice and Collective

        Action in Unequal Societies . World Bank Publications.

Heller, P., Harilal, K.N. and Chaudhuri, S., 2007. Building local democracy: Evaluating the impact of

        decentralization in Kerala, India. World development, 35 (4): 626-648.

Hossain, N., 2009. Rude accountability in the unreformed state: Informal pressures on frontline

        bureaucrats in Bangladesh. IDS Working Papers, 2009(319): 1-35.

Franke, R.W., 2002. Local democracy and development: the Kerala people's campaign for decentralized planning.

        Rowman & Littlefield.

Isaac, T.M.T. and Heller, P., 2003. Democracy and development: decentralized planning in Kerala,

        India. Pp. 77-110 in Deepening Democracy: Institutional Innovations in Empowered Participatory

        Governance , eds. A. Fung and E.O. Wright, London and New York: Verso.

Immerwahr, D., 2015. thinking small: the United States and the lure of community development . Harvard

        University Press.

Karpowitz, C.F. and Mendelberg, T., 2014. The silent sex: Gender, deliberation, and institutions . Princeton

        University Press.

Kaviraj, S., 2011. The enchantment of democracy and India . Permanent Black.

Keane, J., 2009. The life and death of democracy. Simon and Schuster.

Khilnani, S., 1999. The idea of India. Penguin Books India.

Maine, H.S., 1876. Village-communities in the East and West. H. Holt.

Mansbridge, J., 2015. A Minimalist Definition of Deliberation. In Heller and Rao 2015: 27-50.

Mansuri, G. and Rao, V., 2012. Localizing development: does participation work? . World Bank Publications.



                                                      20
Mantena, K., 2010. Alibis of empire: Henry Maine and the ends of liberal imperialism . Princeton University

        Press.

Mantena, K., 2012. On Gandhi's critique of the state: Sources, contexts, conjunctures. Modern

        Intellectual History, 9 (03): 535-563.

Mehta, B., 1957. Report of the Team for the Study of Community Projects and National Extension

        Service. Committee on plan projects, Government of India, New Delhi.

Mill, J.S., 1966. On liberty. Macmillan Education UK.

Rao, V. and Sanyal, P., 2010. Dignity through discourse: poverty and the culture of deliberation in

        Indian village democracies. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social

        Science, 629 (1): 146-172.

Retzlaff, R.H., 1962. Village government in India: a case study. Village government in India: a case study.

Rudolph, L.I. and Rudolph, S.H., 2006. Postmodern Gandhi and other essays: Gandhi in the world and at

        home. University of Chicago Press.

Sanyal, P., 2015. The Role of Emotions in Deliberative Development. In Heller and Rao 2015:

        167-191.

Sanyal, P., Rao, V. and Majumdar, S., 2015. Recasting culture to undo gender: A sociological analysis

        of Jeevika in Rural Bihar, India. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper , 7411.

Sanyal, P., Rao, V. and Prabhakar, U., 2015. Oral democracy and women’ s oratory competency in

        Indian village assemblies: a qualitative analysis. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper , 7416.

Sen, A., 2005. The argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian history, culture and identity . Macmillan.

Tinker, H., 1954. The Foundations of the Local Self-government in India, Pakistan and Burma (Vol. 1).

        London: University of London, Athlone Press.




                                                       21
Notes
1
    More recent work has challenged these pre-conditions, creating room within deliberative theory for

other forms of argumentation (including, for example, story-telling and emotional argumentation),

for arguments based on particular, rather than common, interest, and even for deviations from the

egalitarian ideal. See, for example, Mansbridge (2015), Dryzek (2002), and others.
2
    BR Ambedkar, along with Gandhi and Nehru, is considered one of the pre-eminent figures of

modern India. He was born into an untouchable caste, educated at LSE and Columbia, and was the

Chairman of the committee that drafted the Indian constitution in 1949.
3
    This term is used primarily in phenomenological sociology to refer to the mutual constitution of

social relationships and reality. As the term has been used here, it means a mutually shared and

constructed meaning of poverty.
4
    According to the Indian census, rural adult literacy grew from 58.7 to 68.9 percent between 2001

and 2011, while urban literacy grew from 79.9 to 85.0 percent. National gains in male literacy during

this period totaled 6.8 percent, while for females, the growth in literacy was 12.7 percent.




                                                   22
