                                                                   WPS8020


Policy Research Working Paper                                     8020




          Savings, Financial Development
              and Economic Growth
      in the Arab Republic of Egypt Revisited
                                 Khaled Hussein
                               Mahmoud Mohieldin
                                 Ahmed Rostom




Office of the Senior Vice President for 2030 Development Agenda
UN Relations and Partnerships
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8020


  Abstract
 Private savings play a pivotal role in financing development                        covering 1991–2010, adopting a vector error correction
 and sustaining growth. Recently, there have been many                               model. The key findings attest that private savings in Egypt
 theoretical developments that underpin key determinants                             follow the Life Cycle Model in the long term. Controlling
 of savings behavior, many of which merit empirical inves-                           for population growth, the analysis finds that the real inter-
 tigation. Understanding the dynamics of the determinants                            est rate and financial development are key determinates for
 of savings is crucial to inform economic policy and devise                          real private savings in the long run. The negative long-run
 reform programs. This paper builds on earlier work exam-                            relation between the real interest rate and private savings
 ining the stability of the long-run relationship between the                        holds under the proposed model structure as well as for that
 real interest rate, financial saving, and total saving during                       in the earlier work. However, in the short run, inflation and
 1960 to 1990. The paper extends the scope of the empirical                          exchange rate movements are key determinants for private
 investigation of the determinants of private savings behavior                       savings decisions. Robust economic policies, inclusive of
 in the Arab Republic of Egypt, and considers the effect                             macroeconomic and monetary measures, are prerequisites for
 of financial development. The analysis uses quarterly data                          maximizing private savings and financing growth in Egypt.




  This paper is a product of the Office of the Senior Vice President for 2030 Development Agenda, UN Relations and
  Partnerships. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution
  to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at arostom@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
    “Savings, Financial Development and Economic Growth in the Arab Republic of Egypt
                                        Revisited”1

                      Khaled Hussein2 Mahmoud Mohieldin3 and Ahmed Rostom4




JEL codes: D91, D81, E21



Keywords: Time-Series Models, Savings, Uncertainty, Life cycle model, Permanent Income Hypothesis




1
  The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not
represent the views of the World Bank Group and its affiliated organizations nor those of the Executive Directors of
the World Bank or the governments they represent. It does not also represent the views of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa and should only be attributed to Authors in their personal research capacities. Authors would
like to thank Ms. Mariam El-Maghrabi for her outstanding research support. Correspondent author email address is
arostom@worldbank.org. Earlier version of this paper was presented 37th Annual Meeting of the Middle East
Economic Association (MEEA); January, 5th 2017.
2
  United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
3
  World Bank and Cairo University Faculty of Economics and Political Science
4
  World Bank and the George Washington University Economics Department
    Introduction
Savings is alternatively defined as income minus consumption, the change in wealth, or the supply
of capital. Given the comprehensive and consistent definitions of each of these terms, each
definition of savings would represent the same concept and give rise to similar empirical measures
(Gale and Sabelhaus 1999).

Understanding savings behavior is critical when designing economic policies that promote
investment and growth. Most of the empirical literature that analyzes cross-country savings
behavior concentrates on aggregate savings for a multitude of reasons. The first reason is due in
part to the lack of consistent information on household behavior, as well as possible differences in
the household savings in developing versus industrial countries (Loayza et. al. 2000).

The decline in savings will reflect on the state of economic growth and development. One
interpretation asserts that the low savings rate will induce low savings behavior and will
accordingly lead to low capital accumulation. On the macro level, it illustrates vulnerability of an
economy’s dependence on foreign capital. At the micro level, it raises households’ fears to secure
future consumption through pension systems for retirement or other purposes.

Another interpretation is that the sustainment of short-term aggregate demand is indicative of a
low savings rate; however, worries that the savings rate will rebound tend to arise. The decline in
personal savings, and the accompanying rise in consumption has helped fuel the economic
expansion in the United States as well as propping up the global economy (Gale and Sabelhaus
1999).

Nordhaus (1996) proposed a third view asserting that current tools for measuring savings and
investment are stone-age definitions in the information era. His view emphasized that measures of
aggregate savings weakly correspond to the classical concept of savings. Accordingly, empirical
analysis of different economic issues may require examining different measures of savings. In
spite of that, his view supports the conceptual theory that low savings or higher consumption
accelerates economic growth; however, both the minimal and poor quality of savings data makes
it quite difficult to reach such conclusion when based solely on official savings aggregates.

While analysis of savings is significant to guide development policies in developing economies, it
is challenged by quality of data and strength of the analytical framework and interpretation of
empirical outcomes. With that being said, this paper will study savings behavior in the Arab
Republic of Egypt. The next section provides a literature review of recent empirical literature on
savings behavior in addition to earlier research on modeling savings behavior in Egypt. It is
followed by a section describing the data and the empirical methodology. The last two sections
include the analysis of the empirical findings and the conclusion.

    Literature Review on Modeling Savings Behavior
The Life Cycle Hypothesis (LCH) enriched the theoretical literature on savings. The key
assumption of this hypothesis is that individuals spread their lifetime consumption evenly over
their lives by accumulating savings during earning years and maintaining consumption levels
throughout retirement. Therefore, tests of the life cycle hypothesis are mainly concerned with the
effect of demographic variables such as age groups, birth rates, and dependency ratios on savings


                                                 2
 
behavior mainly in the long term. The second group of variables used to describe savings during
working life and dissavings during retirement are financial variables such as interest rates, inflation
rates, available financial instruments, and initial wealth levels. These variables are significant as
they dynamically affect the intertemporal consumption decisions of households.

The life-cycle model of household savings behavior, grounded in expected utility theory, is
generally associated with Modigliani5 and Friedman (1957). Modigliani and Friedman made their
literary contributions by translating the abstract notion of an optimal consumption profile into a
model that could be estimated econometrically (King, 1985). This demonstrated the empirical
relevance of the separation of the consumption and income profiles, which is the principal
implication of the life-cycle model. Modigliani stresses the role of wealth in the consumption
function, Friedman’s concept of “permanent income,” and how both are based on the idea that
current consumption is not determined primarily by current income.

Nevertheless, empirical tests of these two major hypotheses focused on cross-country studies that
resulted in many drawbacks (Muradoglu and Taskin, 1996). The key challenge is the comparability
of samples that include countries at different levels of development; this questions the reliability
of these studies as far as interpreting differences across country groups.6 Moreover, Schmidt-
Hebbel, Webb, and Corsetti (1992) emphasized another great challenge that cast doubt upon using
national aggregate savings data, assuming that the private savings account was a predominant part
of total savings. They emphasized that aggregation of savings is inconsistent across countries,
which resulted in a number of cross-country inconsistencies due to the difference in the
methodology employed in their derivation. The following section provides a brief review of recent
empirical literature on modeling savings behavior.

i) Recent Developments in Literature on Savings Behavior in Emerging and
   Developing Countries

Kwakwa (2013) examines the key determinants of national savings using the Johansen
cointegration technique as well as the error correction model for Ghana over 1975-2008. The
empirical results show that in the long run, income and terms of trade have a positive and
significant impact on savings while dependency ratio, political instability and the real interest rate
have a negative impact on savings. In the short run, however, only terms of trade positively affects
savings.

Awan et al. (2010) analyzes the long run and short run association among the real rate of interest
on deposits, financial liberalization, economic growth, terms of trade, real remittances by Pakistani
emigrants, and domestic savings behavior in Pakistan, using annual time series data for 1973-2007.
The “Auto Regressive Distributed Lag Bounds Testing” approach is utilized to determine co-
integration. The results reveal that real interest rate, financial liberalization, and economic growth
positively affect domestic savings in Pakistan in the long run. The coefficient of the liberalization
dummy is also positive and statistically significant, suggesting a need for increased liberalization
and deregulation of interest rates for mobilization of savings. Conversely, the terms of trade and
real remittances by emigrants show a negative relationship with domestic savings, thus supporting
the Complementarity Hypothesis which was developed separately by Mckinnon and Shaw in 1973.
                                                            
5   Modigliani & Brumbreg, 1954; Modigliani & Ando, 1957.
6   See Ortmeyer, 1985; Koskela and Viren, 1982; Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén, 2000; Beneston and Kauffman, 1990.


                                                               3
 
Dhanasekaran (2010) examines the causal relationship between gross domestic product and
savings using annual data in India between 1950-51 and 2002-03. In his investigation, he adopts
cointegration and causality models that allude to the presence of a stable long-run relationship
between both variables. Having verified that GDP and savings are cointegrated, the Granger test
was implemented in pursuit of indicating the absence of any causal relationship between both
variables.

Kim’s (2010) study explores internal and external determinants that could affect personal savings
in the United States using time series data between 1950 and 2007. The findings reveal that
personal savings is highly dependent on personal income, tax, bank credit and employment, while
the dependency ratio, current real estate loan, real interest rate, and status of economic performance
are indeterminate.

Agrawal and Sahoo (2009) estimate the long-run total and private savings functions for
Bangladesh using annual data during 1975 - 2004. They find that the total savings rate is mainly
determined by GDP growth rate, dependency ratio, interest rates, and bank density. Additionally,
the private savings rate is also affected by the public savings rate. The Granger Causality test
pointed to a bi-directional causality between savings and growth. They also carry out the Forecast
Error Variance Decomposition (FEVD) analysis using the Vector Auto Regression framework.
The FEVD is consistent with the causality results obtained using the Granger Causality tests as
well as the estimated savings functions.

Slami and Sheikhy (2008) examine the behavior of household savings in Algeria from 1970-2005;
they tested several models using the Least Squares method. The following models were tested: the
classical model, Keynesian model, relative income model, permanent income model, life cycle
model, and Taylor model. They find that the permanent income model most accurately explains
the saving behavior of an individual in Algeria. According to this model, previous savings and
current available income determine savings behavior.

Nwachukwu and Egwaikhide (2007) examine the determinants of private saving in Nigeria. Their
study re-estimates Nigeria’s saving function using ECM and annual data from 1970-2005. In
addition, the study compared the estimation results of ECM with those of three conventional
models: Partial-Adjustment, Growth Rate and Static Models. The conclusion was that the ECM
performed far better than the other models. Moreover, the results revealed that the savings rate is
positively correlated with the level of disposable income but negatively correlated with the rate of
growth of disposable income. The real interest rate on bank deposits has a significant negative
impact while public savings appears not to crowd out private savings. Therefore, the Ricardian
Equivalence does not hold in the case of Nigeria, in contrast to industrialized and semi-
industrialized economies. Furthermore, external terms of trade, inflation rate, and external debt
service ratio appear to have a positive impact on private saving.

ElBassam (2005) estimates a model that analyzes household savings in Saudi Arabia from 1970-
2002. A partial adjustment model of Koyck type was utilized to analyze the behavior of household
savings in Saudi Arabia. The estimated model of this study indicates that the income, wealth, and
financial development variables are statistically significant, while the other variables (inflation,
Dollar interest rate, and financial intermediation) are found statistically insignificant. Furthermore,
it suggested that the Gulf crisis had an effect on household savings behavior in Saudi Arabia.


                                                  4
 
Taher’s (2001) study explores the determinants of private savings in Saudi Arabia. His findings
assert that government spending on investment has a positive effect on private saving;
alternatively, budget surplus, excess of consumer loans, and outgoing remittances observed a
negative effect.

Burnside (2000) analyzes the behavior of private savings in Mexico by using quarterly data from
1980 to 1995. The correlation of private savings with various macroeconomic time series data
suggests that private savings is negatively correlated with the fiscal balance of the government. In
addition, private savings is more highly correlated with the level of private disposable income
(which has significant cyclical components) than it is with GNP. This suggests that savings, rather
than consumption, absorbs transitory movements in income. The paper uses vector autoregressions
in which tax shocks are found to be the primary determinants of the ratio of private savings to
GDP.

Rymes (1993) examines the fundamental determinants of savings and bubbles in stocks, bonds,
and real estate prices by exploring key findings drawn from the works of Laurence Kotlikoff and
Robert Shiller. Kotlikoff attributes savings to the existence of the extended family as well as
intergenerational transfers; he attests that savings is determined by the individual based on their
“fundamentals” (tastes, technology, endowments) as well as their intertemporal maximizing
choices. In addition, he claims that the role of the government is overemphasized in the
determination of rates and accumulation. Alternatively, Shiller examines the prices of stocks,
bonds, and residential real estate, hypothesizing that stock markets are efficient and that no such
excessive volatility exists in prices. Moreover, he argues that asset prices reflect more than
fundamentals, attesting that they reflect bubbles as well. Rymes concludes that although both
studies are detrimental to savings literature, he deems that the necessity to draw a line of separation
between fundamentals and conventions is wrong.

The main takeaway from surveying recent literature is that the findings are consistent with the
classical theory; that is, growth in income per capita has a predictive power to savings behavior
that is in line with the Keynesian proposition. However, it should be noted that determinants of
private savings behavior differ across countries, which merit individual country analysis to
robustly model savings behavior and identify its key determinants; this is a key motivation to the
deliberation of this paper.

ii) Recent Contributions for Understanding Savings Behavior in Egypt

Hevia and Loayza (2012) illustrate the mechanisms that link national savings and economic growth
in Egypt. The study uses a simple theoretical model calibrated to fit the Egyptian economy and
simulated to explore different potential scenarios. Their main conclusion was that if the Egyptian
economy did not experience progress in productivity, then a high rate of economic growth would
not be feasible at current rates of national saving and would require a saving effort that is highly
unrealistic. To obtain a constant 4% growth rate of GDP per capita with no TFP improvement
would require a national saving rate of around 50% in the first decade and 80% in 25 years.
However, if productivity starts to rise to at least moderate levels, sustaining and improving high
rates of economic growth becomes viable. Realistically, to achieve the goal of high economic
growth, the national savings effort must be alleviated by forcefully and purposefully improving
productivity.



                                                  5
 
Giavazzi et al.’s (2010) study explores the behavior of household savings using household-level
micro data from the Egyptian Income, Expenditure and Consumption Surveys. Different from
aggregate time series, the survey data clearly observed an immense reduction in household savings,
from 14% in 2004/05 to 10% in 2008/09. The authors find evidence that indicates the reduction
can be attributed to improvements in access to finance and credit. Moreover, they find a negative
correlation between savings and measures of financial development. The study also suggests that
the pension reform considered in Egypt—in which contributions to pension funds are compulsory-
--is less likely to result in the saving shortfall observed in other countries which left individuals
the option of savings for retirement.

Love (2010) examines corporate savings in Egypt, which represents 50% of total savings. Her
study focuses on two measures of corporate savings – financial savings and physical savings.7 It
employs two data sets - Investment Climate Assessment and data for publicly listed firms on EGX
to analyze the determinants of corporate savings behavior. The study finds that larger firms invest
more (physical savings), which is imperative to maintaining competitiveness and growth.
Moreover, the study also concludes that small firms invest less because of their lack of access to
credit. Therefore, improving access to credit for small and medium enterprises is likely to have a
positive impact on investment. Furthermore, despite the financial deepening, the use of credit
products observed a reduction during the last decade. The main policy recommendation from the
study reaffirms the importance of improving access to financial services in Egypt. In addition,
policies aimed at reducing macroeconomic volatility are likely to result in increased investment.

Touny (2008) shows that Egypt’s domestic savings ratio has an average of only 14.6 percent of
GDP through the period 1980 - 2005, which is relatively low compared to other countries at a
similar level of per capita income. He examines the long-run determinants of domestic saving rates
in Egypt through the period 1975 – 2006 using unit root and co-integration tests, which allow for
heterogeneity in parameters and dynamics. The results of the study show that domestic savings in
Egypt is determined by the following factors: first, the growth of per capita income positively
influences domestic savings in the short- and the long run. Second, the budget deficit ratio has a
negative effect on the domestic savings ratio; in other words, higher government savings partially
crowd out private savings, and thus, does not provide support to the existence of the Ricardian
Equivalence. Third, financial depth, proxied by the increase in the ratio of broad money supply
(M2) to GDP, illustrates a positive and statistically significant effect on domestic savings in the
long run. Fourth, the real interest rate (RR) has a positive effect in the short-run; however, the
effect of RR in the long run appears to be positive but statistically insignificant. Fifth, the inflation
rate has a positive impact on the level of domestic savings in Egypt in both the short run and the
long run. This provides support for precautionary motives for savings in the face of increased
economic uncertainty in Egypt. Finally, the current account deficit has a negative and statistically
significant effect in both the short and long run, implying that external savings may tend to act as
a substitute to domestic private saving.

AL-Mashat (2006) assesses the effects of financial sector reforms on non-government savings in
Egypt through the period 1970-1999. The quantitative outcomes of financial sector reforms are
evaluated by comparing relevant indicators before and after the introduction of reform measures,
and by analyzing the link between those indicators and the non-government savings rate. The
                                                            
7 Physical savings represent addition to physical assets as investment in property, plant and equipment. Financial savings
represent addition to financial assets, as increase in the firm‘s holdings of cash and marketable securities.  


                                                                6
 
measures of the financial sector reforms include (i) the cost of capital approximated by the real
interest rate, (ii) the volume of intermediation measured by the ratio of M2 to GDP, and (iii) the
effectiveness of financial intermediation proxied by the ratio of reserve money to total deposits
and reserve money to quasi-money, with a decrease in the ratios indicating a growing efficiency
of the banking system in mobilizing deposits. The model is estimated for the entire period between
1976-1999, the pre-reform period between 1976-1990, and the reform period between 1991-1999.
For the entire period, among the financial intermediation variables, the study finds that reserve
money in percent of total deposits is the only significant variable. This was reflective by the
dominance of “forced savings” and rationing, as well as the importance of the public sector. For
the pre-reform period, among the financial intermediation variables, the reserve money in percent
of total deposits and credit to the private sector are significant. During the reform period, all the
financial intermediation variables proved to be significant (with the exception of M2/GDP). This
suggests that after the reforms the savings ratio became more responsive to changes in the
effectiveness of the financial intermediation. The author concludes that as market-based financial
systems are established, higher real returns on savings, greater efficiency of the financial system,
and a larger share of resources intermediated through financial institutions all contributed to higher
savings.

Hussein (2002) examines the impact of financial liberalization proxied by the expected real interest
rate on financial savings in Egypt over the time period 1967-1996. The study used the
autoregressive distributed lag (ARDL) procedure developed by Pesaran, Shin, and Smith (1995,
1999) and Pesaran and Shin (1999). The study concludes that interest rates have a positive impact
on financial savings; nonetheless, the magnitude of the interest elasticity of financial savings in
Egypt is statistically too small. In other words, an increase in the interest rate by 1% causes a
meager increase in financial savings by 0.08% and 0.04% in the long and short term, respectively.
Furthermore, real per capita income and expected inflation rate have a positive effect on financial
savings in the long run. Lastly, Hussein concludes that an increase in the real rate of interest is
neither the most logical nor feasible path for the pursuit of the development and enhancement of
the financial sector in Egypt.

Elsayed (1993) studies the determinants of savings in Egypt, and the factors that contribute to the
rising savings rates from 1969-1990. Her study focuses on the determinants of domestic savings
(gross and private) using stepwise regression. It examines the following determinants: real per
capita income, inflation rate, per capita cash balances (money, quasi money, and saving deposits),
nominal and real interest rates on one-year deposits, unemployment rate, and international trade
rate. Elsayed finds that savings is determined by income, and it is negatively correlated with the
unemployment rate and interest rate. On the other hand the effect of inflation is undetermined. She
concludes that implementing the government economic reform policies that liberalized the interest
rate since the 1980s in addition to the economic regression Egypt was witnessing would lead to a
further decline in saving rates.



    Econometric Methodology and Modeling Strategy
This paper builds on earlier research by Hussein and Mohieldin (1997) that examines the stability
of the long run relationship between the real interest rate and the following savings indicators: (i)
financial saving, (ii) total saving, (iii) private investment, as well as (iv) real economic growth in


                                                  7
 
Egypt over the period 1960-1990. They utilize the cointegration tests to identify relationships
between the variables of interest. The authors employ a series of tests in two preliminary stages:
first, they use Augmented Dickey-Fuller tests to identify unit-roots and stationarity, a prerequisite
to testing for cointegration; following this, the Engle and Granger (1987) as well as the Johansen
(1988) multivariate cointegration techniques are utilized to identify linear relationships.

To fully understand the construction of the model utilized by Hussein and Mohieldin, consider the
interest bearing financial assets at the formal financial sector as a percent of GDP (FS/Y) as an
independent variable. Additionally, consider real interest rate (id- π), lagged savings rate, per capita
income (y), as well as the premium between the domestic and foreign interest rates adjusted for
expected devaluation (Z). The long-run equation is as follows:

                     L(FS/Y) = -0.03(id- π) – 5.58Z + 0.43 L(y)                (1)

Subsequent to their empirical analysis, the authors identified a plethora of key findings relevant to
savings literature:
    a) Money illusion: deposit holders suffer from money illusion. As a result, the rise in nominal
       interest rate may explain the increase in financial savings within the formal sector.
    b) Risk and return: when selecting a particular asset in accordance to the relationship
       between its return and risk, it seems as though a large number of depositors in the formal
       sector were satisfied with the relationship, and selected the asset. Since the sequestration
       of deposits that accompanied the Egyptianization and nationalization laws of 1957 and
       1961, the formal financial sector was stable, and as a result did not suffer any major crises.
    c) Implicit deposit insurance: the monetary authority was quick to rescue ailing units and
       managed to contain the possible damages of failing banks, under a notion of collective
       responsibility among all of the operating banks. According to this implicit insurance
       mechanism and the government’s explicit support of the banking system, bank deposits
       were associated with low risk, which thus satisfied risk-averse savers.
    d) Tax free returns: interest on deposits with banks was tax-exempt which attracted more
       depositors.
    e) Limited choices of financial instruments: because of the absence of an active capital
       market, bank deposits were the only available saving instruments for a large number of
       savers. Those who took the risk and saved with the Informal Investment Companies during
       the 1980s as an alternative (realized with the collapse of 1988) concluded that they had
       collectively made the wrong decision.
    f) Moderate inflation: this provides an explanation as to why depositors behave the way that
       they do. Despite the downward bias in official rates, inflation in Egypt averaged 9.57%
       throughout the period between 1960-1990. Comparatively, this is considered as a period of
       moderate inflation. With that being said, the authors argue that had the inflation rates been
       higher in Egypt, ceteris paribus and real interest rates would have been negative, and
       therefore, the behavior of savers with regards to the selection of bank deposits would have
       been fundamentally different.
    g) Widows and orphan behavior: many formal sector depositors neglect to foster
       entrepreneurial skills and/or lack the ability to invest or manage their savings, even in the
       face of alternatives. Regular predetermined returns are offered by banks, and perhaps may
       suit depositors better than any form of saving, which may be implicated by irregularity and
       high variability.


                                                   8
 
In summary, the authors concluded on the basis of their empirical analysis, that the real interest
rate has an insignificant impact on economic growth. On the other hand, real interest rate has a
negative impact on financial savings and investment. Changes in exports and private investment
exhibited a positive impact on economic growth. Relevant policy recommendations provided by
the study assert that the economic problems of the Egyptian government derived from the financial
repression of 1960s cannot be alleviated by an increase in real interest rate as it further deepens
the problem of excess liquidity of the banking system, which is indicative to the liquidity crisis in
the late 1990s.

For the purpose of this research, we focus on the period 1991–2010. First, we inspect the stochastic
properties of the variables. This procedure involves visual inspection of the given variables to
check whether the series is trending smoothly. Moreover, the smooth trending pattern makes it
feasible to quantitatively test for the presence of unit roots following the implementation of the
Augmented Dickey Fuller procedures (ADF).8 (See Dickey and Fuller 1979, Campbell and Perron
1991 and Enders 1995.) This step is vital to the cointegration procedure as it determines the
strategy and the methodology for modeling. Using variables with unit roots in linear regression
violates the basic assumptions needed for asymptotic analysis and consistency of estimation as it
leads to spurious results (Davidson and Mackinnon, 1999).
The unrestricted (or general) from of the ADF (1981) unit root test equation is:
                                                                 k             3
                                           yt  b0  b1 yt 1    i yt i    i CSit  trend  t
                                                                i 1          i 1


                                                                                                           (2)

trend is time trend,                       is white noise errors.

The Augmented Dickey-Fuller test maintains the null hypothesis of non-stationarity of the given
time series. If the test provides evidence illustrating the presence of unit roots in levels of the series,
the test is repeated for differenced series to identify the order at which the series is stationary. This
is defined as “order of integration of the series.” Variables of interest interact to enter into
equilibrium in the long run if they are integrated of the same order. This is the key objective of
this paper as it attempts to test the nature of the equilibrium relationship between the real monetary
aggregates, the real sector, as well as the external sector.

Accordingly, a system of equations will be modeled to investigate the existence of a stable
relationship between the variables of interest by employing a Vector Auto Regression (VAR)
procedure as well as testing for optimal lag length using the general to specific criteria9 (see
Enders, 1995).

This is complemented by visually inspecting the graph of residuals and its respective distribution
as well as the resultant residual diagnostic tests to ensure that residuals are white-type and do not
influence the parsimony of the model. The Chow test and break point test for model stability are
also implemented in order to ensure consistency of estimation and inference. The Johansen (1988)
                                                            
8   See Dickey and Fuller, 1979; Campbell and Perron, 1991; and Enders, 1995.
9   The optimal lag length is defined as lags are reduced without losing information.


                                                                        9
 
and Enders (1995) test for co-integration are then employed upon ensuring that the series are all
integrated of the same order. Tests of weak exogeneity will also provide evidence on the nature
of the long run equilibrium relationship between variables.
The full information maximum likelihood (FIML) of a Vector Error Correction Model is as
following:
                                                           k 1
                                         yt  yt 1   i yt i     t
                                                           i 1                                   (3)


              is a (n x 1) vector of the n variables in interest,  is a (n x 1) vector of constants, 
         yt
Where,
                                                                     
represents a (n x (k-1)) matrix of short-run coefficients, t denotes a (n x 1) vector of white noise
residuals, and  is a (n x n) coefficient matrix. If the matrix  has reduced rank (0 < r < n), it
can be split into a (n x r) matrix of adjustment coefficients  , and a (n x r) matrix of co-integrating
vectors  . The former indicates the importance of the co-integration relationships in the individual
equations of the system as well as the speed of adjustment to disequilibrium; the latter represents
the long-term equilibrium relationship, so that
                                                     . k is a maximum number of lags in VAR;
t denotes time and  is a difference operator.

Testing for co-integration, using the Johansen’s reduced rank regression approach, centers on
estimating the matrix  in an unrestricted form, and as a result, testing whether the restriction
implied by the reduced rank of  can be rejected. In particular, the number of the independent co-
integrating vectors depends on the rank of  which in turn is determined by the number of its
characteristic roots that are different from zero. The test for nonzero characteristic roots is conducted
using Max and Trace tests statistics. It is important to note that as illustrated by Johansen (2002),
these tests tend to reject the null hypothesis of no cointegration in small samples, therefore it is
useful to also use the degree of freedom adjusted test statistics in the cointegration analysis.

A vector error correction model (VECM) is then determined following Johansen (1988) and
Johansen and Juselius (1990). The last step is identifying a conditional vector error correction model
including endogenous variables that rejected the null hypothesis of being excluded from the co-
integrating relation.

This model will be tested for stability and residuals should be ensured to be non-serially correlated.
The analysis will move on to determining the short-run relation through running the VECM. The
General to Specific Modeling Approach is applied. Note that general idea behind this approach is:
(a) first, to estimate general/unrestricted VECM with the maximum lags of the right hand side
variables:
                                                              k 1          k 1
                                 xt   0   y ECM t 1   1i xt i    2i zt i   yt
                                                                  i 1      i 0


                                                                                                        (4)




                                                     10
 
Where, xt is a dependent variable, zt stands for a vector of explanatory variables, ECMt 1 is one
lagged the residuals from the long-run model, vyt – is the residuals which are expected to be white
noise. If αy falls the interval of (-1 0) and is statistically significant; it can then be concluded that
the variables exhibit a stable cointegrated relationship and short-run fluctuations are corrected in
the long-run equilibrium.

The coefficient of the lagged error correction term (α) is expected to be negative and statistically
significant for the model to work and converge to the equilibrium path in the long run. This model
should be also be tested for stability to ensure the parsimony of the outcomes. (b) The appropriate
lag length will be determined based on the general to specific reduction methodology, and the
model will also test for stability and the well-defined nature of the relation between the four
variables in the short and long run. The exclusion of statistically insignificant variables and
performing the comprehensive set of autocorrelation, serial correlation, normality,
heteroscedasticity, and misspecification tests is critical to reach a more parsimonious specification
for the model. For this deliberation, Oxmetrics 6.1 will be used as the key econometric package
for related quantitative modeling.


    Hypothesis to Be Tested, Variable Selection and Data Issues
This section follows Modigliani & Brumbreg (1954) LCH motivation as adopted by Loayza,
Schmidt-Hebbel, and Servén (2000) specification for empirically testing for determinants of
savings. We test the null hypothesis (‫ܪ‬଴ ) that aggregate private savings in Egypt vary positively
with real per capita income, interest rate, yet it varies negatively with inflation, and the level of
financial development (M2 to GDP).

The following equation represents the regression equation with expected signs shown between
brackets based on theory:

       Real Gross Private Savingst =

       f(Growth in real per capita incomet-k, M2 to GDPt-k, Inflationt-k, Real interest ratet-k)

                          (+/-)                   (-)            (-)            (+)                  (5)
This paper will investigate short and long run relationships between the variables of interest using
the above mentioned econometric procedure.
Real Gross Private Savings Per-Capita
Gross private saving is generally computed as the difference between gross national saving and
the relevant definition of gross public saving (Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén 1999). The
applicability of this definition is challenged in developing economies that suffer from a weak
national accounting framework. Accordingly, saving behavior in developing countries has been
predominantly examined using multi-country cross-sectional data, which has produced dubious
results given vast disparities among countries with respect to the nature and quality of data. This
makes cross-country comparisons and policy recommendations difficult as it is fraught with
danger. (Athukorala and Sen 2001). This was the main limitation for studying private savings
behavior in Egypt in the past. For example, Al-Mashat (2006) used non-government time deposits
to GDP as a proxy for private savings to assess the probable relation between financial sector


                                                          11
 
development and growth. Hussein (2002) used savings to GDP as a proxy for financial
development where financial savings is the sum of demand, time, and savings deposits held at
deposit money banks. He utilized such to assess the response of the savings rate to the liberalization
of interest rates in Egypt in early 1991. The other three studies on savings in Egypt focused on
gross domestic savings that include both public and private savings.10

This research fills a significant gap on empirical modeling of private savings in Egypt. It employs
a new time series on private savings in Egypt that was compiled by the Central Bank of Egypt
(CBE) and the Central Authority for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) in Egypt. This
series is inclusive of savings in deposits, money banking, post offices, specialized banks,
investment and savings certificates issued by banks in addition to institutional private savings in
pension funds and insurance companies. These were significant components that account for
almost 15% of aggregate private savings during 1990-2010.

                 100%                Structure of Aggregate Private Savings in Egypt
                  90%
                  80%
                  70%
                  60%
                  50%                                                              Institutional
                  40%
                                                                                   Banking
                  30%
                  20%
                  10%
                   0%
                            1991
                            1992
                            1993
                            1994
                            1995
                            1996
                            1997
                            1998
                            1999
                            2000
                            2001
                            2002
                            2003
                            2004
                            2005
                            2006
                            2007
                            2008
                            2009
                            2010
                            2011




Source: CBE and CAPMAS, 2014

While the new series is available in annual frequency, the Chow-Lin’s Temporal Disaggregation
Methodology (Chow and Lin 1971) is employed to disaggregate the annual data into a higher
frequency quarterly series. This methodology generates the best linear unbiased interpolation,
distribution, and extrapolation of time series by using a related series called the indicator variable.
The Chow-Lin method uses quarterly indicators to generate the quarterly volatility and transforms
annual frequency data to quarterly data. To generate a quarterly series of aggregate private savings,
the quarterly series of non-government demand and time deposits (obtained from the IMF – IFS
2015) was used as an indicator variable.11

The generated quarterly series was deflated using CPI and divided by the population count to
obtain the real gross private saving per capita in logarithm.

Motivated by the Life Cycle Model, it follows a brief account on relevant variable selection and
the hypothesis to be tested with respect to the saving behavior in Egypt.

                                                            
10
     See ElSayed (1993), Touny (2008) and the literature review section.
11
     Full details of the matlab code and output is provided in the annex.


                                                               12
 
Real Income Growth Per Capita
Theory provided various interpretations to the nature of the relation between private savings and
income growth. The life-cycle theory of saving and consumption predicts that changes in an
economy’s rate of economic growth will affect its aggregate saving rate. In the simplest version of
the model, in which young people save for retirement, and old people consume their previously-
accumulated assets, an increase in the rate of economic growth will unambiguously increase the
aggregate saving rate. This is because of the observed increase in lifetime resources (and saving)
of younger age groups relative to older age groups. Furthermore, Chow and Lin 1971, among
others, supported this hypothesis. However, more complicated and realistic versions of the model
yield ambiguous conclusions pertaining to the relationship between saving and growth. For
example, young people may have low current income but high lifetime wealth, and may therefore
borrow to finance current consumption.

Whether higher growth increases or reduces the aggregate saving rate depends on the respective
age-profile of saving, which is an empirical matter and is negatively correlated with age (See
Poterba (1994), Paxson (1996), Deaton and Paxson (1997) and Nwachukwu and Egwaikhide
(2007)).

Following Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) and Modigliani (1998) the growth in the aggregate
growth of real per capita income - not the level - is considered in the proposed setup as a
determinant to private savings. The difference log of real per capita income is included in the
model.

Real gross private savings and real income are both controlled for population growth - considering
both variables in per capita terms. Due to the unavailability of high frequency data on population,
the annual population count is used to index both quarterly series.

Accordingly, the nature and magnitude of the relation between growth and savings will be tested
using Egypt’s data and provide an explanation to the ongoing debate.
Financial Development
The earlier work of McKinnon (1973) and Shaw (1973) as well as the large body of contributions
that followed assumed that financial development was indicative to the increased saving rate.
Financial development policies called for elimination of credit ceilings, interest rate liberalization,
ease of capital flows, enhanced prudential guidelines and supervision, and the development of
capital markets.

Loayza and Shankar (2000) empirically show that – from a portfolio composition perspective -
financial development allowed the private sector to increase long-term assets and durable goods
within their portfolios of financial assets.

Loayza et al. (2000) propose that financial development has a direct short-run impact on saving
rates and an indirect positive long-run impact. The direct effect goes through price and quantity
channels. The price channel works through higher interest rates and, although popularly advocated
in operational documents and the financial press, it is rarely effective in raising private saving—
suggesting that the negative income effect of higher interest rates tends to neutralize their positive
intertemporal substitution effect. Expanding access to credit to previously credit-constrained
private agents allows households and small firms to use collateral more widely, and thus reduce


                                                  13
 
down payments on loans for housing and consumer durables. In theory, this move should reduce
private saving because individuals are able to finance higher consumption at a given current
income level.

However, whether increased financial development itself significantly increases overall propensity
to save depends on the extent of substitution between financial saving and other components of
the financial assets portfolio. Consequently, the expected signs of this relationship in the private
saving function are ambiguous (Athukorala and Sen, 2004).
Real Interest Rate
The net effect of the interest rate on saving/consumption is unclear in the Life Cycle Model. A
higher interest rate increases the present price of consumption relative to the future price (the
substitution effect), and thus provides an incentive to increase saving (Athukorala and Sen, 2004).
If the household is a net lender, an increase in interest rates also raises lifetime income, and thus
tends to increase consumption and consequently, decrease saving (the income effect). Therefore,
saving responds positively to increases in the interest rate only if the substitution effect is stronger
than the income effect. It could be argued that for the typical developing economy, the net impact
of a change in real interest rate on saving is likely to be positive.

McKinnon (1973) and Shaw (1973) also argued that the relationship between real interest rate and
saving is positive for a developing economy. The argument is hinged on the basis of the state of
underdevelopment of financial markets in these countries. Financial intermediation in these
economies is dominated by self-financing and bank loans. This influences decisions on financial
saving, which is determined more in this case by the desire to invest rather than to live on interest
income. As a result, the greater part of household saving will be in the form of cash and near-
money assets as well as the substitution effect will usually be much greater than the income effect
of an interest rate change.

In January 1991, banks’ lending and deposit rates were liberalized in Egypt. Ceilings on bank
lending to the private sector and bank-specific ceilings on lending to public sector companies were
abolished in October 1992 and July 1993. This gave way to increasing the public’s confidence in
the government’s reform program that was in accordance with the IMF. Lifting restrictions on
market entry and increasing competition proved to stimulate the efficiency of bank intermediation.
Moreover, public sector companies were permitted to deal with all banks without prior permission
from public sector banks. In the context of a developing economy, the hypothesis of a positive
relation between real interest and real private savings in Egypt will be tested in this paper.
Inflation and Macroeconomic Uncertainty
The impact of inflation on saving - within the setup of the Life Cycle Model – prevails upon
determining real returns to saving (the real interest rate). This proposition is based implicitly on
the assumptions of inflation neutrality and absence of money illusion in saving behavior as well
as the absence of the real balance effect of inflation. However, the validity of this assumption is
questioned in countries with underdeveloped financial markets for the following two reasons.

The first is that inflation brings about ample uncertainty in future income streams and can thus
lead to higher saving on the basis of precautionary grounds. This may be particularly true for
households in developing countries whose income prospects are much more uncertain than their
counterparts in developed countries.


                                                  14
 
Second, inflation could influence saving through its impact on real wealth. If consumers attempt
to maintain a target level of wealth or liquid assets relative to income, saving will rise with
inflation. For these considerations, we include the inflation rate as an additional explanatory
variable.12 It is calculated as the quarter over quarter percentage in change in CPI.

The second is motivated by the fact that an individual's level of precautionary saving is modeled
as being determined by the utility maximization problem. This was realized by Friedman (1957),
and later by and Bewley (1977) in their seminal work on the permanent income hypothesis (PIH).
Ando and Modigliani (1963) emphasized the relevance of the life-cycle framework, therefore,
building on intertemporal allocation of resources between the present and an uncertain future with
the goal of maximizing utility. Rational individuals make sequential decisions in pursuit of
achieving a coherent and otherwise ‘stable’ future goal using available information. Skinner (1988)
and Zeldes (1989) observe that an increase in uncertainty should raise saving since risk-averse
consumers set resources aside as a precaution against possible adverse changes in income; it is
significant to note that individuals are inherently risk adverse, adhering to the assumption that the
rational individual will increase savings in the face of uncertainty in hopes to avoid risk entirely.
Carroll (1991) shows that uncertainty helps to explain why consumption is highly correlated with
income in the case of young consumers who expect their incomes to increase in the future but do
not know by how much.

Uncertainty also explains why the older population saves a positive amount as they face a lot of
uncertainty regarding the length of their life and health costs; because of its subjective nature, those
who make choices under uncertainty must rely on their intuition as well as present information to
make such well-informed decisions. Furthermore, due to the concept of loss aversion, the homo
economicus is largely affected by loss as opposed to a similar gain, which thus explains why the
older population saves as opposed to consuming. Carroll and Samwick (1995a) obtained results,
which suggest that precautionary saving may account for a large chunk of household wealth.
Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Serven (2000) find a positive and significant relationship between
inflation and the private saving rate.

The hypothesis of a negative relationship between real private savings and inflation will be tested
to assess the aversion of the private savers to future uncertainty.


       Empirical Results
Testing for Integration

Tables (3a), (3b) and (3b) provide summary statistics of the ADF test. Following the Dickey and
Pantula (1987) sequential approach to confirm the order of integration for each variable, unit roots
are tested under the assumption that the order of integration is at most two. The second difference
for the data is employed for this purpose and as shown in table (3a), the data provide strong
evidence to reject the null hypothesis of non-stationarity at the 1 percent level for all variables.
This is replicated for the first difference of the series. The null hypothesis of the existence of a unit
root is rejected for all variables at 1% significance level. This indicates that the time series is
stationary in their first and second differences.

                                                            
12   See Deaton, 1989.


                                                               15
 
Moreover, upon replication of this procedure with levels of data, the null hypothesis cannot be
rejected for all variables with the exception of the change in the nominal exchange rate. This step
concludes the existence of strong evidence that all the data series robustly follow an I(1) process
in levels with the exception of the change in the exchange rate that follows an I(0).
Cointegration Analysis
At this stage the set of relevant variables proposed by LCH for savings behavior proposed by
Modigliani & Brumbreg (1954) are considered. It is now plausible to investigate the presence of a
long run equilibrium relation between real gross private savings per capita, real interest rate and
m2togdp. A VAR-model in levels is considered between these three series.
Selecting the Lag Length
The reliability of the findings of the VAR system of equations depends on the lag length considered
in running the system. This research adopts a robust procedure to test the optimal number of lags
that maximize the efficiency of the model and ensure that the feedback information is adequately
and efficiently maintained within the model. The optimal lag length is tested using several criteria
including (AIC), Shwartz Criteria (SC) and the Log Likelihood test. The theory proposes that
quarterly data as well as the propagation of the business cycle should be considered within a 6-
year period (Cotis and Coppe, 2005).

The analysis begins with a VAR system using 6 lags and then a sequential reduction process is
implemented thereafter to move from a general to a specific model specifically to avoid over-
parameterization and ensure parsimony. Individual equations and vector misspecification tests for
the reduced rank 3 lags model residuals and model stability robustly support our proposition to
proceed with modeling long run and short run dynamics by adopting 3 lags and conditioning the
analysis on white type noise residuals.
Cointegration Tests
The cointegration analysis is employed to a 3-lags system. The presence of a co-integrating
relation is identified by Johansen’s maximum likelihood estimator approach. The null hypothesis
is rejected of no cointegration at 1% significance level and trace eigenvalue (ߣ௧௥௔௖௘ ) - adjusted
for the degrees of freedom – rejects the same null at 5% significance level. Table (7a) also
reports that maximal eigenvalue test rejects the null at 5% for a second co integrating relation.
These results means that one can confidently proceed with the analysis given the existence of a
single cointegrating relation for the closed economy formulation.
Long-run Modeling
The long run equilibrium relation for real gross savings per capita in Egypt is provided in equation
6. The implied long run equilibrium relationship for real gross savings per capita (rgpspc) can be
outlined (see tables 5 a &b):

                rgpspc = 1.1317 - 0.045087 * RealInterest + 0.40821* m2gdpratio
                                                                                                (6)

Real Interest Rate
The real interest rate negatively influences private savings in the long run in the case of Egypt;
however, this interpretation should be considered with caution. As elaborated earlier, the empirical
evidence on interest-rate elasticities of saving reflects the theoretical ambiguity: empirical


                                                16
 
evidence estimates typically are small and not significantly different from zero. An interpretation
to the overall negative relation between real private savings per capita and real interest rate can
be attributed to the fact that the income effect outweighs the sum of its substitution and human
wealth effects.

The statistical results shown in the long run equation provides evidence that income effect
dominates the substitution effect in the case of Egypt. This result is consistent with relevant LDC’s
results by Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Servén (2000). The coefficient represents a semi-
elasticity of real balances with respect to interest rates, and its value is - 0.045 if using percentages.
At a 5% interest rate, the elasticity of money balances with respect to interest rates is (-0.22).
Financial Development
Financial development positively influences private savings in the long term in Egypt. The data
provide strong evidence that the indirect positive effect of financial liberalization on private
savings in Egypt should not be underemphasized. The positive implication of liberalizing domestic
financial markets in Egypt—through recapitalizing domestic banks—fostering the efficiency of
financial intermediation in addition to liberalizing interest rates has contributed to higher growth.
Thus, through faster income growth, attaining higher levels of financial development depicted by
a 1% increase in m2 to GDP increases private saving rates by 0.4% in the long run in Egypt if all
other variables remain unchanged.
Short-run Modeling
The short run system is built using the cointegrating vector of real gross private savings per capita;
as follows:


Drgpspc =    + 0.357*Drgpspc_1 + 0.000117*DRealInterest_1 + 0.018*Dm2gdpratio_1
(SE)          (0.104)           (0.00449)                     (0.048)
             - 0.114*Drgpspc_2 + 0.00313*DRealInterest_2 + 0.0499*Dm2gdpratio_2
              (0.103)           (0.00489)                    (0.0443)
             - 0.0612*CIa_1 - 0.00577*CSeasonal + 0.00664*CSeasonal_1
              (0.0254)       (0.00301)           (0.00672)
             + 0.00346*CSeasonal_2 - 0.0299*dumm2002q3 - 0.00293*dumm1998q4
              (0.00697)             (0.00905)           (0.00838)
             - 0.00303*dumm1999q1 + 0.0369*dumm2004q1 + 0.0409*dumm2002q4
              (0.00843)            (0.00851)           (0.00895)
             - 0.0332*dumm2008q2 + 0.00609*dumm2002q1
              (0.00842)           (0.00849)




                                                   17
 
Dm2gdpratio =    + 0.508*Drgpspc_1 - 0.00672*DRealInterest_1
(SE)              (0.242)           (0.0105)
                 - 0.00897*Dm2gdpratio_1 + 0.351*Drgpspc_2 - 0.00629*DRealInterest_2
                  (0.112)                 (0.241)           (0.0114)
                 - 0.156*Dm2gdpratio_2 + 0.176*CIa_1 - 0.134*CSeasonal
                  (0.104)               (0.0593)      (0.00704)
                 + 0.000735*CSeasonal_1 - 0.0297*CSeasonal_2 - 0.0606*dumm2002q3
                  (0.0157)               (0.0163)             (0.0211)
                 + 0.0104*dumm1998q4 + 0.0547*dumm1999q1 + 0.00534*dumm2004q1
                  (0.0196)            (0.0197)            (0.0199)
                 + 0.0563*dumm2002q4 - 0.0138*dumm2008q2 + 0.0653*dumm2002q1
                  (0.0209)            (0.0197)            (0.0198)




The speed of adjustment in the short run money demand equation is negative, statistically
significant and lies between zero and unity. It therefore satisfies the needed criteria to set up a
robust model that converge to equilibrium in the long run. This also translates to the fact that real
gross private savings per capita is above or below its long run equilibrium level. Finally, the
negative sign and the magnitude that is less than unity ensure that real private savings converges
to the long run equilibrium.

Reduction of the General Model and Parsimonious Model
The estimation of the short term system with unrestricted constant and dummies indicated that a
number of variables are statistically insignificant. Since our empirical analysis reached a general
statistical model that captures the key characteristics of the underlying data set, we proceed to
reducing the complexity of the general model by eliminating statistically insignificant variables
and checking the validity of the reductions at every stage to ensure congruence and parsimony of
the final selected model (See Hoover and Perez (1999) and Campos, Ericsson, and Hendry (2005)).

Throughout the reduction process, 32 regressors were eliminated based on their statistical
insignificance. Throughout the process, a progress test was conducted to test for the validity of the
elimination in each step. This test is built on the likelihood ratio of the restricted (after reduction)
versus the unrestricted model (before reduction).

The parsimonious short term equations included some significant lagged variables in the general
model in addition to the first lag of exchange rate and US treasury bills rate. This is in addition to
contemporaneous growth in real per capita income, inflation, and real interest rates.

Moreover, a comprehensive test was conducted to ensure that no critical information was lost
throughout the process. The parsimonious model was accordingly formulated based on minimizing
the Schwartz (SC) and Hannan–Quinn (AIC) information, which was found to encompass the
general unrestricted system as well as all the reduced systems. It also minimized the three
information criteria.




                                                  18
 
This system reads:
Drgpspc =   + 0.338*Drgpspc_1 + 0.0297*Dm2gdpratio_2 - 0.0325*CIa_1
(SE)         (0.0682)          (0.0109)               (0.0138)
            - 0.00608*CSeasonal - 0.017*DDrealPercapitaGDP - 0.224*DInflation
             (0.00169)           (0.0101)                   (0.0379)
            + 0.00591*DRealInterest + 0.00713*DDExchangeRate_1
             (0.00274)                  (0.00353)
            - 0.0028*DUSTBills_1 + 0.023*dumm2003q1 - 0.0215*dumm2002q3
             (0.00147)            (0.0064)           (0.00642)
            + 0.0407*dumm2002q4 + 0.0346*dumm2004q1 + 0.0183*dumm2007q2
             (0.00579)           (0.00535)           (0.00568)
            - 0.0368*dumm2008q2
             (0.00572)

Dm2gdpratio =    + 0.418*Drgpspc_1 + 0.114*CIa_1 - 0.135*CSeasonal
(SE)              (0.165)           (0.0345)      (0.00431)
                 - 0.00788*CSeasonal_2 - 0.0665*dumm2002q3 + 0.0575*dumm1999q1
                  (0.00397)             (0.0143)            (0.0134)
                 + 0.053*dumm2002q4 + 0.0758*dumm2002q1 + 0.0711*dumm2003q1
                  (0.0144)           (0.0136)            (0.0151)
                 - 0.0722*dumm2007q1 + 0.046*dumm2007q2 - 0.47*DUnemployment_1
                  (0.0144)            (0.0138)           (0.255)



The short-term private savings function for Egypt is more aligned with the simple permanent
income hypothesis. Savings growth is negatively related to contemporaneous change in income
growth. The change in income growth reflects on lower growth in private savings. The change in
income growth by 10% leads to a drop in private savings growth by around 0.2%. This finding
contradicts the proposition of Life-Cycle Model and findings of earlier studies by Modigliani,
1970; Madison, 1992; Bosworth, 1993 and Carroll and Weil, 1994).

However, these findings are aligned with the simple permanent income that proposes that current
savings could drop in case of higher future income growth. This school of thought interpret the
decline in aggregate saving rate by the fact that the lifetime wealth of the young is high enough
relative to that of their elders (Athukorala and Sen, 2004). This in turn reflects on lower rates of
inter-temporal substitution and triggers higher preference to current consumption. Accordingly,
growth in per capita income could actually lead to a decrease in saving. This finding provides
significant guidance to policy on the need to robustly provide involuntary savings mechanisms.
This is critical to smooth the younger cohort’s consumption across time and mitigate incidence of
future poverty of the elderly.

In addition, our tests concluded that macroeconomic uncertainty negatively influences private
savings. Although this contradicts with the theory of precautionary savings, it is a common finding
in empirical studies on savings behavior. Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Servén (2000) found only
one of the six seminal empirical studies on savings and growth in LDCs that included inflation
among the explanatory variables finds a positive and significant effect on the private saving rate.
This is supported by the fact that macroeconomic uncertainty in LDCs - suffering financial market


                                                19
 
imperfection - leads to more reliance on non-financial inflation hedges as investment in real estate
and gold that are perfect substitutes of financial savings.

Short-term influence of real interest rates and financial development on real private savings are in
line with theory and our earlier interpretation of long-term equation. Both variables are positively
related to real private savings in the short term. This is in full conformity with the LCH.

Market openness has a significant effect on private savings. Exchange rate movement in the
previous period reflects on real private savings in the current period. This is consistent with the
analysis on the impact of short-term inflation. In general, devaluation of domestic currency in
LDCs with limited capital mobility raises the public aversion to future uncertainties and trigger
higher precautionary savings to mitigate future macroeconomic shocks. Another interpretation for
the case of LDCs is that devaluation inflates the volume of the equivalence of foreign currency
deposits in domestic currency. This has in turn led to a positive net effect for exchange rate
devaluation on real private savings. Furthermore, the rise of foreign exchange rate triggers dis-
savings and preference to store of value in non-financial assets (See Hussein and Mohieldin 1997).



    Conclusion
A mix of the simple permanent income hypothesis as well as the life cycle hypothesis determinants
are used to interpret real private savings behavior in Egypt. This study provides new empirical
evidence related to savings behavior, financial development, and economic growth in Egypt. By
using high quality and high frequency quarterly data covering 1991-2010, this study employed a
robust vector equilibrium correction modeling strategy. The key long-term determinants of private
savings in Egypt are the real interest rate and level of financial development. The data also show
higher persistence of real private savings in the short run.

The real interest rate varies negatively with real private savings in the long term for the period
under consideration, 1991 – 2010. This translates to the fact higher consumption is becoming more
attainable at lower cost. Hussein and Mohieldin (1997) reached the same conclusion on the relation
between private savings and real interest rates during 1960 – 1990. However, they referred to the
fact that the financial repression of 1960s cannot be alleviated by an increase in the real interest
rate as it further deepens the problem of excess liquidity of the banking system, which is indicative
to the liquidity crisis in the late 1990s.

In the short term, real private savings vary positively with real interest rates, whereas financial
development positively reflects on higher private savings on both horizons. This is a literal
translation of the McKinnon -Shaw hypothesis on financial development and growth, which
strongly holds for the case of Egypt.




                                                 20
 
The effect of higher inflation on real savings contradicts theory and negates the presence of a
precautionary motive for savings in Egypt. This can be attributed to seeking alternative non- formal
inflation hedges particularly in real estate and gold. This is common in LDCs that suffer financial
market imperfections. Unavailability of robust data on real estate holdings and gold prices in the
domestic market limit the interpretation of this result and raise a feasible research question for
future development of this model.

Exchange rate movements reflect on higher private savings. It provides signals of macroeconomic
uncertainty to economic agents and triggers precautionary motive for savings. In the absence of
data on domestic and foreign currency denominated private savings, devaluation would reflect on
raising the domestic currency equivalence of foreign currency savings leading to a net positive
effect of devaluation on private savings.

Relevant policy recommendations are imperative to the betterment of the Egyptian economic
narrative. A multitude of sources indicate that trust is a significant determinant of saving; in other
words, it has been observed that individuals who perceive that the economic situation within their
country will improve are more likely to save. Moreover, regression analysis illustrates that trust in
deposit safety and financial stability is highly correlated with trust in one’s government; therefore,
an individual who trusts the institutions within their country is likely to save. With that being said,
it is imperative that Egypt builds creditability as well as maintains integrity in their financial
institutions in pursuit of building trust to ultimately increase savings.

In addition to trust, Internet access is significant to savings behavior whereas physical access and
distribution of banks does not have an effect on one’s probability of participation in bank savings
and/or on informal savings. In many underdeveloped countries, information barriers are generally
associated with higher costs. With that being said, improvements in Internet access lower
transaction and information costs for stock market participation; thus increasing the likelihood of
savings as well as helping a consumer make better financial decisions. However, one must be
financially literate to reap the benefits cultivated from access to the Internet. Increasing Internet
access within Egypt could be pivotal to savings behavior; however, it should also be noted that it
would only assist a specific cohort of individuals.

Furthermore, the inception of funded private pension systems schemes within Europe and Central
Asia have been pivotal to savings behavior. Essentially, a pension system encourages savings
within the workplace to ensure adequate income for workers during retirement. However,
regulatory requirements and misguided strategies have reduced the yield of such investments as
well as impeding on the overall objective of private pensions. Appropriately positioning a
mandatory pension system within Egypt could dynamically alter savings behavior; however, it is
recommended that more research should be conducted in regards to regulatory requirements prior
to implementing such policy.




                                                  21
 
Overall, macroeconomic measures heavily influence resource mobilization and particularly
savings behavior in Egypt during the period under consideration in this study (1991-2010). Robust
economic policies including macroeconomic and monetary measures - are pre-requisites to
maximize private savings and finance growth in Egypt.




                                               22
 
References

Agrawal, P., (2001), The Relation between Savings and Growth: Cointegration and Causality
Evidence from Asia, Applied Economics, 33, pp. 499-513.

Agrawal, P. and P., Sahoo, (2009), Saving and Growth in Bangladesh, The Journal of Developing
Areas, 42, Iss. 2, 89-110.

Al-Mashat, R. A., (2006), Financial Sector Development and Economic Growth in Egypt 1960-
1999, paper presented as part of the Global Research Project (GRP) conducted by the Economic
Research Forum, available at http://www.erf.org.eg/html/grp_list%202.asp

Ando, A., and F., Modigliani, (1963), The ‘life-cycle’ hypothesis of saving: aggregate Implications
and tests, American Economic Review, 53(1), 55–84.

Arrieta, G. (1988), Interest Rates, Savings and Growth in LDCs: An Assessment of Recent
Empirical Research, World Development, 16: 589-605.

Athukorala, P and Sen, K., (2004), The determinants of private saving in India, World
Development, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 491-503.
 
Awan, R. U., Munir, R., Hussain, Z., & Sher, F., (2010), Rate of Interest, Financial Liberalization
& Domestic Savings Behavior in Pakistan, International Journal of Economics and Finance, 2(4),
p75.
 
Bahmani-Oskooee, M., S., Hegerty, H., Wilmeth, (2012), The Saving-Investment Gap and Income
Inequality: Evidence from 16 Countries, The Journal of Developing Areas, Journal of Developing
Areas College of Business, Tennessee State University.

Benston, G., and G. Kaufman, (1990), Understanding the savings-and loan debacle, The Public
Interest 99 (April):79-95.

Bewley, F., (1977), The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation, J. Econ.
Theory 16: 252–92.

Burnside, C. and D., Dollar (2000), Aid, Policies, and Growth, American Economic Review
90(4):847–68.

Campbell, J.Y., Perron, P., (1991), Pitfalls and opportunities: What macroeconomists should know
about unit roots, National Bureau of Economic Research. In: Macroeconomics Annual. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 141–201.

Campos, J., N. R. Ericsson and D. F. Hendry (2005), “Editors’ Introduction”, in: Campos, J., N.
R. Ericsson and D. F. Hendry (eds.), Readings on General-to-Specific Modeling, Cheltenham:
Edward, Elgar, 1–81.




                                                23
 
Carroll, C., (1991), Buffer Stock Saving and the Permanent Income Hypothesis, Working Paper
Series 114. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Economic Activity Section,
Washington, D.C.

Carroll, C., and A., Samwick, (1995), How Important Is Precautionary Saving? NBER Working
Paper 5194. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Chow, G. C. and A., Lin, (1971). Best linear unbiased interpolation, distribution, and extrapolation
of time series by related series, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 53(4): 372 – 75.

Cotis, J. and J. Coppe (2005), Business Cycle Dynamics in OECD Countries: Evidence, Causes
and Policy Implications, A working paper presented to Reserve Bank of Australia Economic
Conference on The Changing Nature of the Business Cycle, Sydney, Australia – July 2005.

Davidson R. and J. MacKinnon (1999), Econometric Theory and Methods. Oxford University
Press.

Deaton, A., (1991), Saving and Liquidity Constraints. Econometrica 59(July):1121–42.

Deaton, A., and C., Paxson. 1994. Intertemporal Choice and Inequality. Journal of Political
Economy 102(3):437–67.

Dhanasekaran, K., Testing of Savings-Growth Relationship in India: An Application of
Cointegration and Error Correction Techniques (June 18, 2010). The IUP Journal of Applied
Economics, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 85-96, 2010.

Dickey, D. and W. Fuller (1979), Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregressive Time Series
with a Unit Root, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74, 427-431.

ElBassam, K., (2005), A Model of House Hold Saving in Saudi Arabia:An Empirical Study of the
Period 1970-2000, Journal of King Abdulaziz University : Economics and Administration,
01/2005.

Elsayed, H., (1993), Determinants of Savings in Egypt, Egypt Contemperaire, Vol. 421, pp. 127 –
156.

Enders, W., (1995), Applied Econometric Time Series, New York, John Wiley and Sons Inc.

Engle, R.F. and C.W.J. Granger, (1987), Co-integration and error correction: representation,
estimation and testing, Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 2. (Mar., 1987), pp. 251-276.

Friedman, A., (1957), A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University Press.

Gale, G., and J., Sabelhaus, (1999), Perspectives on the Household Saving Rate, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity.




                                                24
 
Giavazzi, F., T., Jappelli, and M., Pagano, (2000), Searching for Non-Linear Effects of Fiscal
Policy: Evidence From Industrial and Developing Countries, European Economic Review, vol. 44,
no. 7, pp. 1259–1289.

Granger, J., (1983), Cointegrated Variables and Error Correction Models, UCSD Discussion paper,
83-13a.

Gupta, L., (1987), Aggregate Savings, Financial Intermediation, and Interest Rate, Review of
Economics and Statistics, pp. 303-311.

Hevia, C., & N., Loayza, (2012), Saving and Growth in Egypt, Middle East Development Journal
(MEDJ), World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., vol. 4(01), pages 1250002-1-1.

Hoover, K. D. and Perez, S. J. (1999). Data mining reconsidered: Encompassing and the general-
to-specific approach to specification search, Econometrics Journal, Vol. 2, pp. 1–25.

Hussein, K. A., c. (2002), Finance and Growth in Egypt, presented at the conference organized by
EPIC and ECES, 24th July 1999, Cairo,www.iceg.org/NE/projects/financial/growth.pdf

Hussein, K. and Mohieldin, M. (1997). Interest Rates Savings, Investment and Growth Under
Financial Repression: The Egyptian Example, Arab Economic Journal -9.

Keynes, M., (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, New York,
Harcourt Brace and World.

Kim, M., (2010), The Determinants Of Personal Saving In The U.S., Journal of Applied Business
Research, Vol 26, No 5.

King, A., (1985). The Economics of Saving: A Survey of Recent Contributions, Kenneth J. Arrow
and Seppo Konkapohja, editors, Frontiers in Economics, Basil Blackwell.

Koskela, E. and M., Viren, (1982), Saving and inflation: some international evidence, Economics
Letters, 9(4).

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. What Determines Savings? Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989.

Kwakwa, P., (2013), Determinants of National Savings: A Short and Long Run Investigation in
Ghana, Journal of Business and Management, Vol. 5 Issue No. 1.

Loayza, N., and R., Shankar, (2000), Private Saving in India, The World Bank Economic
Review, VOL. 14, NO. 3.

Loayza, N., K., Schmidt-Hebbel, and L., Serven, L., (2000), What drives private savings across
the World, The Review of Economics and Statistics, May, 165–81.

Love, I., (2011), Empirical analysis of corporate savings in Egypt, Policy Research Working Paper
Series 5634, The World Bank.


                                               25
 
Modigliani, F., and A. Ando, (1957), Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis of Savings: Comments
and Suggestions, Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics.

Modigliani, F., and R., Brumberg, (1954), Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function, In K.
K. Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesian Economics. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.

Modigliani, F., (1998), The role of intergenerational transfers and life-cycle saving in the
accumulation of wealth, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2(2), 15–20.

Mohieldin, M., (1995), Causes, Measures and Impact of State Intervention in the Financial Sector:
The Egyptian Example. Economic Research Forum – Working Paper 9507, available at https://idl-
bnc.idrc.ca/dspace/bitstream/10625/34591/1/126341.pdf

Muradoglu, G. and F., Taskin, (1996), Differences in household savings behavior: Evidence from
industrial and developing countries, The Developing Economies 34(2), 138-153.

Nordhaus, D., (1996), Budget Deficits and National Saving, Challenge, (March - April), 45-49.

Nwachukwu, T., and F., Egwaikhide, (2007), An Error-Correction Model of the Determinants of
Private Saving in Nigeria, A Paper presented at the African Economic Society (AES), Conference,
Cape Town, South Africa.

Ortmeyer, D., (1985), A Portfolio Model of Korean Household Saving Behavior, 1962-1976,
Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 575-599.

Paxson, C., H., (1996), Saving and growth: evidence from micro data, European Economic
Review, 40, 255–88.

Pesaran, M., H., and Y., Shin, (1999), An Autoregressive Distributed Lag Modelling Approach to
Cointegration Analysis, in S Strom, (ed.), Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century:
The Ragnar Frisch Centennial Symposium, Cambridge: Cambridge U P.

Pesaran, M., H., Y., Shin, and R., J., Smith, (2001), Bounds Testing Approaches to the Analysis
of Level Relationships, Journal of Applied Econometrics, 16, 289-326.

Poterba, J., M., (1994), Public policies and household saving, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Schmidt-Hebbel, K. and L., Servén, (1997), Saving across the World: Puzzles and Policies, World
Bank Discussion Papers 354 (Washington: The World Bank).

Schmidt-Hebbel, K. and L., Servén, (2000), Does Income Inequality Raise Aggregate Saving?
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 61, pp. 417-446.

Schwert, W., (1989), Tests for unit roots: A Monte Carlo investigation, Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 7 (1989), pp. 147–159.


                                                26
 
Shiller,R., (1989), Market Volatility, The MIT Press (1990), pp. xiv-464.

Skinner, J., (1988), Risky Income, Life-Cycle Consumption, and Precautionary Savings, Journal
of Monetary Economics 22(2):237–55.

Slami, A., and M., Sheikhy, (2008), Estimating Algeria’s Savings Function 1970-2005, Journal of
Social Research, University of Algeria, issue 6, pp. 129 -144.

Tahir, J., (1995), Recent Developments in Demand for Money Issues: Survey of Theory and
Evidence with Reference to Arab Countries. Working Paper 9530, Arab Planning Institute.

Touny, M., (2008), Determinants of Domestic Savings Performance in Egypt: An Empirical Study,
Journal of Commercial Studies and Researches, Faculty of Commerce, Benha University.

Zeldes, S., (1989), Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation, Journal
of Political Economy 97(2):305–46.




                                               27
 
   Annex I: Data Definitions

   Table (1): Data Description:

Acronym                     Description                      Source             Adjusted                   Date Accessed

                                                                                         Yes
                                                                Egyptian
                                                                 Central           (log of levels of
                               Log of real gross private
           rgpspc                                             Authority for     quarterly interpolated        March 30th 2015
                                 savings per capita
                                                              Mobilization         data from annual
                                                              and Statistics      series using Chow
                                                                                 Lin disaggregation )

                                                             Quarterly Series
                                                              Obtained from              Yes
                               Growth (First Difference)         Egyptian
   DrealPercapitaGDP           of Logs) of real per capita      Cabinet’s       (first difference of log      March 30th 2015
                                         GDP                 Information and     of levels deflated by
                                                                 Decision        CPI: base year 2010)
                                                              Support Center

                                                                  IMF
                               Inflation Rate: quarter on     International
          Inflation                                                                       No                  March 30th 2015
                                 quarter change in CPI          Financial
                                                                Statistics

                               Real Interest Rate: Three          IMF
                               months deposit rate less       International
        RealInterest                                                                      No                  March 30th 2015
                                 inflation (quarter on          Financial
                                   quarter inflation)           Statistics

                                                                  IMF
                                Financial Development
                                                              International
        m2gdpratio              Indicator: log of M2 to                                   No                  March 30th 2015
                                                                Financial
                                      GDP ratio
                                                                Statistics



                            Expected Exchange Rate                IMF                    Yes
                                 Depreciation: of             International
       DExchangeRate                                                                                          March 30th 2015
                            differenced log of official         Financial        (First Difference of
                             nominal exchange rate              Statistics              levels)

                                                                  IMF
                                Foreign Interest Rate:        International
         USTBills                                                                         No                  March 30th 2015
                                US Treasury Bills Rate          Financial
                                                                Statistics




                                                                  28
    
    Annex II: Diagnostic Tables

    Table (2): Summary Statistics:

    Sample:         1993(quarter: 1) - 2010(quarter: 4) (72 observations; qurterly data covering 18 years)           # of Variables: 7

        Variable              Leading sample       #obs      #miss         Minimum             Mean             Maximum                  std.dev
         rgpspc              1993(1) - 2010(4)      72         0           0.46401            0.61723            0.78112                 0.11191

DrealPercapitaGDP            1993(1) - 2010(4)     72          0           -0.097638         0.0086462           0.15028                 0.044196

        Inflation            1993(1) - 2010(4)     72          0           0.00000           0.018889           0.080000                 0.016746

   RealInterest             1993(1) - 2010(4)      72          0            5.8600            8.6786              11.990                  1.9372

   m2gdpratio                1993(1) - 2010(4)     72          0           -0.37106          -0.20299           -0.030459                0.091823

 DExchangeRate               1993(1) - 2010(4)     72          0           -0.34000          0.036806             1.2300                 0.17118

    USTBills                 1993(1) - 2010(4)     72          0           0.050000           3.3743              6.2200                  1.9594



          

         Table (3a): Augmented Dickey-Fuller Tests for Unit Roots: Second Differences of Log Levels of Real Data - Sample
                     1993(2) - 2010(4)
         Variable                      t-adf         beta Y_lag          t-DY_lag         Maximum Lags              AIC

                DDrgpspc                -8.330**            -2.4482                  3.274                3                  -8.925

         DDDrealPercapitaGDP            -9.920**            -14.573                  4.033                6                  -6.243

               DDInflation              -7.075**            -6.4815                  2.577                6                  -7.911

             DDRealInterest             -5.640**            -2.3274                  1.654                5                  -2.610

              DDm2gdpratio              -5.869**            -4.4654                  1.546                6                  -7.233

         T=73, Constant+Trend+Seasonals; 5%=-3.47 1%=-4.09

         P-values are in brackets, *** Significance level at 1%; , ** Significance level at 5%; *Significance level at 10%

          

          

          

          

          

          

          



                                                                      29
     
        Table (3b): Augmented Dickey-Fuller Tests for Unit Roots: First Differences of Log Levels of Real Data - Sample
                     1993(1) - 2010(4)

    Variable                       t-adf              beta Y_lag           t-DY_lag          Maximum Lags                 AIC

          Drgpspc               -7.254***              0.11175                                      0                   -8.990

    DDrealPercapitaGDP          -10.05***              -1.0780               3.083                  1                   -5.740

         DInflation             -7.873***              -1.6105               2.790                  3                   -8.237

        DRealInterest           -5.200***              0.29126               1.555                  1                   -2.835

        Dm2gdpratio             -7.952***              0.028625                                     0                   -7.345

    T=73, Constant+Trend+Seasonals; 5%=-3.47 1%=-4.09

    P-values are in brackets, *** Significance level at 1%; , ** Significance level at 5%; *Significance level at 10%

     



    Table (3c): Augmented Dickey-Fuller Tests for Unit Roots: Levels of Real Data - Sample 1993(1) - 2010(4)


                                              t-adf          beta Y_lag         t-DY_lag        Maximum Lags              AIC
                 Variable

                  rgpspc                     -1.824              0.93194          2.724                 5               -9.018

           DrealPercapitaGDP                -10.49**             -1.6168          4.614                 2               -6.720

                 Inflation                  -5.934**             0.26828          2.500                 1               -8.329

               RealInterest                  -2.658              0.86223          4.333                 1               -2.911

               m2gdpratio                   -0.8490              0.96645                                0               -7.356

    T=73, Constant+Trend+Seasonals; 5%=-3.47 1%=-4.09

P-values are in brackets; *** Significance level at 1%; , ** Significance level at 5%; *Significance level at 10%




 

 

 

 

 




                                                                   30
 
 

    Table 4a: Baseline Model

    Cointegration Analysis with Johansen Test: sample 1991 - 2010



                        eigenvalue         Log likihood      Trace test              Max test          Trace test        Max test
    rank                                   for rank
                                                              [ Prob]                [ Prob]           (T-nm)            (T-nm)

                                                                    44.98
             0                                470.8575                                     29.52           39.51           25.93
                                                                 [0.003]***
                                                                                        [0.003]***       [0.015]**       [0.012]**

             1              0.32895           485.6172              15.46                  12.54           13.58            11.01
                                                                   [0.205]                [0.161]         [0.327]          [0.260]
             2              0.15582           491.8848               2.92                   2.92            2.57             2.57
                                                                   [0.603]                [0.602]         [0.669]          [0.668]
             3             0.038718           493.3458

    P-values are in brackets, *** Significance level at 1%; , ** Significance level at 5%; * Significance level at 10%



    Table 4b: Eigen vector of the variables entering into the respective cointegrating vector

    beta (scaled on diagonal; cointegrating vectors in columns)

    rgpspc                             1.0000                             19.041                           0.87189

    RealInterest                       0.045789                           1.0000                           0.028402

    m2gdpratio                         -0.39439                           -5.4924                           1.0000

    Constant                           -1.1301                            -21.190                           0.98448



    alpha

    rgpspc                             -0.066459                          0.00066369                       -0.029979

    RealInterest                       -0.47952                           -0.14404                         -0.28516

    m2gdpratio                         0.19591                            0.0035570                        0.060292

    Constant                           -0.066459                          0.00066369                       -0.029979

    P-values are in brackets, *** Significance level at 1%; , ** Significance level at 5%; * Significance level at 10%




                                                                  31
 
    Table 5a: Hypotheses Tests for the Alpha Vector: Weak Exogeneity

    rgpspc                                              Zero           Chi^2(1)               6.4004 [0.0114]**

    RealInterest                                        Zero           Chi^2(1)               0.28427 [0.5939]

    m2gdpratio                                          Zero           Chi^2(1)               9.2625 [0.0023]**

    Joint Significance for alphas of (RealInterest
                                                        Zero           Chi^2(2)               6.4985 [0.0388]**
    rgpspc)

     P-values are in brackets, *** Significance level at 1%; , ** Significance level at 5%; * Significance level at 10%




    Table 5b: Reduced Rank Standardized Coefficients

                            Beta Vector               Std Err                     Alpha Vector               Std Err

    rgpspc                  1.0000                    0.00000                     -0.059411                  0.024957

    RealInterest            0.045087                  0.0044744                    0.00000                   0.00000

    m2gdpratio              -0.40821                  0.11153                      0.17236                   0.058731

    Constant                -1.1317                   0.033245                    -0.059411                  0.024957




                                                                  32
 
 
                    rgpspc                                                          Drgpspc
           0.7                                                      0.025

           0.5                                                      -0.025
             1990            1995       2000   2005   2010   2015            1990          1995          2000   2005   2010   2015
          12.5      RealInterestqoq                                                 DRealInterestqoq
                                                                       0.5

           7.5                                                        -0.5

             1990            1995       2000   2005   2010   2015            1990          1995          2000   2005   2010   2015

                    m2gdpratio
                                                                       0.1          Dm2gdpratio
          -0.1

                                                                      -0.1




    33
                                                                                                                                     Graph (1): Plot of Levels and First Differences




          -0.3

             1990            1995       2000   2005   2010   2015            1990          1995          2000   2005   2010   2015
                                                                                                                                                                                       Annex III: Graphical Representation and Diagnostics




           0.2      DrealPercapitaGDP
                                                                       0.2          DDrealPercapitaGDP



           0.0
                                                                      -0.2
             1990            1995       2000   2005   2010   2015            1990          1995          2000   2005   2010   2015

                    Inflationqoq
                                                                     0.05           DInflationqoq
         0.075

         0.025                                                       -0.05
             1990            1995       2000   2005   2010   2015            1990          1995          2000   2005   2010   2015
  Graph (2): Diagnostic Graphs of Restricted VAR


                                                                                                            Density
            0.8      rgp sp c      Fitted                       r:rgp sp c (scaled)
                                                                                                     0.75      r:rgp sp c          N(0,1)
                                                                                                                                                           1   ACF-r:rgp sp c
                                                        2

            0.7                                                                                      0.50
                                                        0                                                                                                  0
            0.6
                                                                                                     0.25
            0.5
                                                        -2
                          2000                  2010                 2000                    2010           -2.5             0.0            2.5            0             5             10
                                                                                                            Density
                     RealInterestqoq        Fitted              r:RealInterestqoq (scaled)
                                                                                                     0.75      r:RealInterestqoq            N(0,1)
                                                                                                                                                           1   ACF-r:RealInterestqoq
                                                        2

           10.0                                                                                      0.50
                                                        0                                                                                                  0
            7.5                                                                                      0.25

                                                        -2
                          2000                  2010                 2000                    2010           -2.5             0.0            2.5            0             5             10
                                                                                                            Density
            0.0      m2gdp ratio       Fitted                   r:m2gdp ratio (scaled)                         r:m2gdp ratio           N(0,1)
                                                                                                                                                           1   ACF-r:m2gdp ratio
                                                       2.5
           -0.1                                                                                       0.4

           -0.2                                        0.0                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                      0.2
           -0.3


                          2000                  2010                 2000                    2010           -2.5            0.0        2.5           5.0   0             5             10




  Graph ( 3): Stability Test of Restricted VAR


                  r rgpspc
0.025


0.000


-0.025

              1995                                           2000                                            2005                                                2010

      1           r RealInterestqoq




      0



      -1
              1995                                           2000                                            2005                                                2010

 0.05             r m2gdpratio




 0.00



 -0.05
              1995                                           2000                                            2005                                                2010




                                                                                                    34
   
Graph (4): Diagnostic Graphs of Parsimonious VECM:


                                                                                          Density
                                              3                                                                                    1.0
                Drgpspc       Fitted               r:Drgpspc (scaled)                         r:Drgpspc        N(0,1)                        ACF-r:Drgps pc


                                              2
    0.02                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                   0.4
                                              1
                                                                                                                                   0.0
    0.00
                                              0
                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                   -0.5
                                              -1
-0.02

                  2000                 2010           2000                  2010         -2.5      0.0         2.5                    0              5           10
                                                                                           Density
     0.1                                                                           0.5                                             1.0
                Dm2gdpratio       Fitted           r:Dm2gdpratio (scaled)                     r:Dm2gdpratio         N(0,1)                   ACF-r:Dm2gdpratio
                                              3
                                                                                   0.4
                                              2                                                                                    0.5
     0.0
                                                                                   0.3
                                              1
                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                   0.2
                                              0
    -0.1
                                                                                                                                   -0.5
                                              -1                                   0.1



                  2000                 2010           2000                  2010     -2.5          0.0        2.5            5.0      0              5           10


Graph (5): Stability of Parsimonious VECM:



      0.050
                      r Drgpspc

      0.025

      0.000

     -0.025


                 1995                              2000                                     2005                                          2010

           1          r DRealInterestqoq




           0



           -1
                 1995                              2000                                     2005                                          2010
       0.10
                      r Dm2gdpratio

       0.05

       0.00

      -0.05


                 1995                              2000                                     2005                                          2010




                                                                              35
 
