                                                 WPS8044


Policy Research Working Paper                   8044




   Underreporting of Gender-Based Violence
               in Kerala, India
      An Application of the List Randomization Method

                           George Joseph
                        Syed Usman Javaid
                        Luis Alberto Andres
                        Gnanaraj Chellaraj
                       Jennifer L. Solotaroff
                         S. Irudaya Rajan




South Asia Region
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8044


  Abstract
 This paper analyzes the incidence and extent to which                              levels of incidence of domestic violence. Further, women
 domestic violence and physical harassment on public/                               and those who are professionally educated tend to under-
 private buses is underreported in Kerala, India, using                             report more than others. Underreporting is also higher
 the list randomization technique. The results indicate                             among the youngest and oldest age cohorts. For physical
 that the level of underreporting is over nine percentage                           harassment on public/private buses, rural population—
 points for domestic violence and negligible for physical                           especially the rural non-poor and urban females—tend to
 harassment on public/private buses. Urban households,                              underreport compared with the rural poor and urban males.
 especially poor urban households, tend to have higher




  This paper is a product of the South Asia Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access
  to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at gjoseph@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
   Underreporting of Gender-Based Violence in Kerala, India: An Application of the List
                               Randomization Method

                 George Joseph, Syed Usman Javaid, Luis Alberto Andres, Gnanaraj
                      Chellaraj, Jennifer L. Solotaroff, and S. Irudaya Rajan1




JEL Classification: C93, J16
Key Words: Gender, Gender Based Violence.




1  George  Joseph  is  a  Senior  Economist,  Water  Global  Programs  (GWAGP),  World  Bank.  gjoseph@worldbank.org;  Syed  Usman 

Javaid  is  a  consultant  to  the  Social  Development  Unit  (GSU06),  South  Asian  Region,  World  Bank.  Sjavaid1@worldbank.org;  Luis 
Alberto Andres is a Lead Economist, Water Global Programs (GWAGP), World Bank. landres@worldbank.org; Gnanaraj Chellaraj 
is an independent consultant for the World Bank. gchellaraj@worldbank.org; Jennifer Solotaroff  is a Senior Social Development 
Specialist, Social Development Unit (GSU06), South Asian Region, World Bank. jsolotaroff@worldbank.org; and S. Irudaya Rajan 
is a Professor, Center for Development Studies, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India. rajan@cds.ac.ins.   
       I. Introduction
              In this paper, we analyze the underreporting of two types of violence against women and girls—

domestic violence and physical harassment on public/private buses2—in Kerala, India, using the list

randomization technique. Past studies indicate that domestic violence is underreported in many

developing countries (Palermo et al., 2014; Devries et al., 2013; Whitaker et al., 2007). However, the

extent of underreporting of domestic violence rates has not been systematically analyzed despite the

existence of new and improved techniques such as list randomization (Blair et al., 2015; 2014; Blair and

Imai, 2012; Imai, 2011). In the past, these techniques have been used to measure and analyze sensitive

subjects such as illegal migration in the United States (McKenzie and Siegel, 2013), abortion in Mexico

(Lara et al., 2004), as well as employee theft in the United States (Wimbush and Dalton, 1997).

Surprisingly, however, to our knowledge these techniques have not been used to analyze the

underreporting of domestic violence in any country.


              Violence against women and girls is a widespread problem all over the world, in developing and

industrialized countries alike. Ever since the widely-reported gang rape on public transport in Delhi in

2012, the issue of gender-based violence and harassment in India has taken on increasing significance

(Shakya et al., 2017). There is greater awareness not only of violence against women and girls perpetrated

by males in South Asian countries, but of violence perpetrated by female relatives as well, such as by

mothers who commit murders against daughters for choosing to get an education instead of getting

married—or for marrying the “wrong” person.3 Furthermore, violence against women in some states in




                                                            
2 Domestic violence and public physical harassment are two types of gender-based violence (GBV). This study considers only the
subset of women and girls who experience these types of GBV, as opposed to men and boys. In this context, “domestic violence”
follows the legal definition of “Any abusive, violent, coercive, forceful, or threatening act or word inflicted by one member of a
family or household on another…” (http://legal-dictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Domestic+Violence), except that the survey
question pertains only to female household members experiencing domestic violence. Similarly, “sexual harassment” and
“physical harassment” in this study follow the UNHCR definition of sexual harassment in public spaces—“Any unwelcome
sexual advance, request for sexual favor, verbal or physical conduct or gesture of a sexual nature, or any other behavior of a
sexual nature that might reasonably be expected or be perceived to cause offence or humiliation to another” (UNHCR 2005, p. 3)
and that occurs in public places.
3 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/pakistan/Mother-kills-pregnant-daughter-in-name-of-honour-in-

Pakistan/articleshow/52798087.cms  

                                                                2
India is institutionalized by extra-judicial organizations in villages such as the Khap Panchayats.4 Studies

also indicate that domestic violence in India has been a major problem over numerous generations and

even thousands of years (Martin et al., 2002) and that rates of domestic violence are especially high in

northern India (Martin et al., 1999). Although considerably lower than for northern India, the rates remain

relatively high by international standards for states such as Kerala (Nithya, 2013) and in the urban areas

of South India in general (Rocca et al., 2009).


              Violence against women is highly prevalent in both developing and industrialized countries.

Globally, one in three women will face violence in their lifetimes (WHO, 2013). Even in U.S. states such

as Mississippi, domestic violence is very high and very little has been done to combat the problem.5

Violence has an adverse impact on the survival rates of women and girls, their health and education, and

makes it difficult for them to be productive members of society (Solotaroff and Pande, 2014). Globally,

the mortality and disability rates of women due to violence are as high as cancer rates (WHO, 2013).

Furthermore, survivors of sexual assault are three times more likely to suffer from depression, six times

more likely to suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder, 13 times more likely to abuse alcohol, 26 times

more likely to abuse drugs, and four times more likely to contemplate suicide than those who were not

sexually assaulted (WHO, 2013).


              Domestic violence also has high macroeconomic costs in many countries. In Vietnam, both out-

of-pocket expenditures and lost earnings represented nearly 1.41 percent of the GDP in 2010 (Duvury et

al., 2012). Even in advanced countries such as the United Kingdom, total costs linked to domestic

violence were estimated at around 10 percent of GDP (Santos, 2013).


              Despite the costs of violence against women and girls, research on its prevalence continues to be

constrained by conventional survey questions, whose accuracy depends mostly on the content of

questions asked, extent of privacy, protection from retaliatory behavior by others, and the cooperation of


                                                            
4   http://ncw.nic.in/pdfReports/ReportbyJamiaMilia.pdf
5   http://www.refinery29.com/93029  

                                                               3
the respondent. When surveys such as India’s National Family and Health Surveys (NFHS) involve direct

questions about sensitive information, as in the case of violence against women, respondents may fail to

cooperate—through either nonresponse or dishonest response (Chaudhuri and Mukerjee, 1988;

Tourangeau and Yan, 2007). As a result, the quality and reliability of prevalence data tend to be poor.

Without correction, such data will likely yield undesirable outcomes such as over- or under-estimation

(bias) of the actual prevalence or incidence of violence and inaccurate relationships between the variables

of interest. This will result in inaccurate conclusions and recommendations and, in turn, wrong policy

choices (Tourangeau and Yan, 2007).


        This paper addresses the problem of underreporting prevalence by utilizing the list randomization

technique—an alternative to the method of direct questioning—to measure the incidence of domestic

violence and physical harassment of women on public and private buses in the Indian state of Kerala.

The purpose of this paper is to measure (1) the incidence of domestic violence and physical harassment

on public and private buses in Kerala; (2) the extent of underreporting of the incidence of both forms of

violence listed; (3) the incidence of both forms of violence among population sub-groups; and (4) the

incidence of underreporting of both forms of violence based on respondent characteristics to understand

the types of respondents who are more likely to underreport. Some caveats of the study should be noted as

well. The levels of incidence of domestic violence and physical harassment on public/private buses that

are presented in this study can be viewed as a lower bound of these rates. This is because the incidence

that is measured through this study is at the household level and not at the individual level. In cases where

there is more than one woman facing domestic violence or physical harassment on public/private buses in

a household, the rate of incidence at the individual level can be higher.


        Our results indicate that the level of underreporting is over nine percentage points for domestic

violence and negligible for physical harassment in public/private buses. Urban households, particularly

the urban poor households, tend to have higher levels of incidence of domestic violence. Further,

professionally educated and females tend to underreport more. Underreporting is also higher in the


                                                      4
youngest and oldest age cohorts. For physical harassment on public/private buses, it is the rural

population, particularly the rural non-poor, and urban females who tend to underreport compared to rural

poor and urban males.


        The paper proceeds as follows: In the next section, we review literature that motivates the study.

In section III, a simple model is developed and specification is set out. In Sections IV and V, we provide

the results and discuss their implications. In Section VI we conclude.


    II. Background and Literature Review

        The question of whether domestic violence is underreported in most countries has been discussed

in academic circles as well as in the media. As mentioned earlier, the extent of underreporting of domestic

violence has not been analyzed using techniques such as list randomization. However, there are related

strands of research that help motivate our analysis.


        The National Family Health Survey of India (2005-06) finds that the percentage of ever-married

women who have experienced physical violence at the hands of their husbands in Kerala is 15.3 percent,

compared to 35.1 percent for India as a whole (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 2005-06).

Moreover, studies indicate that domestic violence is an endemic problem in many Indian states and has

existed for thousands of years (Kavitha, 2012; Martin et al., 2002; 1999). A large number of studies focus

on dowry-related violence, and during the 1980s there were frequent reports of dowry deaths called “bride

burning” (Chowdhry, 1997). In recent years, despite economic development, dowry payments in India are

on the rise (Anderson, 2007; 2003). Dissatisfaction with the amount of dowry has resulted in increasing

violence against brides, particularly in rural India (Sekhri and Storeygard, 2014; Bloch and Rao, 2002). A

study in the Salem district of Tamil Nadu indicates that larger dowries reduce marital violence by

increasing the economic resources of the marital household, enhancing the social status of the groom and

his family, and serving as an asset over which the woman enjoys relatively more control. However, while

women with generous dowries may benefit, a continued upward spiral in dowry expectations will


                                                       5
exacerbate daughter aversion and may fuel sex-selective abortion and female infanticide (Srinivasan and

Bedi, 2007). Evidence also indicates that the implementation of the Protection of Women from Domestic

Violence Act in 2005 has significantly reduced dowry violence, while at the same time reporting of such

violence has increased in north and central India (Das, 2015). Research also finds that the effectiveness of

anti-dowry laws may be limited without additional strategies that mobilize women, families, and

communities to challenge the widespread acceptance of dowry and to promote gender equity (Rocca et

al., 2009). Finally, a recent study (Shakya et al., 2017) finds that since 2012, reporting of intimate partner

violence has increased significantly in the state of Maharashtra, while the acceptance of existence of such

violence has increased by both men and women, possibly as a result of the prominent Delhi rape case at

the end of that year.

              Research results on risk and protective factors for violence are mixed. The long-practiced

tradition of dowry unequivocally increases the risk of violence. Other forms of contribution to household

wealth, such as working outside the home, are not accepted in many communities in the country, although

engagement in paid work by women has led to declines in marital violence in Uttar Pradesh over time

(Bhattacharya et al., 2011). Chin (2012) finds similar results in other states. However, other studies find

that community and institutional acceptance of violence against women negates the positive impact of

women’s education and working outside the home (Boyle et al., 2009), and a study in southern India

produced diametrically opposite results compared to the study in Uttar Pradesh (Krishnan et al., 2010).

              Kerala is an interesting case for analyzing the prevalence of violence against women and girls in

that it performs better than other Indian states on a host of human development indicators for women. It

has a favorable female sex ratio6 of 1,058 females to 1,000 males compared to India’s 933, a high female

literacy rate of 92.1 percent compared to India’s 65.5 percent, and a high female life expectancy rate of 77

years compared to the national 67.7 years (Sakhi, 2004). At the same time, economic impoverishment,

malnourishment, low political participation rates, and low labor force participation rates are prevalent
                                                            
6The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary defines sex ratio as “the proportion of males to females in a population as expressed
by the number of males per hundred females” (http://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/sex%20ratio), accessed on September
29, 2016.

                                                               6
among women in Kerala (Panda and Agarwal, 2005), although the situation is much better in the state

regarding these indicators than in the rest of India. In addition, more households in Kerala have migrants

abroad compared with any other state in the country (Zachariah and Rajan, 2015; Chellaraj and

Mohapatra, 2011).


        Similar studies have been undertaken in other countries. Globally, gender inequality, gender

norms and social cohesion play a major role in domestic violence (VandeeEnde et al., 2012).              In

Bangladesh, results suggest that membership in microcredit organizations does not increase the odds of

domestic violence (Bhattacharya and Amin, 2013). Working outside the home in Bangladesh is associated

with increased violence, but only for less-educated households (Heath, 2014). The higher the education of

the household, the lower the odds of violence in Bangladesh (Koenig et al., 2003), though they are also

higher for perceived willful transgressions by female household members (Yount et al., 2013). In general,

women in South Asia are also afraid to seek help from relatives or acquaintances (Ahmed et al., 2009). In

a cross section of African countries for which data are available, Alesina et al. (2016) find that ancient

socioeconomic conditions determine social norms about gender roles, family structures, and intra-family

violence, which persist even when the initial conditions change. Norms about marriage patterns, living

arrangements, and the productive role of women are associated with contemporary violence. Finally,

women’s contemporary economic role affects violence in a complex way, which is itself related to

traditional norms from ancient times and current power-bargaining dynamics within the marriage. In

general, families with agrarian traditions enforce gender roles (Alesina et al., 2013). For thirty different

Sub-Saharan African countries it was also found that resource inequality, both aggregate and within the

household level increases intimate partner violence (Cools and Kotsadam, 2017). In Tanzania, women

who own businesses are more likely to face domestic violence if they are self-employed and without

partnership (Vyas et al., 2015). Domestic violence increased sharply in Rwanda after the genocide of

1994 (La Mattina, 2017). For Mexico, Liu and Fullerton (2015) find that higher female social status—

measured by educational, economic, and political standings—is associated with lower rates of homicide


                                                     7
of women and lower intimate partner violence rates (Liu and Fullerton, 2015). Attitudes towards gender

violence vary across countries, and in Vietnam a greater share of women justify domestic violence against

them than do men (Yount et al., 2014a). Women in rural Minya, Arab Republic of Egypt, who are

exposed to intimate partner violence may escalate their housework to satisfy local customs of feminine

domesticity, while at the same time substituting economic activities for non-spousal care work to enhance

their economic independence from violent partners (Yount et al., 2014b).


        Violence against women is prevalent in industrialized countries as well. In the United Kingdom,

higher unemployment rates are associated with higher rates of domestic violence (Anderberg et al., 2016).

Decreases in gender wage gaps are associated with decreases in violence against women in the United

States (Aizer, 2010).


        In general, violence against women and girls is a global problem (VanderEnde et al., 2012; Watts

and Zimmerman, 2002). It can span generations in a vicious circle (Pollak, 2004) and is a major public

health issue particularly in developing countries (Heise et al., 1994). In schools in both industrialized and

developing countries, violence against women and girls continues to be a problem (Leach, 2006). It has

serious economic and health consequences, including an adverse impact on the survival rates of women

and girls, their health, education, and being a productive member of society (Solotaroff and Pande, 2014;

Kishor and Johnson, 2006; Campbell, 2002). It is associated with higher HIV prevalence in Sub-Saharan

Africa (Durevail and Lindskog, 2015), reduced GDP in Vietnam (Duvvury et al., 2012), significantly

worse nutrition outcomes for girls when compared to girls who live in households without domestic

violence (Ackerson and Subramanian, 2008), and increased childhood mortality in India (Koenig et al.,

2010). Despite its prevalence and impact on societies, violence against women and girls is underreported

in most countries around the world because of the failure of respondents to answer, or answer truthfully,

sensitive questions in the surveys (Palermo et al., 2014; Devries et al., 2013; Whitaker et al., 2007).

Hence the need to tackle the issue of underreporting such violence in order to effectively measure the

problem and, in turn, address it by developing and implementing appropriate policies and programs.


                                                     8
        In recent years, new techniques have been developed to measure the extent of underreporting of

sensitive behaviors using household surveys (Lara et al., 2004). They include— among others— the list

randomization or item count technique (Blair et al., 2015; Tsuchiya et al., 2007; Houston and Tran, 2001;

Anderson and Miller, 1990), randomized response method (Pollock and Beck, 1976; Goodstadt and

Gruson, 1975; Greenberg et al., 1971; Warner, 1965), three card method (Droitcour et al., 2001),

nominative method (Sirken, 1970), and Bogus Pipe method (Tourangeau et al., 1997). Several studies

have used list randomization in other fields where the respondents have a tendency to withhold

information about sensitive issues. Blair et al. (2014) have developed a statistical test and multivariate

regression models for comparing and combining the results from list randomization and endorsement

experiments, showing that when carefully designed and analyzed, the two survey experiments can

produce substantively similar empirical findings. Blair and Imai (2012) have found similar results. When

using the National Race and Politics Survey, Imai (2011) has employed the item count technique to

measure the degree of racial hatred in the United States. The results indicate that the level of hatred is

higher relative to that reported in conventional surveys. Similar results have been found for vote buying in

Nicaragua (Gonzales-Ocantos et al., 2012). Finally, Rosenfeld et al. (2016) have found that while direct

questioning leads to significant underestimation of sensitive votes against the anti-abortion referendum in

Mississippi, indirect survey techniques yield estimates much closer to the actual vote count, with

endorsement experiment and randomized response yielding the least bias.


        Despite the urgent need to more accurately estimate the prevalence of gender-based violence

(GBV), and despite the recent development of statistical and survey techniques discussed above to

address this issue, research on the extent of underreporting of GBV is virtually non-existent for any

country. Studies of physical violence and harassment on buses and other forms of transport are also

virtually non-existent. Hence, by applying the list randomization technique to survey questions about

GBV in Kerala, India, this study intends to fill this gap in the literature.




                                                       9
    III. Data and Methodology
        In our research, we use the List Randomization method, discussed in detail in this section, to

estimate both the incidence and the extent of underreporting of domestic violence and physical

harassment on private and public buses in Kerala.


        The list randomization method, also known as the item-count technique (ICT) and the unmatched

count technique, was introduced by Anderson and Miller (1990). Respondents are divided into control

and treatment groups, with the former given a set of true-false statements that are both relevant and

inoffensive to the respondents’ socio-economic or political context. The treatment group is given one

true-false statement in addition to the ones given to the control group. The additional statement is about

the sensitive issue. The respondents of each group are asked to report the number of statements they agree

with, and it is expected that those in the treatment group will give true answers about the sensitive

statement which they might not if questioned directly. The mean value of true answers by the control

group is then subtracted from the mean value of true answers by the treatment group to get the average

proportion of people who agree that the sensitive statement is indeed true. Examples of application of the

list randomization technique include findings on condom use among college students (LaBrie and

Earleywine, 2000), voting for bribes (Gonzalez-Ocantos et al., 2012), shoplifting (Tsuchiya et al., 2007),

theft at the workplace by employees (Wimbush and Dalton, 1997), welfare and unemployment benefits

(Van der Heijden et al., 2000), use of microcredit loans for non-business purposes (Karlan and Zinman,

2012), and illegal migration (McKenzie and Siegel, 2013).


        The Kerala Migration Survey (KMS) 2014 was the sixth in the series of an ongoing migration

monitoring studies conducted by the Centre for Development Studies, Trivandrum. The first survey was

conducted in 1998 (Zachariah and Rajan, 2015). The total sample size in KMS 2014 was 14,575

households, including 10,000 new households and 4,575 households which were interviewed in the

previous round in 2010 (Zachariah and Rajan, 2015). Questions about GBV and attitudes on gender-

relevant issues were also added to the household questionnaire of the KMS 2014. To implement the list


                                                    10
randomization technique, we divided the sample of households into treatment and control groups so that,

of all sampled households in each primary sampling unit, every alternative household was classified as a

treatment household and the rest as the control households. The two groups were questioned on domestic

violence and physical harassment on public/private buses using both the list randomization and the direct

questioning techniques.


    i) Domestic Violence

Question for the list randomization method: Could you tell me how many of the following four statements

you regard as true?


    A. At least one member of my household plans on opening a new business in the next five years

    B. The economic situation of my household has improved considerably over the past five years.

    C. In my household, all girls below the age of 14 go to or have gone to school.

    D. At least one woman member of my household has faced physical aggression from her husband

        anytime during her life.

The treatment group was asked questions A through D, whereas the control group was asked only

questions A through C.


The following question, used for direct questioning, was administered to all households regardless of their

treatment status. Has at least one woman member of your household faced physical aggression from her

husband anytime during her life? (1- Yes 2- No 3- Don't Know 4- No Response).


    ii) Physical Harassment on Public/Private Buses


The following question was asked for the list randomization method: Could you tell me how many of the

following four statements you regard as true?


    A. At least one member of my household uses public/private buses for transportation every day.




                                                    11
      B. The number of people using public/ private buses has increased in my locality in the last two

         years.

      C. Road accidents have become less in my area in the last two years.

      D. At least one woman/girl in my household has faced physical harassment while travelling on

         public/private buses during the past year.

Again, the treatment group was asked questions A through D, whereas the control group was asked only

questions A through C.


         For direct questioning to all households regardless of their treatment status, the following

question was asked: Has at least one woman/girl in your household faced physical harassment while

travelling on public /private buses during the past year? (1- Yes 2- No 3- Don't Know 4- No Response).


         In both cases, the mean estimate from the control group’s answers was subtracted from that of the

treatment group to estimate an incidence rate of domestic violence as well as an incidence rate of physical

harassment while travelling on public and private buses. Moreover, the mean of answers from direct

questioning was subtracted from the incidence of each form of violence calculated through the list

randomization method to estimate the rate of underreporting in each case. In addition, this rate of

underreporting was calculated for various sub-groups such as rural vs. urban households to assess the

characteristics that are associated with both higher incidence of violence as well as of underreporting.

The rate of underreporting was analyzed using the individual characteristics of the respondents.


IV.      Results

         The first part of the analysis involves a test of randomization between the treatment and control

groups to ascertain whether the treatment and control groups are statistically similar in observable

characteristics, such as the number of females per household, religion, level of education, poverty status,

and so on. The results of the two-sided t-test of difference between means shown in Table 1 suggest that

the control and treatment groups are not statistically different for any of the characteristics. This confirms


                                                      12
that the survey team implemented the experiment as instructed, and the only difference between the

treatment and control groups is the number of statements (four or three, respectively) they are expected to

state their agreement on.


        The second part of the analysis involves measuring the number of individuals who answer 3

(agreed with three statements) as a proportion of statements they agree to within the control group. A

large proportion suggests that many of the respondents could be concerned that their anonymity is not

assured. We measure this proportion for all households and respondent sub-groups such as urban

households or poor households. The results suggest that the proportion of individuals who agree with the

three statements in the control group is not large, particularly for domestic violence. In the general

analysis of all households, this number is 8.73 percent in the case of domestic violence and 20.43 percent

in the case of physical harassment on public/private buses.


        The results for the overall analysis through list randomization suggests that about 15 percent of

households have women who suffer from violence perpetrated by their husbands during their lifetime,

whereas only 1 percent of households have women who suffer from physical harassment while using

either public or private buses during the preceding year. This incidence when measured through direct

questioning is 5.6 percent for the former and 2.6 percent for the latter. The rate of underreporting, which

is the difference between incidences measured through list randomization vs. direct questioning, is 9.39

percentage points for domestic violence. For physical harassment while using public/private buses, on the

other hand, the analysis suggests over-reporting of 1.79 percentage points (Table 2).


    (i) Analysis with Population Sub-groups

        The results (Tables 3 and 4) show that when compared to rural population, urban population tends

to have higher incidence of domestic violence as well as higher levels of underreporting. In the case of

domestic violence, list randomization shows a rate of incidence of 12 percent of lifetime violence among

women in rural households, while this rate is 19 percent for urban households; both are significant at the

one-percent level. Further, the difference between estimates of direct questioning and randomized listing

                                                    13
technique (11.6 and 8 percentage points respectively for urban and rural households) shows that urban

residents are typically more likely to underreport than rural residents. Meanwhile, in the case of physical

harassment on public/private buses, the difference in incidence is slightly higher in rural households when

compared to urban households. However, the results for prevalence of this form of violence using list

randomization for urban households are statistically insignificant. For rural areas, however, the extent of

underreporting is about 3 percentage points for physical harassment on public or private buses.


        Poorer households, as measured by those with red ration cards, report slightly more instances of

domestic violence compared to relatively non-poor households. Furthermore, the rate of underreporting is

higher among poorer households when compared to their less poor counterparts for domestic violence.

These patterns continued to exist when we divide the groups further into sub-groups for poverty within

rural and urban households. Poorer households report a slightly higher incidence of domestic violence in

both rural and urban settings. Moreover, poorer households have higher instances of underreporting

compared to non-poor households, in both urban and rural areas for this form of violence. The highest

incidence as well as underreporting of violence is among poor urban households for reporting on

domestic violence (Table 3). For physical harassment on buses, the incidence of underreporting is the

highest for non-poor rural households, but this rate of underreporting is much smaller compared to that of

domestic violence. In general, underreporting of physical harassment on public/private buses is much

lower for all categories. However, for physical harassment on buses, the only statistically significant

result is the estimation of incidence using list randomization for rural households with a blue ration card

(non-poor) at 9 percent with a corresponding underreporting value of 7 percentage points (Table 4). In

addition, results suggest that those households who owned their own homes have a higher level of

incidence and higher rate of underreporting for domestic violence compared to those that did not own

their homes.




                                                    14
    (ii) Analysis of Underreporting Using Individual Characteristics of Respondents

        Since characteristics of respondents are known, it is possible to understand whether there exist

any systematic differences across respondents in terms of underreporting based on gender, employment

status, age, education, religion, and a combination of these factors.


        As expected, underreporting is higher among female respondents compared to males (Tables 5

and 6) for domestic violence. This is true for both rural and urban areas. When compared by locality,

contrary to expectations, rural females and males tend to have lower rates of underreporting compared to

urban females and males, respectively, with the difference particularly large for males: 11 vs. 3

percentage points for urban vs. rural males respectively. The results for list randomization for physical

harassment on buses are not statistically significant.


        Employed respondents have lower rates of underreporting compared to unemployed respondents

for domestic violence, while the difference is negligible for physical harassment on public/private buses

and results for list randomization are statistically insignificant. Breaking down this finding by gender,

employed females have marginally higher rates of underreporting compared to employed males for both

domestic violence (Table 5) and physical harassment on public/private buses (Table 6).


        In terms of age cohorts, respondents from the youngest (30 years and younger) and oldest age

cohorts (50 and over) have higher rates of underreporting for domestic violence compared to those of the

middle cohort (Between 30 and 49 years). The youngest cohort has the highest rate of underreporting. For

physical harassment on public/private buses, the rate of underreporting is negligible and insignificant in

most cases.


        Education can potentially help people to overcome social norms and taboos concerning modesty,

thus reducing the hesitation to report sensitive issues. Quite surprisingly, underreporting in the case of

domestic violence tends to be highest among the professionally educated who typically hold medical,

engineering, or management degrees, followed by the least educated group with an educational attainment


                                                     15
of secondary school and below. In particular, both women and men with professional degrees have the

highest rate of underreporting, with men having at least a marginally higher rate of underreporting than

women in this category. For the least educated group with educational attainment of secondary school and

below, female respondents far exceed their male counterparts in terms of underreporting domestic

violence. This is also true for the education category of high school and diploma. There is no clear pattern

in the case of physical harassment on public or private buses, but males with professional degrees have

the highest rate of underreporting.


         In terms of religion, respondents who identified themselves as Hindus have the highest rates of

underreporting followed by Muslims and then Christians for domestic violence (Table 5). Females have

higher rates of underreporting of domestic violence compared to males for all religions (Table 5), with the

highest underreporting rates for Hindu women respondents followed by Muslim and Christian female

respondents respectively. There is no clear pattern regarding this for physical harassment on public or

private buses.


    V. Discussion

        The incidence of lifetime domestic violence in Kerala, as measured by the list randomization

method, is 15 percent, while it is only 5.6 percent from direct questioning, which indicates a 9.4

percentage point rate of underreporting for domestic violence. In terms of physical harassment on

public/private buses, the analysis finds an incidence rate closer to 1 percent and an over-reporting rate of

1.8 percentage points. This finding is of particular interest, as the incidence of physical harassment on

buses has not been estimated in the past (as mentioned in the literature review), nor have past studies used

the list randomization method to study underreporting of gender-based violence. The difference between

the results for domestic violence and physical harassment in public/private buses may be due to the fact

that the former is perpetuated by intimate partners and relatives while the latter is perpetuated by

strangers. Women may be more likely to report harassment by strangers than violence by people on

whom they are economically dependent. Hence, this result is not surprising.

                                                    16
        Domestic violence is higher in urban than in rural households. The analysis also suggests that

poorer households have a slightly higher incidence of domestic violence than better-off households. With

regards to physical harassment on public/private buses, the patterns are less clear; the incidence is slightly

higher in the urban than in the rural areas when using the direct questioning method, while the reverse is

true when using the list randomization method. However, results for incidence of physical harassment on

buses using the list randomization method for urban households are statistically insignificant.


        Demographic characteristics of respondents also allow us to understand better patterns of

underreporting of both domestic violence and physical harassment on public/private buses. As expected,

women tend to underreport the incidence of domestic violence in their households more than men, with

urban males and females underreporting more than their rural counterparts. Respondents belonging to the

younger cohort of below 30 years are more likely to underreport than the older cohorts, but the oldest

cohort has higher underreporting than the middle cohort in general. Quite surprisingly, professionally

educated men and women, who tend to hold high social status in Kerala, are more likely to underreport

the incidence of domestic violence in their households. More primary research is indeed needed to

unravel the puzzling relationship between education and social norms and underreporting of sensitive

behavior. Among the religious groups, Hindus are more likely to underreport domestic violence in their

households followed by Muslim and Christian respondents. Hindu women tend to be more conservative

in reporting than women from the other religions. The analysis does not suggest any clear patterns on the

underreporting of physical harassment on public/private buses by the respondents.


VI.     Conclusions

        As measured by the list randomization method, the share of households with women having ever

experienced domestic violence in Kerala is 15 percent, and for physical harassment on private/public

buses in the past year, the rate is 1 percent. Of these, the incidence of domestic violence is significantly

higher than that which is estimated by the direct questioning method, indicating that this form of violence



                                                     17
is highly underreported. Incidences of violence are estimated to be higher in urban households compared

to rural ones, but higher among the poor in both urban and rural areas.


        In terms of underreporting, females tended to underreport relative to males. Underreporting tends

to be higher among urban households. Underreporting also tends to be highest for the professionally

educated males and females, and thus shows a tendency to rise with education. In terms of religion,

Hindus record higher rates of underreporting compared to other religious groups in the study. Among all

the religious groups, women tend to underreport more than men. Furthermore, Hindu women tend to

underreport more than Muslim and Christian women. There are no clear patterns of underreporting or

over-reporting of physical harassment in public/private buses.


        Overall, list randomization estimates higher rates of domestic violence as compared to direct

questioning methods and provides a strong benchmark for measuring the incidence of domestic violence

as well as physical harassment on public and private buses. However, it should be noted that Kerala has

relatively lower rates of these types of violence compared to most states, particularly states located in

north and central India. It is possible, or even likely, that the rates are heavily underreported for these

states as well. Future studies therefore should further explore the misreporting of gender-based violence

in the states of central and northern India.


        The levels of incidence of domestic violence and physical harassment in public/private buses that

are presented in this study can be viewed as a lower bound of these rates. This is because the incidence

that is measured through this study is at the household level and not at the individual level. In cases where

there are more than one woman facing domestic violence or physical harassment in public/private buses

in a household, the rate of incidence at the individual level can be higher.


        Apart from this difference in measurement at the household level, the prevalence of domestic

violence as calculated by this study is about the same as that calculated by the India National Family

Health Survey (NFHS) of 2005-06, where the incidence is measured at the individual level. However,


                                                     18
these two numbers are not comparable for two additional reasons. First, the NFHS calculated the

prevalence of domestic violence in 2005-06, about 10 years prior to this study. Second, the manner in

which the NFHS asks questions about physical violence—as a form of domestic violence—is very

different from the manner in which the list randomization method poses these questions. The NFHS

specifically defines what physical aggression is, whereas this study left the definition of physical

aggression open to interpretation by the respondent. It could be that the respondent does not consider

certain acts, such as pushing, as acts of violence by the husband, which would contribute even more to the

underreporting of domestic violence. Future studies need to combine the inquiry methodology used by

this study (list randomization) and the wording of questions as used by the NFHS. This will lead to an

even more accurate estimation of domestic violence, at the same time contributing to alternate and shorter

methods of data collection—particularly on sensitive issues like gender based violence.




                                                   19
                                              Bibliography
Ackerson, L.K. and Subramanian, S.V. 2008. “Domestic Violence and Chronic Malnutrition among
       Women and Children in India." American Journal of Epidemiology, 167: 1188-1196.
Anderberg, D., Rainer, H., Wadsworth, J. and Wilson, T. 2016. “Unemployment and Domestic Violence:
       Theory and Evidence.” Economic Journal, 126: 1947-1979.
Ahmad, F., Driver, N., McNally, M.J. and Stewart, D.E. 2009. “”Why Doesn’t She Seek Help for Partner
      Abuse?” An Exploratory Study with South Asian Immigrant Women.” Social Science and
      Medicine, 69: 613-622.
Aizer, A. 2010. “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence.” American Economic Review, 100:
        1847-1859.
Alesina, A., Brioschi, B. and La Ferrara, E. 2016. “Violence against Women: A Cross-Cultural Analysis
        in Africa.” Working Paper Series, No. 21901, NBER.
Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. and Nunn, N. 2013.”On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128: 469-530.
Anderson, R.J. and Miller, G.L. 1990. A Simple Randomized Parallel Algorithm of List-Ranking.”
       Information Processing Letters, 33: 269-273.
Anderson, S. 2007. “The Economics of Dowry and Brideprice". Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21:
       151-174.
Anderson, S. 2003. “Why Dowry Payments Declined with Modernization in Europe but are Rising in
       India.” Journal of Political Economy, 111: 269-310.
Bhattacharya, A. and Amin, S. 2013. “Microcredit and Domestic Violence in Bangladesh: An Exploration
       of Selection Bias Influences.” Demography, 1819-1843.
Bhattacharya, M., Bedi, A.S. and Chhachhi, A. 2011. “Marital Violence and Women’s Employment and
       Property Status: Evidence from North Indian Villages.” World Development, 39: 1676-1689.
Blair, G., Imai, K., and Zhou, Y-Y. 2015. “Design and Analysis of the Randomized Response
        Technique.” Journal of American Statistical Association, 110: 1304-1319.
Blair, G., Imai, K., and Lyall, J. 2014. “Comparing and Combining List and Endorsement Experiments:
        Evidence from Afghanistan.” American Journal of Political Science, 58: 1043-1063.
Blair, G. and Imai, K. 2012. Statistical Analysis of List Experiments.” Political Analysis, 20:47-77.
Bloch, F. and Rao, V. 2002. “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case Study of Dowry Violence in
       Rural India". American Economic Review, 92: 1029-1043.
Boyle, M.H., Georgiades, K., Cullen, J. and Racine, Y. 2009. “Community Influences on Intimate Partner
       Violence in India: Women’s Education, Attitudes towards Mistreatment and Standards of
       Living.” Social Science and Medicine, 69: 691-697.
Campbell, J.C. 2002. “Health consequences of intimate partner violence.” Lancet, 13: 1331-1336.




                                                    20
Chellaraj, G. and Mohapatra, S. 2011. “Impact of Migrant Remittances on Household Expenditures in
        India.” Paper Presented at the Migration and Remittances Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, June
        12-15, 2011
Chaudhuri, A. and Mukherjee, R. 1988. Randomized Response: Theory and Technique. Marcel Dekker,
      New York.
Chowdhry, P. 1997. “Enforcing Cultural Codes: Gender and Violence in Northern India.” Economic and
      Political Weekly, 32: 1019-1028.
Chin, Y-M. 2012. “Male Backlash, Bargaining, or Exposure Reduction?: Women’s Working Status and
       Physical Violence in India.” Journal of Population Economics, 25: 175-200.
Cools, S. and Kotsadam, A. 2017. “Resources and Intimate Partner Violence in Sub-Saharan Africa.”
        World Development, 95: 211-230.
Das, S. 2015. “The Effect of the Adoption of a Pro-Women Domestic Violence Policy on Dowry
       Violence: Empirical Evidence from India.” Economic Record, 91: 78-93.
Devries, K.M., Mak, J.Y.T. and Garcia-Moreno, C. 2013. “The Global Prevalence of Intimate Partner
        Violence against Women, Science, 340: 1527-1528.
Droitcour, J. A., Larson, E.M. and Scheuren, F.J. 2001. "The Three Card Method: Estimating Sensitive
       Survey Items--With Permanent Anonymity of Response," 2001 Proceedings of the American
       Statistical Association, Social Statistics Section [CD-ROM], Alexandria, VA: American
       Statistical Association,
Durevail, D. and Lindskog, A. 2015. “Intimate Partner Violence and HIV Infection in Sub-Saharan
       Africa.” World Development, 72: 27-42.
Duvvury, N., Carney, P. and Nguyen, H.M. 2012. “Estimating the Costs of Domestic Violence against
      Women in Vietnam.” United Nations, Hanoi, Vietnam.
Goodstadt, M.S. and Gruson, V. 1975. “The Randomized Response Technique: A Test on Drug Use.”
       Journal of the American Statistical Association 70:814–818.
Gonzales-Ocantos, E., de Jonger, K., Melendez, C., Osorio, J. and Nickerson, D.W. 2012. “Vote Buying
       and Social Desirability Bias: Experimental Evidence from Nicaragua.” American Journal of
       Political Science, 56: 202-217.
Greenberg, B.G., Kuebler, R.R., Abernathy, J.R. and Horvitz, D.G., 1971. “Applications of the RR
       Technique in obtaining Qualitative Data.” Journal of American Statistical Association, 66:243-
       250.
Heath, R. 2014. “Women’s Access to Labor Market Opportunities, Control of Household Resources, and
        Domestic Violence: Evidence from Bangladesh.” World Development, 57: 32-46.
Heise, L.L., Raikes, A., Watts, C.H. and Zwi, A.B. 1994. “Violence against Women: A Neglected Public
        Health Issue in Less Developed Countries.” Social Science and Medicine, 39: 1165-1179.
Houston J and Tran A. 2001. “A Survey of Tax Evasion Using the Randomized Response
       Technique.”Advanced Taxation, 13: 69-94.



                                                 21
Imai, K. 2011. “Multivariate Regression Analysis for the Item Count Technique.” Journal of the
        American Statistical Association, 106: 407-416.
Karlan, D. and Zinman, J. 2012. List Randomization for Sensitive Behavior: An Application for
        Measuring Use of Loan Proceeds.” Journal of Development Economics, 98: 71-75
Kavitha, V.R.S. 2012. “Spousal Domestic Violence of Married Women in India.” Journal of Sociology
       and Social Anthropology, 3: 7-13.
Kishor, S. and Johnson, K. 2006. “Reproductive Health and Domestic Violence: Are the Poorest Women
        Uniquely Disadvantaged?” Demography, 43: 293-307.
Koenig, M.A., Stephenson, R., Acharya, R., Barrick, L., Ahmed, S. and Hindin, M. 2010. “Domestic
       Violence and Early Childhood Mortality in Rural India: Evidence from Prospective Data.”
       International Journal of Epidemiology, 39: 825-833.
Koenig, M.A., Ahmed, S. and Hossain, M.B. 2003. “Women’s Status and Domestic Violence in Rural
       Bangladesh: Individual-and Community-Level Effects.” Demography, 1151-1572.
Krishnan, S., Rocca, C.H., Hubbard, A.E., Subbiah, K., Edmeades, J. and Padian, N.S. 2010. “Do
       Changes in Spousal Employment Status Lead to Domestic Violence? Insights from a Prospective
       Study in Bangalore, India.” Social Science and Medicine, 70: 136-143.
LaBrie, J.W. and Earleywine, M.E. 2000. “Sexual Risk Behavior and Alcohol: Higher Base Rates
       Revealed using the Unmatched-Count Technique.” The Journal of Sex Research, 37: 321-326.
LaMattina, G. 2017. “Civil Conflict, Domestic Violence and Intra-Household Bargaining in Post-
       Genocide Rwanda.” Journal of Development Economics, 124: 168-198.
Lara, D., Strickler, J., Olavarrieta, C. and Ellerston, C. 2004. “Measuring Induced Abortion in Mexico: A
        Comparison of Four Methodologies.” Sociological Methods Research, 32: 529.
Leach, F. 2006. “Researching Gender Violence in Schools: Methodological and Ethical Consideration.”
       World Development, 34: 1129-1147.
Liu, Y. and Fullerton, T.M. 2015. “Evidence from Mexico on Social Status and Violence against
       Women.” Applied Economics, 47: 4260-4274.
Martin, S.L., Morocco, K.E., Tsui, A.O., Kupper, L.L., Chase, J. and Campbell, J.C. 2002. “Domestic
        Violence across Generations: Findings from Northern India.” International Journal of
        Epidemiology, 31: 560-572.
Martin, S.L., Tsui, A.O., Maitra, K. and Marinshaw, R. 1999. “Domestic Violence in Northern India.”
        American Journal of Epidemiology, 150: 417-426.
Mckenzie, D. and Siegel, M. 2013. “Eliciting Illegal Migration Rates through List Randomization.”
      Migration Studies, 1: 276-291
Nithya, N.R. 2013. “High Literacy and Mounting Violence: A Case of Women in Kerala, India.”
        International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 3: 1-9.
Palermo, T., Bleck, J. and Peterman, A. 2014. “Tip of the Iceberg: Reporting and Gender-Based Violence
       in Developing Countries.” American Journal of Epidemiology, 179: 602-612.



                                                   22
Panda, P. and Agarwal, B. 2005. “Marital Violence, Human Development and Women’s Property Status
       in India.” World Development, 33: 823-850.
Pollak, R.A. 2004. “An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence.” Journal of Population
        Economics, 17: 311-329.
Pollock, K.H., and Beck, Y., 1976. “A Comparison of Three Randomized Response Models for
        Quantitative Data.” Journal of American Statistical Association, 71: 884-886.
Rocca, C.H., Rathood, S., Falle, T., Pande, R.P. and Krishnan, S. 2009. “Challenging Assumptions about
       Women’s Empowerment: Social and Economic Resources and Domestic Violence among Young
       Married Women in Urban South India.” International Journal of Epidemiology, 38: 569-579.
Rosenfeld, B., Imai, K. and Shapiro, J. 2016. “An Empirical Validation Study of Popular Survey
       Methodologies for Sensitive Questions.” American Journal of Political Science, 60: 783-802.
Sakhi Women’s Resource Center. 2004. “Gender and Decentralized Planning, Kerala, India, Trivandrum.
Santos, C. 2013. “Costs of Domestic Violence: A Life Satisfaction Approach.” Fiscal Studies: Journal of
        Applied Public Economics, 34: 391-409.
Sekhri, S. and Storeygard, A. 2014. “Dowry Deaths: Response to Weather Variability in India.” Journal
        of Development Economics, 111: 212-223.
Shakya, H.B., Fleming, P., Saggurti, N., Donta, B., Silverman, J. and Raj, A. 2017. “Longitudinal
       Associations of Intimate Partner Violence Attitudes and Perpetration: Dyadic Couples Data from
       a Randomized Control Trial in Rural India.” Social Science and Medicine, 179: 97-105.
Sirken, M.G. 1970. “Household Surveys with Multiplicity.” Journal of American Statistical Association,
        65: 257-266.
Solotaroff, J.L. and Pande, R.P. 2014. Violence against Women and Girls: Lessons from South Asia.
        Washington DC: World Bank Group.
Srinivasan, S, and Bedi, A.S. 2007. “Domestic Violence and Dowry: Evidence from a South Indian
        Village.” World Development, 45: 252-268.
Tsuchiya, T., Hirai, Y., and Ono, S. 2007. “A Study of the Properties of the Item-Count Technique.”
       Public Opinion Quarterly, 71: 253-272.
Tourangeau, R. and Yan, T. 2007. “Sensitive Questions in Surveys.” Psychological Bulletin, 133: 859-
       883.
Tourangeau, R., Smith, T.W. and Rasinski, K.A. 1997. Motivation to Report Sensitive Behaviors on
       Surveys: Evidence from a Bogus Pipeline Experiment.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology,
       27: 209-222.
UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2005. “UNHCR’s Policy on Harassment,
     Sexual     Harassment,    and      Abuse     of     Authority.”  UNHCR,       Geneva.
     http://www.un.org/womenwatch/osagi/UN_system_policies/(UNHCR)policy_on_harassment.pdf.
VanderEnde, K.E., Yount, K.M., Dynes, M.M. and Sibley, L.M. 2012. “Community-Level Correlates of
       Intimate Partner Violence against Women Globally: A Systematic Review.” Social Science and
       Medicine, 75: 1143-1155.


                                                  23
Van der Heijden, P. G., Van Gils, G., Bouts, J., and Hox, J. J. 2000, “A Comparison of Randomized
       Response, Computer-Assisted Self-Interview, and Face-to-Face Direct Questioning Eliciting
       Sensitive Information in the Context of Welfare and Unemployment Benefit,” Sociological
       Methods & Research, 28, 505–537.

Vyas, S., Jansen, H.A.F.M., Heise, L. and Mbwambo, J. 2015. “Exploring the Association between
       Women’s Access to Economic Resources and Intimate Partner Violence in Dar es Salaam and
       Mbuya, Tanzania.” Social Science and Medicine, 146: 307-315.
Warner, S.L. 1965. “Randomized Response: A Survey Technique for Eliminating Evasive Answer Bias.”
       Journal of the American Statistical Association, 60: 63-69.
Watts, C. and Zimmerman, C. 2002. “Violence against Women: Global Scope and Magnitude.” Lancet,
        359: 1232-1237.
Whitaker, D.J., Haileyesus, T. and Swahn, M. 2007. “Differences in Frequency of Violence and Reported
       Injury between Relationships with Reciprocal and Non-Reciprocal Intimate Partner Violence.”
       American Journal of Public Health, 97: 941-947.
Wimbush, J.C. and Dalton, D.R., 1997. “The Base Rate for Employee Theft: Convergence of Multiple
      Methods.” Journal of Applied Psychology, 82: 756-763.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2013. “Global and Regional Estimates of Violence against Women:
       Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate Partner Violence and Non-Partner Sexual Violence.”
       Geneva, Switzerland.
Yount, K.M., VanderEnde, K., Zureick-Brown, S., Anh, H.T., Schuler, S.R. and Minh, T.H. 2014a.
       “Measuring Attitudes about Intimate Partner Violence Against Women: The ATT-IPV Scale.”
       Demography, 51: 1551-1572.
Yount, K.M., Zureick-Brown, S. and Salem, R. 2014b. “Intimate Partner Violence and Women’s
       Economic and Non-Economic Activities in Minya, Egypt, Demography, 51: 1069-1099.
Yount, K.M., Halim, N., Schuler, S.R. and Head, S. 2013. “A Survey Experiment of Women’s Attitude
       about Intimate Partner Violence against Women in Rural Bangladesh.” Demography, 50: 333-
       357.
Zachariah, K.C. and Rajan, S.I. 2015. “Researching International Migration: Lessons from the Kerala
       Experience.” Routledge, New Delhi, India.




                                                 24
Table 1: Test of Randomization- T Test of the Difference in Means
                                                                     Mean-      Mean-       P
                                                                    Treatment   Control   Value
Number of Females per Household                                        2.28      2.30      0.33
Median Age Per Household                                              37.35      37.20    0.54
Number of individuals Below Primary per Household                     0.74       0.72     0.28
Number of individuals in Primary Per Household                        1.46       1.47     0.61
Number of individuals in Secondary but with No Degree Per
                                                                      1.51       1.54     0.16
Household
Number of individuals with Degrees Per Household                      0.36       0.34     0.18
Number of Employed Individuals Per Household                          1.33       1.36     0.11
Proportion of Muslim Households                                       0.21       0.21     0.78
Proportion of Hindu Households                                        0.58       0.58     0.98
Proportion of Christian Households                                    0.21       0.21     0.79
Proportion of Other Religion Households                               0.00       0.00     0.89
Proportion Married Individuals Per Household                          2.35       2.36     0.53
Proportion of Never Married Individuals Per Household                 1.66       1.66     0.93
Proportion of Widows/Widowers Per Household                           0.30       0.30     0.86
Proportion divorced individuals per household                         0.03       0.03     0.27
Proportion of households with ration card                             0.98       0.98     0.07
Proportion of households with red ration card                         0.30       0.30     0.81
Proportion of households with blue ration card                        0.68       0.68     0.76
Proportion of households who own their house                          0.93       0.93     0.64
Proportion of non-migrant households                                  0.63       0.62     0.11
Proportion of households with international migrants                  0.19       0.20     0.10
Proportion of households with domestic migrants                       0.07       0.07     0.39
Sample Size                                                           8,458      5,467




                                                       25
Table 2: List Randomized Measures of Domestic Violence and Physical Harassment on
Public/Private Buses
                                                                                       Estimated        Estimated
                                         Proportion
                                                          Mean                          Rate of          Rate of           Rate
                              Sample     of Control                  Mean for
                                                           for                        Violence by       Violence        Difference
                               Size      Giving 3 as                 Treatment
                                                         Control                          List          by Direct      (RL -Direct)
                                         a Response
                                                                                     Randomization      Question
             .

Physical
Aggression from Husband           13925           8.73         1.31          1.46             0.15***       0.056               0.09
Physical Harassment on
Buses                             13925          20.43         1.73          1.74                0.01       0.026              -0.02
Note: *, **, *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively


Table 3: Estimates of Domestic Violence Rates by Population Subgroup
                                             Proportion                                            Estimated Rate of     Estimated Rate of       Rate
                                                              Mean for               Mean for
     Households          Observations     in Control Group                                          Violence by List        Violence by       Difference
                                                               Control               Treatment
                                         Giving 3 as Answer                                         Randomization         Direct Question    (RL -Direct)
Urban                            6170                  8.72              1.26          1.45             0.19***                 0.07             0.12
Rural                            7755                  8.73              1.34          1.47             0.12***                 0.04             0.08

Non poor                         9424                  9.25              1.35          1.50             0.14***                 0.05             0.09

Poor                             4221                  7.63              1.21          1.38             0.16***                 0.06             0.10

Rural non-poor                   5246                  9.14              1.40          1.52             0.12***                 0.04             0.08

Rural poor                       2351                  7.89              1.23          1.37             0..13***                0.04             0.09

Urban non-poor                   4178                  9.39              1.30          1.47             0.17***                 0.07             0.11

Urban poor                       1870                  7.29              1.19          1.39             0.199***                0.08             0.12
Does not own home
house                             952                  5.79              1.24          1.36              0.12**                 0.07             0.05
Owns House                      12973                  8.94              1.31          1.47             0.15***                 0.06             0.10
Note: *, **, *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively

                                                                                26
Table 4: Estimates of Physical Harassment on Public/Private Buses Rates by Population Subgroup
                                         Proportion                               Estimated      Estimated
                                                                                                                Rate
                                          in Control     Mean                       Rate of       Rate of
                                                                   Mean for                                  Difference
      Households          Observations      Group         for                     Violence by    Violence
                                                                   Treatment                                   (RL -
                                         Giving 3 as    Control                      List        by Direct
                                                                                                              Direct)
                                            Answer                             Randomization     Question
Urban                            6170             21.11          1.71          1.68    -0.04       0.04        -0.08
Rural                            7755             19.92          1.74          1.79   0.05***      0.02        0.03

Non- poor                        9424             20.65          1.72          1.75    0.02        0.03        -0.01

Poor                             4221             20.40          1.74          1.73    -0.02       0.03        -0.05
Rural Non-poor                   5246             19.84          1.72          1.80   0.09***      0.02        0.07
Rural Poor                       2351             20.40          1.78          1.78    0.002       0.02        -0.02

Urban Non-poor                   4178             21.74          1.73          1.69    -0.04       0.03        -0.07

Urban Poor                        1870            20.62          1.70          1.67    -0.03       0.04        -0.07
Does not own house                952             21.58          1.73          1.64    -0.09       0.03        -0.12
Owns House                       12973            20.35          1.73          1.75    0.02        0.03        -0.01
Note: *, **, *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively




                                                                                27
Table 5: Estimates of Domestic Violence Rates by Respondent Subgroup

                                                                                                    Estimated     Estimated
                                                     Proportion in                                                            Rate
                                                                             Mean                    Rate of      Rate of
                                                     Control Group                    Mean for                                Difference
                                    Observations                              for                  Violence by    Violence
                                                      Giving 3 as                     Treatment                               (RL -
                                                                            Control                    List       by Direct
                                                        Answer                                                                Direct)
                                                                                                  Randomization   Question
Male                                    5682              9.32               1.34       1.46         0.12***        0.06         0.06
Female                                  8129              8.14               1.29       1.45         0.17***        0.06         0.11
Rural Male                              3194               9.1               1.39       1.47          0.08**        0.05         0.03
Urban Male                              2488              9.62               1.27       1.45         0.18***        0.07         0.11
Rural Female                            4500              8.25               1.31       1.47         0.15***        0.04         0.11
Urban Female                            3629              7.99               1.25       1.44         0.19***        0.07         0.12
Employed                                5122              9.24               1.36       1.49         0.14***        0.06         0.08
Unemployed                              8689              8.26               1.28       1.44         0.16***        0.06         0.11
Employed Female                         1551              7.85               1.29       1.45         0.16***        0.06          0.1
Employed Male                           3571              9.85               1.39       1.51         0.13***        0.06         0.07
Age-Less than 30                        1187              10.11              1.38       1.55         0.17***        0.05         0.12
Age- 30-49                              5700              9.44               1.38       1.49         0.11***        0.06         0.05
Age-Above 50                            6924              7.73               1.24       1.41         0.17***        0.06         0.11
Secondary and below                     5852              7.89               1.22       1.39         0.16***        0.06         0.1
High School and Diploma                 6456              9.22               1.36        1.5         0.13***        0.05         0.08
Degree and above                        1315              8.65                1.4       1.53         0.13***        0.04         0.09
Professional degree                     240               5.43               1.37       1.62         0.25**         0.05          0.2
Male Secondary and below                2522              8.44               1.27       1.39         0.12***        0.06         0.06
Male High School and Diploma            2503              9.84               1.38        1.5         0.12***        0.06         0.06
Male Degree and above                    569              9.72               1.41       1.54           0.13         0.04         0.09
Male Professional Degree                 110              4.65               1.23       1.49           0.26         0.05         0.21
Female Secondary and below              3330              7.45               1.18       1.38         0.2***         0.06         0.14
Female High School and Diploma          3953              8.81               1.35       1.49         0.15***        0.05          0.1
Female Degree and Above                  746              7.83               1.39       1.53          0.14**        0.05         0.09
Female Professional Degree               130              6.12               1.49       1.73           0.24         0.05         0.19


                                                                       28
Muslim                                          2901                12.61            1.42   1.55     0.13    0.05   0.08
Male Muslim                                     1132                14.81            1.46   1.58    0.11**   0.06   0.05
Female Muslim                                   1769                11.21            1.38   1.53   0.15***   0.05   0.1
Christian                                       2888                 7.26            1.41   1.54   0.13***   0.05   0.08
Male Christian                                  1323                 8.07            1.41   1.52    0.11**   0.05   0.06
Female Christian                                1565                 6.6             1.42   1.56   0.14***   0.05   0.09
Hindu                                           8006                 7.69            1.23   1.39   0.16***   0.06    0.1
Male Hindu                                      3217                 7.93            1.27   1.39   0.12***   0.06   0.06
Female Hindu                                    4789                 7.52             1.2   1.39   0.19***   0.06   0.13
Note: *, **, *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively




                                                                                29
Table 6. Estimates of Physical Harassment on Public/Private Buses Rates by Respondent Subgroup
                                              Proportion                                  Estimated     Estimated
                                                                                                                       Rate
                                              in Control                                   Rate of       Rate of
                                                            Mean for        Mean for                                Difference
                               Observations     Group                                    Violence by    Violence
                                                            Control         Treatment                                 (RL -
                                              Giving 3 as                                    List       by Direct
                                                                                                                     Direct)
                                                Answer                                  Randomization   Question
Male                               5682          19.34        1.73            1.75           0.02          0.03       -0.01
Female                             8129           21.3        1.73            1.73         0.0009          0.03       -0.03
Rural Male                         3194          17.97        1.72            1.79         0.07**          0.02        0.05
Urban Male                         2488           21.2        1.74             1.7          -0.03          0.04       -0.07
Rural Female                       4500          21.45        1.76             1.8           0.04          0.02        0.02
Urban Female                       3629           21.1         1.7            1.66          -0.04          0.03       -0.07
Employed                           5122          21.32        1.79            1.81           0.03          0.03         0
Unemployed                         8689          19.95        1.69             1.7          0.004          0.03       -0.02
Employed Female                    1551          25.75        1.84            1.89           1.87          0.03        1.84
Employed Male                      3571          19.36        1.77            1.78           1.78          0.03        1.75
Age-Less than 30                   1187          23.52         1.8            1.77          -0.03          0.03       -0.06
Age- 30-49                         5700          23.33         1.8            1.78          -0.02          0.03       -0.05
Age-Above 50                       6924          17.66        1.66             1.7          0.04*          0.03        0.01
Secondary and below                5852         18.76          1.7            1.73          0.03          0.03          0
High School and Diploma            6456         21.51         1.75            1.74         -0.004         0.03        -0.03
Degree and above                   1315         23.74         1.75            1.76          0.01          0.03        -0.02
Professional Degree                 240          25           1.79             1.8         0.004          0.04        -0.03
Male Secondary and Below           2522         19.73         1.74            1.78          0.04          0.03         0.01
Male High School and Diploma       2503         19.19         1.72            1.72          0.004         0.03        -0.02
Male Degree and Above               569         18.52         1.68            1.74          0.06          0.02         0.04
Male Professional Degree            110         20.93         1.63            1.76          1.71          0.01          1.7
Female Secondary and Below         3330         17.99         1.68            1.7           0.02          0.03        -0.01
Female High School and
                                   3953         23.02         1.77            1.76          -0.01         0.02        -0.03
Diploma
Female Degree and Above            746          27.76         1.8             1.77          -0.03         0.03        -0.06
Female Professional Degree         130          28.57         1.94            1.83          -0.11         0.06        -0.17

                                                                       30
Muslim                                  2901            20.52           1.76         1.77   0.01    0.02   -0.02
Male Muslim                             1132            23.23           1.81         1.84   0.04    0.03     0
Female Muslim                           1769            18.78           1.74         1.73   -0.01   0.02   -0.03
Christian                               2888            20.72           1.75         1.75   0.002   0.03   -0.03
Male Christian                          1323            17.52           1.71         1.76   0.05    0.03    0.01
Female Christian                        1565            23.27           1.78         1.74   -0.04   0.02   -0.06
Hindu                                   8006            20.38           1.71         1.73   0.01    0.03   -0.02
Male Hindu                              3217            18.81           1.71         1.71   0.004   0.03   -0.02
Female Hindu                            4789            21.53           1.71         1.73   0.02    0.03   -0.01
Note: *, **, *** indicate significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent levels respectively




                                                                                31
