                                                         WPS8133


Policy Research Working Paper                           8133




  Assessing the Global Economic and Poverty
      Effects of Antimicrobial Resistance
                                Syud Amer Ahmed
                                     Enis Barış
                                    Delfin S. Go
                                   Hans Lofgren
                               Israel Osorio-Rodarte
                                  Karen Thierfelder




Development Economics
Development Prospects Group
  &
Health Nutrition and Population Global Practice Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8133


  Abstract
 This paper assesses the potential impact of antimicrobial                           to $85 trillion in gross domestic product and $23 trillion
 resistance on global economic growth and poverty. The                               in global trade (in present value). By 2050, the cost in
 analysis uses a global computable general equilibrium                               global gross domestic product could range from 1.1 per-
 model and a microsimulation framework that together                                 cent (low case) to 3.8 percent (high case). Antimicrobial
 capture impact channels related to health, mortality,                               resistance is expected to make it more difficult to eliminate
 labor productivity, health care financing, and produc-                              extreme poverty. Under the high antimicrobial resistance
 tion in the livestock and other sectors. The effects spread                         scenario, by 2030, an additional 24.1 million people would
 across countries via trade flows that may be affected by                            be extremely poor, of whom 18.7 million live in low-in-
 new trade restrictions. Relative to a world without anti-                           come countries. In general, developing countries will be
 microbial resistance, the losses during 2015–50 may sum                             hurt the most, especially those with the lowest incomes.




  This paper is a joint product of the Development Prospects Group, Development Economics and the Health Nutrition
  and Population Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research
  and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also
  posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The corresponding authors may be contacted at dgo@worldbank.org
  and thier@usna.edu.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
         Assessing the Global Economic and Poverty Effects of Antimicrobial Resistance

                           Syud Amer Ahmed, Enis Barış, Delfin S. Go,
                     Hans Lofgren, Israel Osorio-Rodarte, and Karen Thierfelder1




Keywords: health (pandemics), economic growth of open economies, measurement and analysis
of poverty, computable general equilibrium modeling.




1
  Syud Amer Ahmed: The World Bank; Enis Barış: The World Bank; Delfin S. Go: The World Bank; Hans Lofgren:
The World Bank; Israel Osorio-Rodarte: The World Bank; and Karen Thierfelder: U.S. Naval Academy. The paper
is part of the background analysis for the World Bank report, Drug Resistant Infections – A Threat to Our Economic
Future, a discussion draft presented by Jim Kim to the United Nations in September 2016, and the final report issued
in March 2017. The paper was prepared collaboratively between DEC Prospects Group and the Global Practice on
Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) at the World Bank. It benefitted partly from funding from HNP and the
Strategic Research Program on Infectious Diseases. We thank Olga Jonas, Henning Tarp Jensen, Csilla Lakatos,
Maryla, Maliszewska,Donald Edward Shriber, Jason Nassios and other participants at the 20th Annual Conference on
Global Economic Analysis on June 8, 2017 and the World Bank seminar on June 13, 2017 for suggestions and
suggestions. The corresponding authors are Delfin Go (dgo@worldbank.org) and Karen Thierfelder (thier@usna.edu).
I.     Introduction
The 2014 Ebola outbreak in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone calls attention to the painful
economic and human costs of pandemics if the spread is unchecked (World Bank 2014). Drug-
impervious infections from antimicrobial resistance (AMR) are particularly worrisome because
the risks are substantial but yet uncertain. Like climate change, AMR is a slowly unfolding future
shock. Its impact will depend not only on its progression, its detrimental impact on human health
and morbidity, livestock production, and many other unforeseen effects, but also on the policy
measures taken today and in the future. For these reasons, recent studies have relied on forward-
looking simulations based on increasingly complex economic models to capture the interactions
of AMR with human health and the economy; microeconomic assessments of the impact of AMR
on labor supply and productivity provide plausible assumptions for these simulations.

          This paper advances the methodology used to analyze the economic impacts of AMR.
First, it uses a well-defined global general equilibrium model with channels for AMR to affect the
economy through health costs, labor supply, labor productivity, livestock production and trade
costs. Sectors interact within economies and across countries through bilateral trade links and
resource flows. Second, it traces the global effects on poverty, especially in developing countries,
by employing a global microsimulation framework that draws on harmonized household surveys
that cover around 85% of world population. Finally, to account for the significant uncertainty about
the future progression of AMR, the analysis uses expert microeconomic and or meta-studies to
form low-, mid-, and high-case scenarios for the severity of its impact via explicit channels. In
what follows, we elaborate on the contributions of our analysis.

        The magnitude of AMR’s future global impact depends on the interactions between the
health (care) sector and the rest of the economy within each country and further repercussions
across countries and regions. To capture not just the many health related issues caused by AMR,
but their significant spill-over effects on other sectors of the economy, Smith et al. (2005) use a
computable general equilibrium (CGE) model of the United Kingdom to estimate the full social
costs and benefits of this health problem and its policy interventions. However, because they do
not use a global model, they exclude cross-country interactions and do not address how effects
differ across countries.

        Using first principles, Rudholm (2002) stresses that, without a global view, the actions by
individual countries that take the actions of their neighbors as exogenous would together lead to a
suboptimal allocation of global resources. The paper focuses mainly on conceptual arguments and
derivations in support of the need for a global perspective, thus leaving the empirical analysis to
others. Taylor et al. (2014) combine good microeconomic assessments of AMR’s impact on human
health with a global CGE analysis to estimate the impact with a worldwide perspective. They
conduct a careful meta-analysis of results from various research studies on the impact of AMR on
health and morbidity to determine likely changes in labor supplies in different regions. They

                                                                                                  2
construct a simple global computable general equilibrium (CGE) model with one sector in each
region to analyze the effects of labor supply changes. Their database comes from disparate sources:
10 social accounting matrices (SAMs) mostly from the International Food Policy Research
Institute (three for Sub-Saharan Africa, six for Latin America, and one for the Middle East and
North Africa)2 plus an aggregated input-output table for a high-income region derived from the
World Input-Output Database.3 This information is scaled to match the macroeconomic aggregates
of the pertinent regions and linked by trade flows from the Directions of Trade database of the
International Monetary Fund. The resulting SAMs do not distinguish producing sectors,
comprising mainly of aggregate output, a single intermediate consumption, and one labor category
for each region. In particular, the study does not make use of a more disaggregated and consistent
database like that of the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) of Purdue University, which has
become standard for global CGE modeling.4

        Keogh-Brown et al. (2009) use a global model with sector detail to evaluate the labor
supply and productivity effects of AMR. Unlike Taylor et al. (2014), they use a model with
multiple sectors (GLOBE, see McDonald et al. 2007) and a globally consistent database of GTAP.
Rather than use detailed meta-studies to determine the appropriate labor supply shocks, they use a
sigmoid curve parameterization of the frequency of resistance to estimate the impact of reduced
use of antibiotics. Also, their analysis relies on a static version of the GLOBE model which does
not describe how the impact of AMR evolves over time.

        To improve on the previous modeling efforts, the analysis of the global impact of AMR in
this study uses GLOBE_DYN (McDonald et al. 2013), a multi-sectoral, multi-country and multi-
agent dynamic recursive CGE model that is consistent with neoclassical growth theory and uses
GTAP data. A range of possible AMR incidence scenarios is compared to a baseline scenario, with
the marginal effects of AMR measured as the difference in the evolution of economic variables
between the scenarios with AMR incidence and the baseline. This ex-ante approach follows the
rich tradition of using CGE analysis to examine policy issues in developing countries,5 such as
trade reform in India (Go and Mitra 1999), carbon tax and climate change in South Africa
(Deverajan et al. 2010), or policies to speed up progress on the Millennium Development Goals
(Lofgren et al. 2013). Such models and analysis are also increasingly applied to examine the
forward-looking effects of complex global issues, such as the long-term effects of international
trade agreements like the Doha Development Round (Hertel et al. 2009) or global migration
(Ahmed et al. 2016b).
       To analyze the effects of AMR on global poverty, the results of the GLOBE_DYN model
are passed on to the Global Income Distribution Dynamics (GIDD), a World Bank global

2
  Listed in Appendix C, Ibid.
3
  Ibid; Timmer (2012).
4
  See www.gtap.org for more information.
5
  See, for example, the survey in Devarajan and Robinson (2013).

                                                                                                 3
microsimulation framework with a database that draws on harmonized household surveys with
consistent definition of labor skills based on education for 104 countries(Bourguignon and Bussolo
2013 and Cruz et al. 2017). The integration of global CGE and microsimulation analysis follows
several recent applications. For example, Ahmed et al. (2016a) examine the significance of Sub-
Saharan Africa’s demographic dividend for its future growth and poverty. Devarajan et al. (2015)
stress-test Africa’s recent growth and poverty performance. Indeed, our analysis indicates that the
poverty angle is an important factor: AMR will result in a noteworthy increase in extreme poverty
due to the disproportionate negative GDP impact of AMR on low-income countries.
         The analysis covers multiple impact channels, including others not considered in earlier
research. First, it takes into account the microeconomic assessments by Taylor et al. (2014) of
possible human health costs in the form of increased morbidity and mortality. Second, it expands
the analysis in several ways to consider lessons learned from assessments of infectious diseases
based on simulation modeling and other methods. Specifically, the analysis also considers: an
additional impact on labor productivity as in the case of HIV/AIDS (Kambou et al. 1992; and
Arndt and Lewis 2001) and influenza (Keogh-Brown et al. 2010; Burns et al. 2006; World Bank
2006; and McKibbin and Sidorenko 2006); increased morbidity and mortality in the livestock
sector, leading to lower productivity and lower supply (Laxminarayan et al. 2015); rising demands
for health care due to AMR (KPMG 2014), leading to an increase in public health spending that
is financed by a lump-sum tax on households to maintain fiscal balance; and possible restrictions
on global food trade arising from a “fear factor,” represented by an increase in trade and transport
margins, as in the recent Ebola epidemic in West Africa (World Bank 2014).

        The focus of the paper is the estimation of the potential impact of AMR on the world as a
whole and four income regions defined by the level of per-capita income (following the
classification of the World Bank.) The income regions include countries belonging to low-income,
lower middle-income, upper middle-income, and high-income groups. The list of possible policy
programs and interventions against AMR are many, and it is beyond the scope of this paper to
cover them in detail. O’Neill (2016) and World Bank (2017) provide excellent reviews. In fact,
each infectious disease that is likely to be affected by AMR (such as HIV, tuberculosis, or malaria)
will need its disease-specific support strategy (see, for example, Borowitz et al. 2003, Baris 2004,
and Lindsay et al. 2004), in addition a set of AMR-specific (e.g., improved rapid diagnostics, new
antibiotics for short term, and combined treatment options, etc.) and AMR-sensitive multi-sectoral
policy measures and interventions (e.g., expanded health coverage, improved antibiotic
stewardship, and water and environment management as discussed in World Bank 2017). Even so,
our low case can be interpreted to correspond to an effective outcome of policy measures taken
today and in the future; the high case for lack of policy effectiveness.

        In what follows, we estimate the global impact of AMR with the features described above:
a well-defined global CGE model that has dynamics and makes full use of the GTAP database, the
inclusion of both microeconomic assessments on health and other channels of shock, and analysis

                                                                                                  4
of the poverty implications. Section 2 describes the methodology while sections 3 and 4 present
the baseline and the counterfactual simulation analysis. The results are summarized in section 5,
and conclusions are offered in section 6.


II.     Methodology

The GLOBE-DYN model

The magnitude of AMR’s future global impact depends on many variables with uncertain
evolution and with repercussions that may be felt throughout the global economy. To be able to
consider the combined consequences of alternative expert estimates and meta-analysis of
influencing factors, we use a recursive dynamic global CGE model, GLOBE_DYN, calibrated to
GTAP data, v8.1.
        Regions are mapped into four income regions based on the current World Bank country
classification: low income, lower middle income, higher middle income, and high income.6 As
microeconomic assessments of the effects of AMR become more available, further disaggregation
and differentiation of countries are certainly possible. The database is aggregated into six sectors
(crops, livestock, mining, processed food, manufacturing, and services). The model is a member
of a family of CGE models that models trade relationships using principles described in the 1-2-3
model (de Melo and Robinson, 1989; Devarajan, et al., 1990) or the standard multi-sectoral version
for developing countries (Dervis, de Melo, and Robinson, 1982; and Lofgren et al., 2002).
        A baseline scenario is defined to track the economic trends of “a world without AMR,”
which essentially resembles the long-term growth projections of the World Bank (2016). These
projections are similar to the long-term economic projections by research institutions in Europe,
such as Fouré et al. (2012 and 2013) and Gros and Alcidi (2013). It also tracks the future labor
supply, which is taken as the working-age population (15-64 years of age), drawing from the
demographic projections and medium fertility scenario of the United Nations (2013).
        The baseline in the recursive-dynamic model is generated by solving the model on an
annual basis with exogenous updates between each solution for the following indicators (imposed
as levels or GDP shares): GDP, investment, the real level of government expenditure, the fiscal
balance (also called government savings), the trade balance (a deficit in most developing
countries), and the total supplies of non-capital factors (skilled and unskilled labor, land, and
natural resources). In each period, the fiscal balance is cleared via adjustments in household
income taxes (treated as lump-sum tax). The exogenous trade balances are achieved via
adjustments in real exchange rates. Markets for outputs and factors are cleared via price (or wage)
adjustments The capital stock is updated endogenously: for any period after the base year, it is

6
  Unlike Taylor et al. (2014), we avoided a geographical classification since the different regions would have
included countries at different income levels. For example, if Sub-Saharan Africa were a region, then it would have
brought together a relatively high-income country like South Africa and a low-income country like Niger.

                                                                                                                      5
defined as the supply of capital in the last period plus investment in new capital in the last period
minus depreciation. To generate the exogenous path for GDP and investment, total factor
productivity and savings rates are determined endogenously in each period. After generating the
baseline, GDP and investment become endogenous, while total factor productivity (TFP) and
savings rates are exogenous, set at the levels determined in the baseline. In the AMR scenarios,
GDP and investment respond to the policy shocks, as would be expected.7
        Against the baseline economic projections of no AMR, the AMR-induced shocks are
introduced. Since both the baseline and what-if counterfactual or AMR simulations contain the
same underlying economic projections, their differences isolate the effects of the critical factors
that define the AMR impact of each scenario. The analysis is based on the differences between the
AMR scenarios and the baseline for selected key variables. The economic impact of AMR occurs
primarily through four channels: changes in the labor supply, changes in TFP in the livestock
sector, increases in government public spending on health care, and an increase in trade and
transport margins due to a “fear factor.” The rise in societal health care cost due to AMR is first
reflected as an elevation in public spending. However, the public finance rule for clearing the fiscal
balance means that they are ultimately paid for by households through a direct tax, in effect
becoming out-of-pocket expenditures of households. Through this modeling mechanism, the net-
of-tax income falls, reducing every consumption items in the household budget and causing
impoverishing effects on households. As the net-of-tax income falls, so does the level of household
savings for financing its contributions to total investment. These AMR-induced shocks give rise
to economy-wide interactions within and between regions and over time, resulting in changes in
production, consumption, investment trade, output prices, and factor wages. We summarize these
outcomes by showing how selected macroeconomic indicators differ from the baseline.


The GIDD model

To look at poverty implications of AMR, we use the results of the GLOBE_DYN as input to the
Global Income Distribution Dynamics (GIDD) microsimulation model. GIDD’s extensive
coverage of microdata from household surveys permits the ex-ante investigation of issues not
easily tractable with other methods, especially across countries. GIDD follows the tradition of
microsimulation analysis of Bourguignon and Bussolo (2013), which extends the single-country
macro-micro framework in Bourguignon and Savard (2008) to a global setting.8 Recently, it was
updated to provide a consistent treatment of labor and its skill composition based on educational
attainment of household members for 104 countries to model the income distribution and poverty



7
  This procedure assures that, if the model were resolved with these new assumptions and without any additional
policy shock, the baseline results would be replicated exactly. That is, the fact that the results for the AMR scenarios
deviate from the baseline reflects the policy shocks, not the change in assumptions.
8
  For more details, see Bourguignon and Bussolo (2013), Bussolo et al. (2010), and Cruz et al. (2017).


                                                                                                                      6
effects of human capital formation (see Cruz et al. 2017). In our global setting, the household
survey data in the updated GIDD spans 85% of the global population.9
        In the analysis, GLOBE_DYN provides economy-wide implications of macroeconomic
projections under the baseline and the different AMR scenarios. For each scenario, the evolution
of relative prices and factor rewards, including wages of skilled and unskilled workers in
agriculture and non-agriculture sectors are passed on as inputs to the GIDD. Over time, GIDD
generates reweighted household surveys that account for the changing household composition due
to demographic trends (e.g. aging, education or skill attainment, etc.) as well as changes in the
labor supply from population growth and AMR-related mortality. Drawing on this information,
the behavioral model at the household level regenerates new patterns of household employment,
income, and consumption in the household sample surveys across regions and over time to reflect
the effects of the baseline and AMR scenarios. Using these results, GIDD computes the poverty
and inequality indicators for each scenario.


III.     The Baseline - A World Without AMR

The baseline characterizes “a world without AMR,” which follows the current long-term economic
growth projections of the World Bank. It is based on data on GDP growth, investment growth,
factor supply growth, the evolution of the internal balance (fiscal budget deficit or surplus), and
the evolution of the external (current account) balance. To generate general equilibrium solutions
that are consistent with these projections, the baseline makes the following assumptions regarding
macro closures and conditions for market clearing:

        Regional TFP is made endogenous to track generate exogenous regional GDP levels.
         Changes in TFP directly affect value added (or GDP at factor cost).

        Adjustments in regional savings rates make sure that, in each region, total savings are
         sufficient to finance investment, defined as exogenous shares of GDP to match the
         projections of the World Bank’s Global Economic Prospects (GEP). With regard to
         investment, the analysis uses GEP investment data and forecasts for the period 2008-2017.
         A steady-state GDP investment share of 20% is assumed in all regions in 2030 and beyond.
         A linear adjustment is imposed between 2017 and 2030, linking projected 2017 values to
         the steady state.



9
 In single-country applications of microsimulation such as the Philippines (Bourguignon and Savard 2008) or South
Africa (Go et al. 2010), the availability of richer data sets has made it possible to use an income-generation model
with an elaborate occupational-choice behavioral module at the household level. That approach permits wages and
employment probability of individuals to become the functions of diverse household characteristics, such as age,
gender, the level of schooling, years of work experience, sector of employment, location (urban or rural, family size,
and additional household data.

                                                                                                                     7
         Household incomes taxes adjust to make sure that the exogenous fiscal deficit, defined as
          a share of GDP, is realized. Government expenditure refers only to current expenditure or
          government consumption, and the fiscal deficit excludes public capital spending. In this
          sense, a positive fiscal balance contributes to a pool of savings to finance total investment
          in the economy. Other tax rates are fixed so that other tax revenues will change to the extent
          that the tax bases to which they are applied change over time. For example, tariff revenue
          will change when import values change, given the exogenous tariff rates.

         The real exchange rate adjusts to realize the exogenous external balance (also a fixed GDP
          share). As assumed, this balance adjusts exogenously at a slow pace such that it would
          reach a value of zero after 100 years.


         In the factor markets, wages and rents adjust to bring about equilibrium, i.e. making sure
          that total endogenous demands match exogenous projections of labor or the accumulation
          of capital stock. The supplies of land and natural resources are fixed at the base level. The
          supplies of labor depend on demographic changes that define the working-age populations
          (UN 2013). The split between skilled and unskilled labor is based on the level of education
          as projected in World Bank (2015) and Ahmed et al. (2017). For capital, the supply growth
          is endogenous; given an initial stock, it is determined by investment values, depreciation,
          and the price per unit of new capital (which depends on endogenous input prices).10

IV.       Defining the AMR Shocks in the Counterfactual Simulations
Given that AMR presents a current and future threat, how much economic resources should the
world invest in reducing this threat? The answer depends on the economic costs of the expected
impacts of AMR. The simulations of impacts reported in this paper are based on a review of recent
simulations by other research groups, information on actual impacts of AMR to date, and on
expectations about its spread. As in the baseline, the projection period ends in 2050, well within
the lifetimes of present-day children and young people.
        This analysis uses expert assessments of key factors to form low-, middle-, and high-case
scenarios to address the significant uncertainties about the future progression of AMR and to
provide a range of the uncertain severity of its impact. The low case can be interpreted to
correspond to an effective outcome of policy measures taken today and in the future; the high case
for lack of policy effectiveness.11 In the simulations, the changes in savings and region-wide
effects are driven by the effects over time on labor supplies, investment, output, and relative prices.
These factors in turn change trade flows between regions and the relative and global prices of


10
 See McDonald et al (2013) for the equations used in the capital updating each period.
 The list of possible policy programs and actions against AMR are many and beyond the scope of the paper. For
11

more information, see O’Neill (2016) and World Bank (2017).

                                                                                                                8
commodities that are traded internationally, which add further rounds of global repercussions. The
modeling work carried out for this analysis ensures that impacts on prices, factors of production,
and sector outputs are consistently modeled, across sectors and countries, and over time.
       Our scenario designs draw on recent studies of AMR that provide well-documented
estimates of the individual factors and channels affected by AMR as listed and described next.
Moreover, among the studies, we only use those that can be used as inputs and assumptions within
our general equilibrium framework.

Declines in labor supplies
Of the recent estimates of the impact of AMR on global mortality, the RAND Europe study by Taylor
et al. (2014) includes well-defined projections; like our study, theirs also extends to 2050. That study
provides increased mortality resulting from resistance to antibiotics for three main pathogens
(bacteria): Escherichia coli (popularly known as E.coli), Klebsiella pneumoniae (nasty pneumonia
with drug-resistant complications), and Staphylococcus aureus (or Staph infection), each of which
contributes to the spread and worsening of infectious diseases. The constraints of data and analysis
limit the projections of mortality only from three infectious diseases: HIV, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
Even so, the study allows for differences in fatality rate for each disease in low-income regions like
Sub-Saharan Africa and high-income regions like OECD.
         Following Taylor et al. (2014), the reductions in labor supply under the different scenarios in
this study are defined in efficiency units and include the effects of morbidity (reflected in a loss of
working days due to illness). The low-case scenario corresponds to the “sc1” case in the RAND study
with a 5% AMR resistance rate at the starting period or year 0; the middle-case to “sc4”, which projects
a current rate of resistance before year 15 and 40% from year 15; and a the high case to “sc5,” which
projects a current rate of resistance before year 15 and 100% from year 15. We avoid the extreme
cases of absolute resistance (sc6 and sc7). The “current rate of resistance” refers to the fact that AMR
is already underway and that its effects are already registered in the historical estimates of the
population for the base year (2007) to 2016, albeit still in small quantities. Hence, the Rand report
distinguishes between 0% resistance rate (sc0) and the current rate of resistance (sc00). After testing,
however, the estimated labor supplies that are corrected to have the zero rate (the world without AMR)
are numerically indistinguishable from the uncorrected UN demographic projections in the significant
digits for the unit of population chosen (in millions). Hence, we do not make the delineation, and the
baseline simulation in our paper uses the UN population projections, which for all practical purposes
is the world without AMR. Finally, the mortality figures are mapped from the geographical regions of
the RAND study into World Bank income regions for our study. More specifically, Sub-Saharan
Africa is in our low-income region, high-income corresponds directly to our high-income region, while
their other regions are split across our lower middle-income and higher middle-income regions.
         The RAND study reports the number of deaths only for workers (or labor supply). Applying
the fatality rates of the working age population (labor) to the non-working age (the young and the old
who are outside the labor force), we derive the number of deaths for the total population. The resulting

                                                                                                      9
number of deaths for workers and the total population are as follows: (a) low case: 11 and 18 million,
respectively; (b) middle case: 74 and 117 million, respectively; and (c) high case: 137 and 214 million,
respectively. The number of deaths is influenced by the fact that the global population is growing. For
the high case, the yearly total number of deaths corresponds to 2.3% of the UN-projected population
in 2050. To provide some historical context, the influenza pandemics of 1918-1919 (also known as the
Spanish Flu or La Grippe) killed between 20 and 40 million people, which was more than those killed
in World War I (Barry 2005); the bubonic plague of the 14th century (commonly called the Black
Death) killed between 50 to 200 million, wiping out 40-60% of Europe’s population at the time
(Benedictow 2007).

Fall in labor productivity
In Smith et al. (2005), the influenza case in Keogh-Brown et al. (2010), and the HIV/AIDS case in
Kambou et al. (1992), labor productivity is expected to fall by about 1.0-1.5%. In Burns et al. (2006),
the fall in labor productivity in the case of the avian flu ranges from 1.4% for high-income countries
to 1.9% for Sub-Saharan Africa. In World Bank (2006) and McKibbin and Sidorenko (2006), the
potential output losses imply a much higher (or more than double) decline in labor productivity. Hence,
we use a figure of 1.5% for our low case and scale it up to 3% and 4.5% for the middle and high cases,
respectively. Because of the potential snowballing effect of AMR, these numbers could be very
conservative.

Rise in health care cost
KPMG (2014) projects that prolonged and secondary health care costs, such as the extra number of
hospital days, could rise significantly. According to our assessment, these costs may double the shares
of total health expenditure in GDP, which in 2010 were as follows for our regions: low-income 5.4%,
lower middle-income 4.2%, higher middle-income 6.1%, and high-income 12.7%. In dollar terms,
these increases are amplified over time given GDP growth. To capture the global- and economy-wide
repercussions of rising health cost, these cost increases are translated into additional government
spending on services, paid for by a direct tax on households, thus maintaining an unchanged fiscal
balance. The resulting decline in household post-tax income leads to reductions in consumption,
savings, and investment, reducing GDP and trade.

Reduction in livestock production
Following the meta-analysis of various studies by Laxminarayan et al. (2015) (particularly for cattle in
the more recent of the two periods under investigation), we impose the following declines in total
productivity in the livestock sector: low case 3%, middle case 5%, and high case 7%.

Global restrictions on livestock trade
Not unlike the impact of the 2014 Ebola epidemic (World Bank 2014), increased AMR is likely to
have a disproportionately strong negative impact on trade in livestock products due to border


                                                                                                     10
restrictions arising from the fear factor. In the simulations, we capture this via the following increases
in trade and transport margins: low case 5%, middle case 10%, and high case 15%.


V.      Results

Impacts of AMR on the Global Economy
The simulated impacts of AMR on global GDP in 2017-2050 are shown in Figure 1. Compared to
the baseline case, in the optimistic “low-AMR” scenario, the global economic output is projected
to be 1.0% lower by 2030 and 1.1% lower by 2050. In the pessimistic “high-AMR” scenario, it
would be 3.2% lower in 2030 and 3.8% lower in 2050.12 In the “low-AMR” case, the costs, as
measured by the reduction in GDP compared to the base case, will be a significant economic
burden, while in the “high-AMR” scenario, the costs can be considered severe, especially since
the costly impact endures over time.


         Figure 1: Substantial and Protracted Shortfalls in Global Economic Output

              WORLD REAL GDP
                                   Base    Low case          Middle case          High case

                             101
                             100
                              99
                Base = 100




                              98
                              97
                              96
                              95
                              94




        Given that the simulations were done using a general equilibrium model, economies do
adjust to price signals caused by the AMR shocks. These adjustments lead to a reallocation of
resources and a different pattern of new investments and capital accumulation. These model
characteristics explain the flattening out of the trajectories after 2040 in Figure 1; by this time
much of the adjustment of the world economy to shifts in relative prices and reallocation among

12
  The “high-AMR” case presented here is similar to the results of the modeling done for the UK Review on AMR,
“Antimicrobial Resistance: Tackling a Crisis for the Health and Wealth of Nations, December 2014: including (1)
Taylor et al. Estimating the Economic Costs of Antimicrobial Resistance: Model and Results, Santa Monica, CAA:
RAND Corporation and (2) KPMG, “The Global Economic Impact of Anti-Microbial Resistance.”

                                                                                                             11
sectors would have occurred. After that, growth factors coming from capital accumulation and
labor growth start to prevail, resulting in an essentially constant shortfall relative to the base case
during the last decade before 2050.
        The costly impacts of AMR are not distributed equally among countries at different levels
of per capita income. As shown in Table 1, the negative impact is more pronounced in low-income
countries. The two main reasons for this difference are a higher incidence of infectious diseases as
well as a higher dependence on labor incomes in low-income countries than in high-income
countries. In the high-case scenario, the simulated real GDP shortfalls in 2050 are 5.6% for the
low-income region, 4.4% for the two middle-income regions, and 3.1% for the high-income
region. For the world as a whole, this corresponds to a GDP decline of 3.8% or 6.1 trillion.

Impacts of AMR on International Trade
Figure 2 shows the simulated impact of AMR on world trade (exports). By 2050, the volume of
real global exports may be below the base-case values by 1.1% in the “low-AMR” scenario and
by 3.7% in the “high-AMR” scenario. The pattern of impacts over time follows the pattern of
impacts of AMR on GDP. Trade in livestock and livestock products are vulnerable to AMR not
only because of impacts on productivity of untreatable disease but also because the “fear factor”
results in disruptions of trade (such as bans on imports) in response to disease outbreaks. These
effects do not noticeably affect the total trade flows, however, because of the small share of
livestock and livestock products in world exports. Instead, the effects of broad declines across all
economic sectors dominate the simulation results for trade flows.
         Table 2 provides additional details. AMR will also lead to a severe decline in the exports
of low-income countries in 2050. In the high-case scenario, the projected declines in real exports
equal 5.2% for low-income countries, about 4.2% for the two regions of middle-income countries,
and 3.1% for high-income countries. The decline in global trade amounts to 3.7% or 1.7 trillion
dollars.




                            Figure 2: AMR Impact on World Trade




                                                                                                    12
                    WORLD REAL EXPORTS
                                       Base      Low case      Middle case    High case

                               101
                               100
                                99
                  Base = 100


                                98
                                97
                                96
                                95
                                94




                                     Figure 3: AMR Impact on Livestock Production

                    WORLD LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION
                                       Base      Low case      Middle case    High case

                               102
                               100
                                98
               Base = 100




                                96
                                94
                                92
                                90
                                88




Impacts of AMR on Livestock Production
The shocks to the livestock sector were modeled as both a decrease in productivity because of the
greater prevalence of untreatable disease and as a reduction in its exports due to restrictions
imposed by its trading partners. This trade-related behavior could include a so-called “fear factor”
and contributes to the reductions in livestock production by making it less profitable. Livestock is
a small part of the global economy (about 2% of world GDP), so its reduced productivity has a
minor influence on global indicators. The sector is relatively more important in the economies and
exports of low- and lower-middle-income countries than in the wealthier countries, however. Also,
the sector plays a substantial development role and makes a major contribution to nutrition,

                                                                                                 13
especially for children and women of reproductive age. AMR will worsen animal health, and this
is expected to reduce these benefits as well as undermine the welfare of animal owners and others
in the sector, both by increasing the variability of incomes because of the more frequent and severe
infections and by reducing the levels of incomes.
        Table 3 provides the impact across income regions. Trade reductions from a “fear factor”
will further reduce livestock production, especially for the low-income countries. For our high
case, the decline in livestock production by 2050 is 11.1% for low-income countries, 7% - 9% for
middle-income countries, and about 6% for high-income countries. The global decline is 7.6%.


Impacts of AMR on Health Care Expenditures

Health care expenditures (both public and private) would increase in tandem with the rising disease
burdens. The trends shown in figure 4 illustrate a range of outcomes. As in the GDP and trade
effects, the impact on health spending is also strongest for developing countries, where they will
rise most dramatically (Table 4). In the high-AMR scenario, health care expenditures in 2050
would be as much as 25.3% higher than the baseline values for low-income countries, 15% -16%
higher for middle-income countries, and 6.2% higher for high-income countries. Globally, annual
expenditures would be 8% higher than in the base case in 2050.
        The additional expenditures in 2050 would be $1.2 trillion annually in the high-AMR
scenario. In the low-AMR scenario, the additional health care expenses would be $0.33 trillion in
2050. Since the modeling ensures that these expenditures are not made unless they are financed,
there would be a decline in consumption. This decline will mean a reduction in the population’s
well-being because resources that could have been devoted to reducing poverty or other goals will
have to be diverted to financing the extra costs of a larger health sector coping with a larger disease
burden. The cumulative savings of AMR containment (in terms of avoiding extra health care costs)
during the entire projection period are about $4 trillion in the low-AMR case and $10.8 trillion in
the high-AMR case (see present value tests in Table 5).13
        Although the increase in spending levels is higher the higher the income of the region, the
added expenditures would likely be much more regressive and impoverishing in lower income
settings where the additional health expenditures constitute a larger chunk of the household budget
and likely out-of-pocket because of the lack of universal health coverage/financial protection.


                       Figure 4: AMR Impact on Additional Health Care Cost



13
  The two figures are present values of simulated cumulative extra health care expenditures for the period 2017-2050,
using a 3.5% discount rate. Use of a discount rate ensures that later amounts have less weight in the total than earlier
amounts. For instance, in the high-AMR case, the extra expenditure is $1.2 trillion in 2050. Because 2050 is in the
relatively distant future, the present value is $0.35 trillion, which is added to the cumulative total.

                                                                                                                     14
                             EXTRA HEALTH EXPENDITURE
                             In equivalent additional household tax

                                                 Base       Low case   Middle case   High case

                in billions of 2007 USD   1400
                                          1200
                                          1000
                                          800
                                          600
                                          400
                                          200
                                            0




Cumulative economic cost
To summarize the cumulative economic cost, we derive the present values (PVs) of the differences for
three key economic variables between the AMR scenarios and the baseline, using four alternative
social discount rates.14 These PVs summarize the cost of different degrees of inaction against AMR,
as reflected by the three scenarios. In practice, different views and social discount rates are employed
by countries and multilateral agencies. The annex in Go et al. (2013) surveys some of the discount
rates and their implications for welfare results. In the current analysis, we employ three rates: A low
rate of 1.4%, similar to the environment study by Stern (2007), which yields higher PVs for the
economic losses caused by AMR, thus spurring societal actions that may protect future generations;
an intermediate rate of 3.5%, which is the rate used by HM Treasury (2003); and a high rate of 5.5%
(as in Nordhaus 2007). To provide a higher extreme for the PV of the AMR costs, we also compute
the results for a rate of zero.
         Table 5 summarizes the present values for the cumulative economic impact in terms of
losses in GDP and trade, as well as additional health costs. Using a discount rate similar to the one
used in climate change for long-term shock, the losses (present value) during the period 2015-
2050 may add up to 85 trillion dollars in GDP and 23 trillion dollars in global trade relative to a
world without AMR. For an intermediate discount rate of 3.5%, the corresponding figures are still
high at 54 and 14 trillion, respectively. In comparison, O’Neill (2016) estimates an economic cost
of at least 100 trillion USD, which would match the high case and a discount rate between 0% and
1.4% in this analysis. The O’Neill number comes from the Taylor et al. (2014) study for one of




14
  A social discount rate, which may differ from market rate, is typically used to derive a net present value as a
summary measure of the impact of projects with streams of economic benefits and costs that are uneven over time.

                                                                                                              15
the worst scenarios (sc6) in which the GDP loss is cumulated over 40 years without discounting.
Note, however, that O’Neill’s figure is only for losses due to the reduction of labor supply.
Impacts of AMR on Poverty
The impact of AMR on economic growth will result in a pronounced increase in extreme poverty.
The main reason is the disproportionate impact of AMR on low-income countries, which
experience substantial and protracted shortfalls in economic output and other negative economy-
wide repercussions from the combined effects of the shocks in labor supply, labor productivity,
trade, livestock production, and health care cost. The economic repercussions and effects on factor
prices (e.g. wages) of each scenario will alter the income distribution of countries in each income
region, from which we calculate the poverty indicators through the GIDD framework.
        The results suggest the following: Of the additional 28.3 million people in extreme poverty
in 2050 under the high-AMR scenario, the vast majority (26.2 million) lives in low-income
countries (Figure 5). In the baseline scenario, the world is broadly on track to eliminate extreme
poverty (at $1.90/day) by 2030, reaching close to the target of less than 3% of people in extreme
poverty. Because of AMR, however, the target would be harder to reach: there could be an
additional 24.1 million of extremely poor by 2030 in the high-AMR scenario, of whom 18.7 would
be in low-income countries. Tables 6 and 7 have additional poverty estimates.

 Figure 5. AMR Impact on extreme poverty                                      Figure 6. AMR Impact on extreme poverty
 (PPP$1.90/day) by 2050 in low-income countries                               (PPP$1.90/day) by 2030 in low-income countries
 and the world, under low-, mid-, and high-case                               and the world, under low-, mid-, and high-case
 scenarios                                                                    scenarios
                              Low income                      World                                       Low income                      World
              30




                                                                                          30




                                                                       28.3
                                        26.2
                                                                                                                                                   24.1
  increase in poverty




                                                                              increase in poverty




                                                                                                                    18.7
               20




                                                                                           20




                                                              18.4
                                17.2
        millions




                                                                                    millions




                                                                                                                                          15.2
                                                                                                            12.0
   10




                                                                               10




                                                        6.9                                                                         7.7
                        6.3                                                                         6.2



                                 2050                         2050                                           2030                         2030

                                Low            Middle                 High                                  Low            Middle                 High

 Source: Simulation results and authors’ calculations




VI.                Conclusions
In this paper, we revisit the AMR pandemic, assessing its potential impact. Compared to earlier
work, our analysis presents several improvements. We use a recursive dynamic global computable

                                                                                                                                                          16
general equilibrium model with a well-defined global database to map the interactions of diseases
with multiple channels of impact, covering not only the deterioration of human health and
mortality, but also the effects on labor productivity, health care costs, productivity in the livestock
sector, and global food trade, which is restricted by fear. We simulate the economy-wide
repercussions within economies as well as their cost and spread over time and across countries
through trade and resource flows. We also trace the global effects on poverty, especially in
developing countries, by employing a microsimulation framework that draws on household survey
data with global coverage.
         Relative to a world without AMR, the losses during the period 2015-2050 may add up to
85 trillion dollars in GDP and 23 trillion dollars in global trade (in present value). By 2050, the
cost in global GDP could range from 1% (low case) to 3.8% (high case). Because of AMR, the
target of eliminating extreme poverty would be harder to reach: there could be an additional 24.1
million extremely poor people by 2030 in the high-AMR scenario, of whom 18.7 would be in low-
income countries. In general, developing countries will be hurt the most, particularly those with
the lowest incomes.

        Our analysis shows that the GDP loss due to AMR is most severe for low-income countries.
In the high-case scenario, the real GDP of the low-income region in 2050 could fall 5.6% below
the baseline; similarly, 4.4% for the two middle-income regions and 3.1% for the high-income
region. For the world as a whole, the corresponding decline in GDP is 3.8% or 6.1 trillion dollars.
         With regard to trade, AMR will also lead to a severe decline for low-income countries.
Compared to a world without AMR, for the high-case scenario, the projected declines in real
exports by 2050 equal 5.2% for low-income countries, about 4.2% for middle-income countries,
and 3.1% for high-income countries. The decline in global trade amounts to 3.7% or 1.7 trillion
dollars.
       Likewise, health expenditures will rise most dramatically in developing countries. For the
high case, by 2050, the extra health spending induced by AMR over the baseline will come to
about 25.3% for low-income countries, 16.0% for the lower middle-income countries, 14.7% for
the upper middle-income countries, and 6.2% for the high-income countries. Although the extra
spending measured in dollars is higher the higher the income of the region, the added expenditures
would likely be much more regressive and impoverishing in lower income settings where the
additional expenditures constitute a larger chunk of the household budget and likely out-of-pocket
because of the lack of universal health coverage/financial protection.
        For the livestock sectors, trade reductions from a “fear factor” will further reduce
production, also here most strongly for low-income countries. For our high case, the decline in
livestock production by 2050 is 11.1% for low-income countries; 7% - 9% for middle-income
countries, and about 6% for high-income countries.



                                                                                                    17
        Despite the improvements undertaken in the present analysis, we have several suggestions
for future research. Because AMR is an evolving future threat, improving the basis and particulars
of the underlying assumptions will yield better estimates of the impact. These include the links
between all potential pathogens and infectious diseases, and how these may affect mortality and
labor productivity in varied countries; the implications on health care cost, public versus private,
by the level of income among countries and households within countries; and better estimates of
the effects on livestock production by type of animals. Regarding the methodology, a better
framework is needed to model the snowballing effects of multiple factors and their uncertain
propagation and interactions.



References
Ahmed, Amer S., Maurizio Bussolo, Marcio Cruz, Delfin S. Go, and Israel Osorio-Rodarte.
   2017. “Global Inequality in a More Educated World.” Forthcoming. World Bank Policy
   Research Working Paper.
Ahmed, Amer S., Marcio Cruz, Delfin S. Go, Maryla Maliszewska, and Israel Osorio-Rodarte.
   2016a. “How Significant Is Africa’s Demographic Dividend for Its Future Growth and
   Poverty Reduction?” Review of Development Economics. DOI:10.1111/roe.12227 (online
   version).
Ahmed, Amer S., Delfin S. Go, and Dirk Willenbockel. 2016b. “Global Migration Revisited:
   Short-Term Pains, Long-Term Gains, and the Potential of South-South Migration.” World
   Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7628, April 2016.
Arndt, Channing and Jeffrey D. Lewis, 2001. “The HIV/AIDS pandemic in South Africa:
    sectoral impacts and unemployment,” Journal of International Development, 13(4): 427-
    449.
Baris, E. and M. Ezzati. 2004. “Should Interventions to Reduce Respirable Pollutants be Linked
     to Tuberculous Control Program?” British Medical Journal. 329:1090-3.
Barry, J.M. (2005). The Great Influenza. Penguin Books.
Benedictow, O.J. (2004). Black Death 1246-1353: The Complete History. UK: The Boydell
      Press.
Borowitz, B., E. Wiley, F. Saadah, and E. Baris. 2003. “Responding to HIV/AIDS in East Asia
    and Pacific Region: A Strategy Note for the World Bank. Discussion Paper, the World
    Bank.
Bourguignon, François, and Maurizio Bussolo. 2013. “Income Distribution in Computable
      General Equilibrium Modeling.” In Dixon, P.B., and D.W. Jorgenson, eds., Handbook of
      Computable General Equilibrium Modeling. North Holland, Elsevier B.V., pp. 1383–
      1437.



                                                                                                 18
Bourguignon, François, and L. Savard. 2008. “Distributional Effects of Trade Reform: An
      Integrated Macro-Micro Model Applied to the Philippines.” In F. Bourguignon, L.
      Pereira, and M. Bussolo (Eds.) The Impact of Macroeconomic Policies on Poverty and
      Income Distribution. Palgrave and the World Bank, Washington DC. Pp. 177-212.
Bourguignon, François and Luiz Pereira da Silva. 2003. The Impact of Economic Policies on
    Poverty and Income Distribution – Evaluation Techniques and Tools. Oxford University
    Press.
Burns, Andrew, Hans Timmer, and Dominique van der Mensbrugghe. 2006. “The Potential
       Economic Impacts of the avian flu: an assessment using the World Bank’s Linkage
       Model.” mimeo. The World Bank.
Bussolo, Maurizio, Rafael E De Hoyos, and Denis Medvedev. 2010. “Economic Growth and
       Income Distribution: Linking Macro-Economic Models with Household Survey Data at
       the Global Level.” Article. International Journal of Microsimulation 3 (1): 92–103.
       http://ideas.repec.org/a/ijm/journl/v3y2010i1p92-103.htm
Cruz, Marcio, Delfin S. Go, and Israel Osorio-Rodarte. 2017. “Modeling the poverty and
       distribution effects of human capital formation across countries: using a new database
       about labor skills and wages in GIDD 2.0.” forthcoming.
de Melo, James, and Sherman Robinson. 1989. “Product Differentiation and the Treatment of
      Foreign Trade in Computable General Equilibrium Models of Small Economies.”
      Journal of International Economics, Vol 27, pp 47-67.
Dervis, K., J. de Melo, and S. Robinson. 1982. General Equilibrium Models for Development
       Policy. Cambridge University Press and World Bank, New York.
Devarajan, Shantayanan, Delfin S. Go, Maryla Maliszewska, Israel Osorio-Rodarte, and Hans
    Timmer. 2015. “Stress-Testing Africa’s Recent Growth and Poverty Performance.” Journal
    of Policy Modeling 37 (4): 521–47. doi:10.1016/j.jpolmod.2015.04.006.
Devarajan, Shantayanan, and Sherman Robinson. 2013. “Contribution of Computable General
      Equilibrium Modeling to Policy Formulation in Developing Countries.” In Dixon, P.B.,
      and D.W. Jorgenson, eds., Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling.
      North Holland, Elsevier B.V., pp. 277-301.
Devarajan, Shantayanan, Delfin S. Go, Sherman Robinson, and Karen Thierfelder. 2011. “Tax
    Policy to Reduce Carbon Emissions in a Distorted Economy: Illustrations from a South
    Africa CGE Model." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 11(1)1: 1-21.
    Also, as World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4933, May 2009.
Devarajan, Sherman, Jeffrey D. Lewis, and Sherman Robinson. 1990. “Policy Lessons from
      Trade-Focused, Two-Sector Models,” Journal of Policy Modeling, Vol 12, pp 625-657.
Fouré, J., Bénassy-Quéré, A., and Fontagné, L. 2012. “The Great Shift: Macroeconomic
       Projections for the World Economy at the 2050 Horizon,” CEPII Working Paper 2012-
       03.

                                                                                                19
Fouré, J., Bénassy-Quéré, A., & Fontagné, L. 2013. “Modelling the world economy at the 2050”
       horizon, Economics of Transition 21 (4): 617-54.
Go, D.S., S. Robinson, K. Thierfilder, and R. Utz (2013). “Dutch disease and spending strategies
       in resource-rich low-income country: the case of Niger.” World Bank Policy Research
       Working Paper 6691.
Go, Delfin S., Marna Kearney, Vijdan Korman, Sherman Robinson, and Karen Thierfelder.
      2010. “Wage Subsidy and Labor Market Flexibility in South Africa.” Journal of
      Development Studies, 46(9), 2011, pp. 1481-1502. Also, as Economic Research
      Southern Africa (ERSA) Working Paper 114 (January 2009) and World Bank Policy
      Research Working Paper 4871 (March 2009).
Go, Delfin S. and Pradeep Mitra. 1999. “Trade Liberalization, Fiscal Adjustment and Exchange
      Rate Policy in India.” In Ranis, G. and L. Raut (Eds.) Trade, Growth, and Development.
      North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 229-72.
Gros, D. and C. Alcidi, 2013. The Global Economy in 2030: Trends and Strategies in 2030,
       Brussels: Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS).
Kambou, Gerard, Shantayanan Devarajan, and Mead Over, 1992. “The Economic Impact of
     AIDS in an African Country: Simulations with a Computable General Equilibrium Model
     of Cameroon,” Journal of African Economies, 1(1): 109-130.
KPMG. 2014. The Global Economic Impact of Antimicrobial Resistance. A KPMG LLP study at
    the United Kingdom.
Keogh-Brown, Marcus Richard, Richard D. Smith, John W. Edmunds, and Philippe Beutels.
      2010. “The macroeconomic impact of pandemic influenza: estimates from models of the
      United Kingdom, France, Belgium and The Netherlands.” The European Journal of
      Health Economics. 11(6):543-54.
Keogh-Brown, Marcus, Scott McDonald, Richard Smith, Melisa Martinez-Alvarez, and Jo
      Coast. 2009. “Global CGE modeling of antibiotic resistance: an application of the
      GLOBE model. Paper presented at the 12th Annual Conference on Global Economic
      Analysis, June 10-12, 2009, Santiago, Chile.
Hertel, T., R. Keeney, M. Ivanic, and L.A. Winter. 2009. “Why Isn’t the Doha Development
        Agenda More Poverty Friendly?” Review of Development Economics. 13:543-59.
HM Treasury (2003). The Green Book: Appraisal and Evaluation in Central Government,
     Treasury Guidance. London.
Laxminarayan, R., T. Van Boeckel and A. Teillant. 2015. “The Economic Costs of Withdrawing
      Antimicrobial Growth Promoters from the Livestock Sector,” OECD Food, Agriculture
      and Fisheries Papers, No. 78, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5js64kst5wvl-
      en
Lindsay, S., M. Kirby, E. Baris, and R. Bos. 2004. “Environmental Management for Malaria

                                                                                              20
    Control in the East Asia and Pacific Region. Discussion Paper, the World Bank.
Lofgren, Hans, Martín Cicowiez, and Carolina Diaz-Bonilla. 2013. “MAMS – A Computable
       General Equilibrium Model for Developing Country Strategy Analysis.” In Dixon, P.B.,
       and D.W. Jorgenson, eds., Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling.
       North Holland, Elsevier B.V., pp. 159-276.
Lofgren, Hans, Rebecca Lee Harris, and Sherman Robinson, with assistance from Moataz El-
       Said and Marcelle Thomas. 2002. “A Standard Computable General Equilibrium (CGE)
       Model in GAMS." Microcomputers in Policy Research, Vol. 5. International Food Policy
       Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington DC.
McDonald, S., K. Thierfelder, and S. Robinson. 2007. “GLOBE: A SAM-based global CGE
     model using GTAP data,” Economics Working Paper, US Naval Academy, Annapolis,
     USA.
McDonald, S., K. Thierfelder, and T. Walmsley. 2013. “GLOBE2_DYN: Technical document and
     user guide.” Processed.
McKibbin, W.J. and A.A. Sidorenko. 2006. “Global Macroeconomic Consequences of Pandemic
     Influenza,” Lowy Institute for International Policy, Sydney Australia.
Narayanan, B., Aguiar, A., and McDougall, R., 2012. Global Trade, Assistance, and Production:
      The GTAP 8 Data Base, Center for Global Trade Analysis: Purdue University, West
      Lafayette IN.
O’Neill, J., 2016. “The Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, Tackling Drug-Resistant Infections
       Globally: Final Report and Recommendations.” Independent review, commissioned by UK
       Prime Minister David Cameron in 2014.

Rudholm, Niklas. 2002. “Economic implications of antibiotic resistance in a global economy,”
      Journal of Health Economics, 21: 1071–1083.

Smith, Richard D. Milton Yagoa, Michael Millarb, Jo Coastc. 2005.” Assessing the
      macroeconomic impact of a healthcare problem: The application of computable general
      equilibrium analysis to antimicrobial resistance, Journal of Health Economics, 24: 1055–
      1075.

Stern, Nicholas. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cabinet Office –
        HM Treasury, Cambridge University Press, UK.

Taylor, J., M. Hafner, E. Yerushalmi, R. Smith, J. Bellasio, R. Vardavas, T. Bienkowska-Gibbs,
       and J. Rubin. 2014. Estimating the economic costs of antimicrobial resistance – model and
       results. Cambridge, UK: RAND Europe.
Timmer, M.P. (Ed.). 2012. “The world input-output database (WIOD): Contents, sources and
     methods.” WIOD Working Paper Number 10.

                                                                                               21
United Nations, 2013. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision, DVD Edition., New York:
       United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.
World Bank, 2017. Drug-Resistant Infections – A Threat to Our Economic Future. Washington
      DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2016. Global Economic Prospects 2016. Washington DC: World Bank.
World Bank 2015. Global Monitoring Report 2015/16: Development Goals in an Era of
      Demographic Change. Washington DC: World Bank
World Bank, 2014. The Economic Impact of the 2014 Ebola Epidemic – Short and Medium Term
      Estimates for West Africa. A World Bank Report.
World Bank, 2006. Global Development Finance: Review, Analysis, and Outlook (vol 1).
      Washington DC: World Bank.




                                                                                         22
               Table 1: AMR impact on real GDP relative to a world without AMR
Region by income level       Difference in trillions of 2007 USD       Percent deviation
                                   2020         2030         2050    2020       2030        2050
Low Income
   Low case                      -0.001      -0.021        -0.064   -0.1%      -1.0%        -1.2%
   Middle case                   -0.001      -0.044        -0.187   -0.1%      -2.2%        -3.6%
   High case                     -0.001      -0.071        -0.291   -0.1%      -3.6%        -5.6%
Lower Middle Income
   Low case                      -0.003      -0.118        -0.364   -0.1%      -1.0%        -1.3%
   Middle case                   -0.004      -0.232        -0.750   -0.1%      -1.9%        -2.6%
   High case                     -0.004      -0.377        -1.268   -0.1%      -3.1%        -4.4%
Upper Middle Income
   Low case                      -0.022      -0.312        -0.662   -0.1%      -1.0%        -1.4%
   Middle case                   -0.025      -0.577        -1.280   -0.1%      -1.9%        -2.7%
   High case                     -0.025      -0.933        -2.066   -0.1%      -3.1%        -4.4%
Middle Income Total
   Low case                      -0.025      -0.431        -1.027   -0.1%      -1.0%        -1.4%
   Middle case                   -0.028      -0.809        -2.030   -0.1%      -1.9%        -2.7%
   High case                     -0.028      -1.309        -3.334   -0.1%      -3.1%        -4.4%
High Income
   Low case                       0.001      -0.578        -0.664    0.0%      -0.9%        -0.8%
   Middle case                   -0.014      -1.191        -1.436    0.0%      -1.9%        -1.8%
   High case                     -0.014      -1.980        -2.481    0.0%      -3.2%        -3.1%
World
   Low case                      -0.026      -1.030        -1.754    0.0%      -1.0%        -1.1%
   Middle case                   -0.043      -2.045        -3.653   -0.1%      -1.9%        -2.3%
   High case                     -0.043      -3.360        -6.107   -0.1%      -3.2%        -3.8%
Source: Simulation results and authors' calculations


          Table 2: AMR impact on trade (real exports) relative to a world without AMR
Region by income level       Difference in trillions of 2007 USD        Percent deviation
                                    2020         2030       2050      2020       2030        2050
Low Income
   Low case                        0.000      -0.006      -0.018     -0.1%      -1.0%       -1.1%
   Middle case                     0.000      -0.013      -0.053     -0.1%      -2.0%       -3.3%
   High case                       0.000      -0.020      -0.083     -0.1%      -3.2%       -5.2%
Lower Middle Income
   Low case                       -0.001      -0.029      -0.092     -0.1%      -0.9%       -1.2%
   Middle case                    -0.001      -0.058      -0.191     -0.1%      -1.8%       -2.5%
   High case                      -0.001      -0.095      -0.325     -0.1%      -2.9%       -4.2%
Upper Middle Income
   Low case                       -0.006      -0.081      -0.173     -0.1%      -1.0%       -1.3%
   Middle case                    -0.007      -0.150      -0.338     -0.1%      -1.8%       -2.6%
   High case                      -0.007      -0.244      -0.550     -0.1%      -3.0%       -4.3%
Middle Income Total
   Low case                       -0.007      -0.110      -0.265     -0.1%      -1.0%       -1.3%
   Middle case                    -0.008      -0.208      -0.530     -0.1%      -1.8%       -2.6%
   High case                      -0.008      -0.339      -0.875     -0.1%      -3.0%       -4.2%
High Income
   Low case                       -0.001      -0.153      -0.187      0.0%      -0.9%       -0.8%
   Middle case                    -0.005      -0.314      -0.405      0.0%      -1.9%       -1.8%
   High case                      -0.005      -0.522      -0.698      0.0%      -3.1%       -3.1%
World
   Low case                       -0.009      -0.269      -0.470      0.0%      -0.9%       -1.1%
   Middle case                    -0.013      -0.535      -0.987     -0.1%      -1.9%       -2.2%
   High case                      -0.013      -0.881      -1.655     -0.1%      -3.1%       -3.7%
Source: Simulation results and authors' calculations



                                                                                                    23
                Table 3: AMR impact on livestock production relative to a world without AMR
Region by income level             Difference in trillions of 2007 USD           Percent deviation
                                         2020           2030         2050     2020         2030       2050
Low Income
   Low case                             0.000         -0.002       -0.006    -0.2%        -2.9%       -3.1%
   Middle case                          0.000         -0.004       -0.015    -0.2%        -5.5%       -7.4%
   High case                            0.000         -0.006       -0.022    -0.2%        -8.2%      -11.1%
Lower Middle Income
   Low case                             0.000         -0.018       -0.043    -0.1%        -2.9%       -3.1%
   Middle case                          0.000         -0.033       -0.080    -0.1%        -5.2%       -5.8%
   High case                            0.000         -0.048       -0.123    -0.1%        -7.7%       -8.9%
Upper Middle Income
   Low case                            -0.001         -0.027       -0.048    -0.1%        -2.2%       -2.5%
   Middle case                         -0.001         -0.048       -0.088    -0.2%        -3.8%       -4.6%
   High case                           -0.001         -0.072       -0.136    -0.2%        -5.8%       -7.1%
Middle Income Total
   Low case                            -0.001         -0.045       -0.091    -0.1%        -2.4%       -2.8%
   Middle case                         -0.001         -0.080       -0.168    -0.1%        -4.3%       -5.1%
   High case                           -0.001         -0.121       -0.259    -0.1%        -6.5%       -7.8%
High Income
   Low case                             0.000         -0.013       -0.016     0.0%        -1.9%       -1.8%
   Middle case                          0.000         -0.025       -0.033    -0.1%        -3.7%       -3.6%
   High case                            0.000         -0.040       -0.053    -0.1%        -5.8%       -5.9%
World
   Low case                            -0.001         -0.061       -0.114    -0.1%        -2.3%       -2.6%
   Middle case                         -0.002         -0.110       -0.216    -0.1%        -4.2%       -4.9%
   High case                           -0.002         -0.167       -0.335    -0.1%        -6.3%       -7.6%
Source: Simulation results and authors' calculations


               Table 4: AMR impact on health expenditure relative to a world without AMR
Region by income level         Difference in trillions of 2007 USD           Percent deviation
                                     2020           2030         2050     2020         2030           2050
Low Income
   Low case                         0.001          0.005        0.014     1.5%         4.3%           5.5%
   Middle case                      0.001          0.009        0.038     1.5%         7.9%          15.5%
   High case                        0.001          0.014        0.062     1.5%        11.9%          25.3%
Lower Middle Income
   Low case                         0.002          0.013        0.036     0.6%         3.1%           4.4%
   Middle case                      0.002          0.023        0.075     0.7%         5.7%           9.3%
   High case                        0.002          0.038        0.128     0.7%         9.2%          16.0%
Upper Middle Income
   Low case                         0.007          0.038        0.075     1.0%         3.9%           4.5%
   Middle case                      0.008          0.066        0.148     1.1%         6.6%           8.9%
   High case                        0.008          0.104        0.245     1.1%        10.5%          14.7%
Middle Income Total
   Low case                         0.009          0.051        0.110     0.9%         3.6%           4.5%
   Middle case                      0.010          0.089        0.223     1.0%         6.4%           9.0%
   High case                        0.010          0.141        0.374     1.0%        10.1%          15.1%
High Income
   Low case                         0.008          0.162        0.201     0.1%         1.9%           1.7%
   Middle case                      0.011          0.323        0.429     0.2%         3.9%           3.6%
   High case                        0.011          0.531        0.735     0.2%         6.3%           6.2%
World
   Low case                         0.018          0.218        0.325     0.2%         2.2%           2.2%
   Middle case                      0.022          0.422        0.690     0.3%         4.3%           4.7%
   High case                        0.022          0.687        1.170     0.3%         6.9%           8.0%
Source: Simulation results and authors' calculations

                                                                                                         24
     Table 5: Cumulative global economic cost of AMR
  under alternative social discount rate, in trillion 2007 USD
                               Social discount rate
Scenario                   0%       1.4%         3.5%       5.5%
I. GDP
Low case                -40.4      -29.3         -18.7     -12.7
Middle case             -74.5      -53.7         -34.0     -22.7
High case              -118.6      -85.4         -53.7     -35.7

II. Exports
Low case                 -10.8       -7.8       -5.0       -3.4
Middle case              -19.9      -14.3       -9.0       -6.0
High case                -31.7      -22.8      -14.3       -9.5

III. Household tax to finance extra health expenditure
Low case                   8.0       5.8       3.8          2.6
Middle case               14.8      10.7       6.8          4.6
High case                 23.6      17.1      10.8          7.2
Source: Simulation results and authors' calculations




                                                                   25
                        Table 6. Poverty results from AMR (PPP$1.90/day)
                          Headcount       Additional poverty
                             (%)          (millions of people)                 Population Population
                                                                  Population
                                                                                 % of     covered in
                                                                   millions
                             Base       Low      Middle   High                   World    surveys, %

 2030
  Low income                   24.67      6.2      12.0    18.7        927.7        10.9       69.56
  Lower middle income           1.19      1.3       2.8     4.5      3,541.6        41.7       91.06
  Upper middle income           0.25      0.1       0.3     0.5      2,781.1        32.7       91.09
  Middle income total           0.77      1.4       3.0     5.1      6,322.8        74.4       91.07
  World                         3.37      7.7      15.2    24.1      8,499.5       100.0       86.35

 2050
  Low income                    9.80      6.3      17.2    26.2      1,399.9        14.4       70.59
  Lower middle income           0.22      0.4       0.8     1.4      4,202.3        43.2       90.91
  Upper middle income           0.08      0.1       0.1     0.2      2,835.7        29.2       90.56
  Middle income total           0.16      6.8      18.2    27.8      7,038.0        72.4       90.77
  World                         1.61      6.9      18.4    28.3      9,725.7       100.0       85.87
Source: Simulation results and authors’ calculations


                        Table 7. Poverty results from AMR (PPP$3.10/day)
                              Headcount %, (PPP$1.90/day)                                    Population
                                                                  Population   Population
                                                                                             covered in
                                                                   millions    % of World
                             Base      Low      Middle    High                               surveys, %

 2030
  Low income                 45.70     46.57     47.47    48.43        927.7          10.9        69.56
  Lower middle income         4.92      5.10      5.29     5.54      3,541.6          41.7        91.06
  Upper middle income         0.81      0.83      0.85     0.88      2,781.1          32.7        91.09
  Middle income total         3.11      3.22      3.33     3.49      6,322.8          74.4        91.07
  World                       7.47      7.65      7.83     8.06      8,499.5         100.0        86.35

 2050
  Low income                 23.75     24.44     25.80    26.96      1,399.9          14.4        70.59
  Lower middle income         0.87      0.91      0.96     1.02      4,202.3          43.2        90.91
  Upper middle income         0.28      0.30      0.30     0.32      2,835.7          29.2        90.56
  Middle income total         0.63      0.67      0.69     0.73      7,038.0          72.4        87.42
  World                       3.99      4.12      4.34     4.54      9,725.7         100.0        85.87
Source: Simulation results and authors’ calculations



                                                                                                       26
