                                                    WPS8136


Policy Research Working Paper                      8136




            Pension Funds, Capital Markets,
            and the Power of Diversification
                                  Fiona Stewart
                                Romain Despalins
                                 Inna Remizova




Finance and Markets Global Practice Group
July 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8136


  Abstract
 The potential for pension funds to contribute to capital                           turn, has led to relatively low investment returns, thereby
 markets and thereby economic growth has been argued                                potentially affecting income adequacy in retirement. This
 on a theoretical basis and demonstrated empirically. How-                          paper looks at the potential regulatory hurdles to long-term
 ever, reforms fostering the development of funded pension                          investment by pension funds, while also proposing interna-
 systems have not had the economic impact hoped for in                              tional diversification and the creation of domestic investment
 some countries. Pension fund portfolios in some cases have                         opportunities to help portfolio diversification and ulti-
 remained highly exposed to shorter-term assets, such as                            mately improve the delivery of secure, adequate pensions.
 bank deposits and shorter-term government bonds. This, in




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Markets Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank
  to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  fstewart1@worldbank.org, romain.despalins@oecd.org, and iremizova@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                   Pension Funds, Capital Markets, and
                            the Power of Diversification
                                               Fiona Stewart
                                             Romain Despalins
                                              Inna Remizova




JEL Code:
G110: Financial Economics / General Financial Markets / Portfolio Choice; Investment Decisions
G230: Financial Economics / Financial Institution and Services / Pension Funds; Non-bank Financial Institutions;
Financial Instruments; Institutional Investors
G280: Financial Economics / Financial Institutions and Services / Government Policy and Regulation
F380: International Economics / International Finance / International Financial Policy/ Financial Transactions Tax;
Capital Controls
Keywords: Capital Markets, Financial Instruments, Pension Funds, Diversification, Portfolio, Asset Allocation,
Capital Gain, Regulation, Capital Control
Pension Funds, Capital Markets, and the Power of Diversification1
Pension funds asset allocation and performance
Following the global financial crisis of 2008, the theme of long-term investment and the role of institutional
investors as providers of domestic capital for economic development have been high on policy makers’ agendas.
Pension funds are seen as an important source of funding as the balance sheets of governments and banks have
become increasingly stretched. Yet, despite these strong theoretical arguments, pension funds’ investments in
many countries (even those with relatively mature pension systems) remain highly concentrated in bank deposits
and government bonds, contributing little to long-term funding for productive investments and economic growth –
as well as delivering potentially lower investment returns than what could have been achieved.

OECD Global Pension Statistics2 show that pension funds held more than 75% of their portfolios in equities and
bonds in 18 of 27 OECD economies. Equities represented more than 50% of pension fund portfolios in Australia;
Poland;3 Hong Kong SAR, China; and Namibia. Despite the prolonged low interest rate environment, pension funds
still hold a high share of their portfolios in bills and bonds, especially in some Central and Eastern European
economies (Czech Republic, Hungary, Serbia, the Slovak Republic) and Latin American economies (Chile, Costa Rica,
the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Uruguay), where bills and bonds accounted for more than half of the portfolio.

Figure 1 + 2: Pension Fund Asset Allocation in Selected Asset Classes (2016 preliminary),

                                            as a percentage of total investment




Source: OECD (2017)

The OECD also finds that the portfolio of large pension funds, provident and social security funds is highly
concentrated in bonds and cash.4 These are often the largest potential source of domestic, long-term capital in
developing economies.


1
  This paper was prepared by Fiona Stewart, Global Lead Insurance & Pensions, World Bank, Romain Despalins, Statistician,
OECD; Inna Remizova, Consultant, World Bank;. It is based on a chapter prepared for a Universidad de San Martín de Porres
(USMP) publication.
2
  See Pension Funds in Figures, May 2017.
3
  Pension funds in Poland hold the highest share in equities following the 2014 reform that prevents open pension funds from
investing in treasury bonds and requires these funds to invest a minimum share of their portfolios in equities instead.
4
  Chan-Lau (2004) also notes this is the case with Asian provident funds – though it should be noted that there have been
significant improvements in the diversification of the portfolios of some leading funds (such as the EPF in Malaysia) in recent
years.
                                                                                                                                  2
                                  Figure 3: Asset Allocation of Large Pension Funds (2014),
                                             as a percentage of total investment




Source: OECD (2015b)

As the OECD has argued,5 social security and public pension reserve funds (PPRF) invest and manage surplus
contributions that would only be tapped in the event that benefit payments exceed contributions, thus stabilizing
the financing of the public pay-as-you-go system.

                             Figure 4: Asset allocation of Public Pension Reserve Funds (2014)
                                            as a percentage of total investments




Source: OECD (2015b)6


5
    See OECD (2015b).
6
    Detailed notes on the figure are available in the OECD publication.
                                                                                                                    3
In theory, these funds are not driven to seek the short-term returns that many other market participants must
achieve due to their investment objectives. In practice, they are often heavily invested in government bonds.7 The
OECD (2015b) notes that when it comes to the performance of these public pension funds: “the concentration of
these portfolios into shorter-term instruments has led to disappointing investment performance in some countries”.
Based on the Global Pension Statistics, pension funds in OECD and selected non-OECD countries have delivered
positive real investment returns in recent years. The range of returns is, however, broad, with returns lower than
wage growth in some countries.8 Over the period 2009-2015, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom had the
best performing pension funds with diversified portfolios offsetting low domestic interest rates, in a context of low
wage growth post the financial crisis in these two countries. The Latin American systems have generally delivered
positive returns, with systems in Central and Eastern Europe often proving the main laggards.


                                           Figure 5: Real Investment Returns, %




Source: OECD, Global Pension Statistics9




7
  It should be noted that long-term investment can be also achieved via government instruments if these are of long duration
and kept until maturity and/or if they are financing particular goals such as, for example infrastructure or green bonds.
However, in many countries, pension funds’ holdings of government securities are generally of shorter-term duration. It should
also be noted that when pension systems are launched in some countries, government bond rates can be high (and remain so
for persistent periods). While this is the case, it can make sense for allocations to these assets to remain stable. However, it
would be expected that these would decline as macroeconomic conditions and the pension sector develop. Whereas this has
been observed in some countries (such as Mexico), others lag in their portfolio diversification trends.
8
  Investment returns are taken from OECD pension statistics. Geometric annual returns were calculated over a period of 7
years between 2009 and 2016 in order to have a sample of non-OECD countries as large as possible. Returns vs. wage growth
are shown from the period 2006-2013 based on data available from the ILO wage database.
9
  The return period was selected based on the data available for the largest number of countries to allow for a broad
comparison.
                                                                                                                              4
Figure 6: Nominal Investment Returns – Wage Real Growth, % (2006-2013)




                                                                         5
Source: ILO Global Wage Database10As the OECD recognizes, the performance of the different pension systems can be
linked to the composition of their portfolios. Taking the percentage of equity and ‘other’11 assets as a proxy for the
level of diversification in portfolios, real investment returns are generally delivered when pension funds in OECD
countries diversify away from generally low-yield assets such as bank deposits and bills. The correlation also holds
for some other non-OECD countries in regions where there are fewer diversification opportunities, but the
potential for higher returns exist (such as Colombia, Peru, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Bulgaria,
Romania).

           Figure 7: Portfolio Diversification vs. Real Investment Returns OECD countries, % (2009-2016)




Source: authors’ calculations based OECD Global Pension Statistics

OECD data do not break down the maturity of the bond category. For some countries, this will include 10 year+,
long-dated government bonds, but also includes short-term Treasury Bills. This category is therefore taken along
with deposits as a proxy for short-term. Likewise, the others category contains a diverse range of investments –
from hedge funds to real estate, to infrastructure and guaranteed funds offered by insurance companies. The
authors recognize the caveats and limitations to this analysis and would gladly undertake a further investigation
with more detailed duration data and asset class breakdowns if available.

Using Sharpe ratios also shows that the diversified portfolios are efficiently managed in terms of the risk taken to
deliver the returns. The list countries – Canada, the Netherlands, Iceland, and Norway - shows performance with
Sharpe ratios more than 1 and a high level of diversification. In the case of the other countries, the Sharpe ratio
may help explain whether a portfolio's excess returns were due to informed investment decisions (probably not to
diversify in some cases) or a result of too much risk.




10
  The return period was selected to align with the ILO database statistics.
11
   The ‘other’ category includes loans, land and buildings, unallocated insurance contracts, hedge funds, private equity funds,
structured products, other mutual funds (i.e. not invested in cash, bills and bonds, or equities) and other investments.
                                                                                                                                  6
                           Figure 8: Portfolio Diversification vs. Sharpe Ratio, % (2009-2016)




Source: authors’ calculations12
Impact of Regulation
There are many potential causes that could be behind this focus on traditional and short-term instruments of
pension fund investment (and indeed of other financial institutions).13 These causes may include unsupportive
macro conditions (high government bond rates dis-incentivizing diversification in some developing economies),
poor governance and a lack of investment knowledge and capacity within the funds in developing markets.
Regulation may also play an important part.14

Defined contribution (DC) pension plans may tend to focus more on the short-term. The main goal of any pension
system is to ensure that members receive an adequate pension income when they retire. While traditional defined
benefit (DB) pension plans set out what that pension income will be in advance and then strive to deliver it, DC
plans accumulate a sum of assets, which can then be turned into a pension income on retirement. However, when
providers of DC plans do not offer any investment return or benefits guarantees or promises, the amount of this
retirement income is not predetermined. In many countries that introduced DC private pillars recently, pay-out
phases will become important only in many years to come or/and the legal framework for setting up the pay-out
phase is still in preparation. This frequently leads to a focus by not only most pension providers, but also regulators
and pension plan members themselves on the short-term accumulation of pension assets rather than the longer-
term goal of securing an adequate retirement income. The risk of not achieving this goal can be termed ‘pension
risk’.15

Pension investment regulation in most countries currently serves to reinforce this focus on the short-term delivery
of investment returns rather than the long-term generation of a pension income. This can be caused by the overly
restrictive use of asset class restrictions (limiting the amount of a portfolio, which can be invested in certain (risky)
assets)16 – which can control the volatility of returns but can create distortions in asset management, limit
opportunities for diversification and hamper investment performance.17 Vitas (1996) argues that portfolio
restrictions may be required in the initial stages of pension reform when there is a lack of qualified asset managers
and capital markets lack strength and capacity, as asset allocation limits are a way of isolating pension fund assets
from an agency and systemic risks in capital markets. However, as these systems develop, pension funds often end
up controlling a disproportionate share of some of the markets for those securities in which they are allowed to
invest. Sirivas and Yermo (1999) found that after investment limits were relaxed in the 1980s pension fund
performance improved significantly. The asset class restrictions on equity holdings are generally not a binding
factor in OECD countries – with portfolio allocations well below limits in most countries. However, these
quantitative limits do appear more restrictive in some non-OECD countries.

                                                                                                                        7
 Figure 9: Portfolio Limits on Pension Fund                   Figure 10: Portfolio Limits of Pension Fund
 Investment in Shares in Selected OECD Countries              Investment in Shares in non-OECD Countries 2015
 2015 (as a percentage of total investment)                   (as a percentage of total investment)




 Source: OECD Global Pension Statistics; OECD Annual Survey of Investment Regulation of Pension Funds

Over and above straight asset class limitations, it has been argued that distortions are also increased when these
are combined with relative performance benchmarks, which encourage herding by fund managers and are usually
based on short-term measures.18 The focus on short-term volatility is enhanced by the dislocation between the
accumulation and decumulation phase of DC pensions –described by Blake et al (2008) as like taking two different
aircrafts, one which transports you for the ascent and one for the descent and having to change between them
mid-air.

Other regulatory and agency issues also combine to reinforce the short-term focus of pension fund providers and
prevent the full diversification of portfolios into less traditional and longer-term assets include principle-agent
issues allowing fund managers to derive profits from short-term performance rather than longer-term gains
(particularly where conservative allocations are rewarded almost the same as risky allocations). In addition, fees
are often charged based on short-term performance rather than longer–term measures, and accounting and
solvency regulations may actually incentivize investment in short-term, liquid assets.
Stewart (2014) notes that the short-term conservatism built into second pillar regulation in Central and Eastern
European systems is behind the conservative portfolios, poor performance, the lack of capital market impact and


12
   The Sharpe ratio is the average return minus the risk-free return divided by the standard deviation of return on an investment.
13
   Orpazo et al (2015), and de la Torre et al (2011) include discussions of the portfolio allocations by pension funds vs. mutual
funds and insurance companies in Chile.
14
   de la Torre et at (2011), among other publications, provides a comprehensive discussion of these topics for the Latin America
region.
15
   For a methodology on pension risk see Berstein, Fuentes and Villatoro (2013).
16
   Details of investment restrictions around the world can be found in the regular OECD survey (OECD, 2015c).
17
   See Srinivas and Yermo (1999).
18
   For a discussion of this issue see Randle and Rudolph (2014), and the Viceira and Rudolph presentation ‘The Use of
Guarantees on Contributions in Pension Funds’, World Bank Contractual Savings Conference, January 2012. The issue of
herding is also discussed in (Raddatz and Schmukler 2013).

                                                                                                                                8
ultimately contributed to policy reversals in some of these systems since the financial crisis.19 The paper also
discusses how regulations could be adapted to incentivize long-term investment horizons by introducing outcome-
based benchmarks.20
Another form of regulation, which can distort pension fund investment and skews portfolios to short-term
instruments, is switching. DC style, open pension systems, which allow members to switch between providers –
often at will – have to hold more liquid portfolios to accommodate unexpected outflows. This again forces pension
funds into shorter-term, more liquid instruments and does not allow for full diversification into longer-term asset
classes, and prevents pension funds from having their potential impact on capital market development. Musalem
and Pasquini (2012), examining the pension system in 27 countries from 1990-2007, find that: “occupational
schemes tend to generate higher returns than do personal pension schemes and closed schemes tend to generate
higher returns than do open schemes.”
Evidence of such impact can be found in the United States in the difference between portfolio construction and
investment performance of (closed) DB and (open) DC pension funds. There is also a difference in asset allocation
between fund type in Australia – with open retail funds showing higher levels of cash and lower exposure to other/
illiquid assets than closed industry and corporate funds. As with US DB vs DC schemes, this translates into higher
returns for corporate and industry vs. retail funds.
                                   Table 1: USA DB vs. DC Asset Mix + Performance

 Asset Class                                                 Asset Mix % AUM                     Returns (see note)
 (ranked by returns)                                        DB               DC                 DB               DC
 Private Equity                                             4%              n/a               12.6%              n/a
 Real Assets                                                5%              n/a                9.3%              n/a
 Small Cap Stock                                           6%               7%                10.2%             8.4%
 Employer Stock                                            0%               21%                 n/a             8.6%
 Fixed Income                                              31%              10%                6.8%             6.7%
 Hedge Funds                                               2%               n/a               7.7%               n/a
 Stock U.S. Large Cap                                      26%              30%               6.8%              6.1%
 Stock Non U.S. or Global                                  23%               7%                6.7%             6.5%
 Stable Value/ GICs                                        n/a              17%                 n/a             4.9%
 Cash                                                      2%               8%                 2.9%             3.2%
 TOTAL                                                    100%             100%               7.9%              6.9%
 No. of observations                                      3,083            1,995
Source: CEM21

Notes: Asset Mix 17 years ending 2013 = arithmetic average of annual asset mix weight / Returns 17 years from 1997 to 2013.
Returns are the geometric average of the annual averages for each asset class. Hedge funds were not treated as a separate
asset class until 2000, so 60% stock 40% bond returns were used as a proxy for 1997-1999.




19
   See Schwarz and Arias (2014), Price and Rudolph (2013) which raise these issues through also stress that the main driver
behind the second pillar reversals was fiscal pressures.
20
   Continuing the airplane analogy, without them Blake et at (2008) describe managing pension funds as the equivalent of
worrying about air turbulence on a flight without considering whether the plane is actually going to reach its destination.
21
   Data taken from CEM Database, as presented by Mike Heale, presented at the IOPS/AIOS International Seminar on Pension
Systems, San Jose, Costa Rica, February 25, 2015.
                                                                                                                              9
                                 Table 2: Australia Fund Type Asset Mix and Performance

            Proportion of Assets %                 Corporate    Industry       Public Sector     Retail      Total
 Australian Shares                                     30          29               22             26          26
 International Shares                                  28          25               27             22          25
 Listed Property                                       1            1                4             4           2
 Unlisted Property                                     7           10                6             2           7
 Australian Fixed Income                              14            6                7            15           9
 International Fixed Income                            6            5                7             7           6
 Cash                                                  6            6                9            14           8
 Other Assets                                           8          19               18              9          16
 Total                                                100         100              100            100         100
 Rate of Return (2004-2013)                          6.5%         6.7%              7%           4.9%         6%
 Volatility                                            9           9.5              9.7           9.4         9.5
Source: APRA

Initial evidence from a forthcoming paper22 suggests that higher switching levels between providers in selected
Latin American systems are correlated with higher levels of short-term investments. The analysis also shows that
changes in regulation (such as making switching more difficult) can have a positive effect on portfolio turnover and
construction.

                            Table 3: Correlation between calendar-year returns and transfers
                                                     Across Fund            With Fund
                                                      Providers             Providers*
                             LAC
                               Chile                    -0.46                  -0.41
                               Colombia                 0.15                   0.04
                               Costa Rica               -0.23
                               Mexico                   -0.41                   0.71
                               Peru                      0.18                  -0.10
                             EEC
                               Estonia                  -0.28                  -0.14
                               Romania                  -0.03

Source: Fuentes, Morales and Stewart (forthcoming)




22
     See Fuentes, Moralez and Stewart (forthcoming).
                                                                                                                     10
                       Figure 11: Short-term Assets and Pension Fund Flows – LAC countries




Source: Fuentes, Morales and Stewart (forthcoming)

In conclusion, although regulation may not be a binding constraint (particularly in more developed pension
systems), improving investment regulation can have an impact on pension fund portfolio construction, allowing for
greater diversification and ultimately pension fund returns. Regulatory techniques such as the following have had a
positive impact on pension systems in different regions: using lifecycle rather than straight investment limits;
removing relative return guarantees; benchmarking outcomes; measuring performance and fees over a long-term
period, and reducing incentives for frequent switching.
Creating Investment Opportunities
However, in emerging markets changing investment regulations alone may not be sufficient. As shown, pension
funds rarely reach the ceiling set by investment regulations on equities. Rather a lack of investment opportunities is
also frequently cited as a major barrier to diversifying pension fund portfolios. There is wide variation in the
capacity across countries to effectively manage pension assets and in many, the domestic capital markets lack the
size and liquidity that would effectively channel these funds and provide reasonable returns. Capital market
underdevelopment means that pension funds remain overexposed to government bonds and bank deposits,


                                                                                                                   11
particularly when overseas investment is not permitted. In order to create investment opportunities for pension
funds, both domestic market instruments and international exposure will have to be considered.
Creating domestic investment opportunities
Some countries have been more successful than others in terms of creating innovative domestic investment
opportunities to allow pension funds to diversify their portfolios away from shorter-term (and potentially lower
yield) instruments, such as government bonds and bank deposits, and into longer-term investments, which can
have an impact on economic development and growth. Diversification is linked to the availability of investment
opportunities within domestic capital markets but also goes beyond traditional listed instruments.
The Latin American regulators have been leading in terms of determinedly creating investment opportunities for
their pension funds, foreseeing the need for such instruments as assets from their mandatory savings systems
increase. For example, the Chileans were only one of three countries (along with the UK and the USA) to issue
index-linked government bonds when their system was launched in the 1980s. Infrastructure bonds (utilizing
monoline insurers to guaranteed construction phase risk) were also launched specifically to meet the investment
needs of pension funds. The Peruvian funds have also created trust structures to allow pension funds to invest in
infrastructure projects, while in Colombia, the World Bank was involved in the development of infrastructure debt
funds, which pension funds have invested in.23
In Mexico, the regulator CONSAR has deregulated investment restrictions gradually as alternative investments have
been created for pension funds. In July 2009, significant regulatory changes were made to create a new type of
securities known as CKDs (Certificados de Capital de Desarrollo), which are traded on the Mexican Stock Exchange.
As the principal sources of capital from these instruments are the Mexican mandatory pension funds (or
‘Siefores’),24 part of these regulatory changes involved amending the Siefores' investment rules to allow for the
possibility of making investments in private equity, real estate and infrastructure projects through the CKD
structure.25
CKDs are designed to enhance infrastructure projects (highways, airports, ports, railways, water, electricity etc.);
real estate; mining; SMEs; technology development projects; private capital projects. The most active sector in the
CKD listing since 2009 has been real estate amounting to almost 30% of the total. The successful implementation of
CKDs in Mexico was timely and intended not only to diversify pension funds, but also to finance projects aiming at
facilitating economic growth and development.
                      Figure 12: Sector Participation in Financed Amount by CKDs, 2009-2015




Source: Mexican Stock Exchange26

CKDs are registered in the stock exchange, which fosters market discipline and transparency. To ensure that these
financial products are consistent with the best interests of members, investors, beneficiaries and other

23
   The experience of pension funds in Latin America investing in infrastructure is documented in (Escriva et al 2010).
24
   Sociedades de Inversión Especializadas en Fondos para el Retiro.
25
   See Groenewold (2012), IFLR (2010) http://www.iflr.com/Article/2660162/Mexico-Institutional-private-equity-emerges.html
26
   https://www.bmv.com.mx/docs-pub/reporteTrimestral/BMV4Q15_Engf.pdf
                                                                                                                       12
stakeholders, the National Banking and Securities Commission (CNBV) has established specific regulation regarding
CKD’s issuances, including shareholders’ rights and responsibilities. In addition, the CNBV has developed monitoring
and surveillance processes according with best international practices.27
The diagram below illustrates an issuance of CKDs in its simplest form. A fund manager, acting as a sponsor, creates
a Mexican issuer trust, which in turn obtains the necessary approvals from Mexico’s securities regulator, the
National Banking and Securities Commission to issue and publicly offer CKDs in Mexico through the Mexican Stock
Exchange. The product of the placement of the CKDs is invested in the portfolio companies as an equity, debt or as
a combination of both. The issuer trust then enters into a management agreement with a fund manager, who is
responsible for finding and recommending investments. Once such investments are approved and made, the fund
manager is responsible for managing them until their divestiture is completed. The performance of CKD is linked to
the accomplishment of the portfolio companies in which the issuer trust invests.
                                         Figure 13: Illustrative Issuance of CKDs

                                     Fund Manager
                                                               Issuance
                                                                of CKD                          Investment
                                                                                Mexican           in CKD
              CNBV                    Issuing Trust                               Stock                           Pension
                                                                                                                   Funds
                                                                                Exchange
                                                               Proceeds
                                        Portfolio              from CKD
                                       Companies
Source: IFLR28

Another contributor to the diversification of the pension fund portfolios was Mexican REITs (Real Estate Investment
Trusts) or FIBRAs launched in 2011. Before the launch of these products, pension funds were not allowed to invest
directly in real estate assets. FIBRAs are trusts the purpose of which is to issue investment type securities CPIs
(Certificados de Participaciуn Inmobiliarios) and raise funds from their placement in the domestic and international
capital markets, with the purpose of financing, acquiring and/or developing real estate projects (industrial,
commercial or residential).29 The placement of the CPIs by the FIBRA on the Mexican Stock Exchange (or
international capital markets) is backed up by the real estate portfolio comprising the trust assets (along with any
lease rights and/or funds destined for the financing of the acquisition and/or development of real estate projects).
Holders of CPIs are also able to trade them on the secondary market. Returns on FIBRA investments can be
generated in three ways: dividends obtained through leasing less operating expenses (fixed income); performance,
through the generation profits on the Mexican Stock Exchange; capital gains. FIBRAs are considered hybrid
instruments (fixed and variable income), as holders receive periodic payments (from the lease) and can yield capital
gains, as they can be traded on the capital markets. AFORES own the equivalent of 2.9 billion dollars in FIBRAs, or
roughly 20% of all FIBRA issuance. The following is a diagram that illustrates an issuance of the certificates CPI in its
simplest form.




27
   OECD (2014): https://www.oecd.org/daf/fin/private-pensions/G20-OECD-Report-Annex-Effective-Approaches-LTI-Financing-
Sept-2014.pdf
28
   http://www.iflr.com/Article/2660162/Mexico-Institutional-private-equity-emerges.html
29
   As of March 31, 2016 Fibra Uno – the first FIBRA launched - had a portfolio of 511 properties that totaled approximately 76
million sq ft. Fibra Uno targets properties with the best locations, high-quality assets and diversification of geographies,
segments and tenants
http://en.fibra-uno.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/One-Pager-FUNO-22-Jun-16.pdf
                                                                                                                            13
                                                 Figure 14: Illustrative issuance of certificates CPI



                                         Provides                                                 Issuance of the
                                        Real Estate
                                                                                                                              Mexican
                                                                        Trust Fund                Certificates CPI
                  Company                                                 FIBRA                                                 Stock
                                                                                                                              Exchange


                                                                                                                 Investment                      Delivery of
                                                                                                                    in CPI                           CPI



                                                                                                                                   Pension
                                                                                                                                    Funds


Source: Mexican Stock Exchange30

The pension regulatory authority, CONSAR, amended a series of provisions to their regulations to allow investment
by pension fund administrators, AFORES, in structured instruments such as those issued by CKDs and FIBRAs, as well
as a tax exemptions related to these products. As the investments environment was deregulated, the portfolios of
the pension funds can be seen to have diversified commensurately.

                                               Table 4: Mexico Pension Fund Investment Regulations

                                  Asset classes allowed within the Investment Regime of Pension Funds
      1997-2016       ‘97   ‘98   ‘99    ‘00    ‘01   ‘02   ‘03   ‘04      ‘05   ‘06   ‘07   ‘08     ‘06   ‘07    ‘08   ‘09   ‘10    ‘11   ‘12   ‘13   ‘14     ‘15   ‘16

 Debt
 Currencies
 Equity                -     -     -      -      -     -     -     -

 Structured            -     -     -      -      -     -     -     -        -     -     -     -       -
 Securities (CKD,
 FIBRA)
 Securatizations       -     -     -      -      -     -     -     -        -     -     -     -       -

 Commodities           -     -     -      -      -     -     -     -        -     -     -     -       -     -      -     -     -      -

Source: build based on CONSAR




30
     https://www.bmv.com.mx/en/Grupo_BMV/Instrumentos_disponibles/_rid/965/_mod/TAB_CAPITALES
                                                                                                                                                                       14
                      Figure 15+16: Mexico Pension Fund Portflio Diversification and Duration




Source: CONSAR

In Namibia, similar structures have been created to allow for the investment of pension funds into domestic,
unlisted assets. The Pension Funds Act was amended in 2014, with Regulation 28 now requiring pension funds and
insurance companies to invest between 1.75% and 3.5% in locally unlisted investments. To support institutional
investors, Regulation 29 was also passed which creates Special Purpose Vehicles (SPV) allowing them to comply
with this requirement. These SPVs must have an independent Board or Trustees with fiduciary duty towards the
SPV and its investors. The Board must appoint fund managers specially licensed to manage unlisted investments.31
The SPVs can invest in debt or equity according to their own objectives. Most so far have invested in real estate and
SME debt. Fees average around 2-3% AUM – which is a high PE-style cost, but the regulator, NAMFISA, sees the
overall impact on pension funds costs as limited as these instruments will only form a small overall percentage of
the total portfolio.



                             Figure 17: Namibia Pension Fund Portfolio Allocation, 2014




Source: NAMFISA




31
  One existing asset manager has been licensed,with the other newly approved managers having a track record in other
jurisdictions.
                                                                                                                       15
More initiatives are needed to create these long-term, domestic pension fund investment opportunities for pension
funds. Pension fund regulators, capital market authorities and pension funds and their managers should be
encouraged to work together to create secure financial instruments which meet institutional investors’ needs.

International diversification
Developing investment opportunities is important to use these funds productively, but in many economies,
particularly of smaller countries, it will not be possible to absorb all these savings domestically.

Though foreign investment means that pension funds’ will not be able to directly contribute to domestic economic
development, some international diversification of assets will be required to fulfill the primary objective of the
pension system, which is to deliver a secure income in retirement. Standard portfolio selection theory provides a
fundamental justification for international diversification: by widening the pool of potential assets, investors can
potentially increase returns while possibly even reducing risks through the selection of complementary assets with
low correlations.

The benefits of international diversification are well documented, and there is a growing body of research, which
argues that increasing international diversification improves pension funds’ investment performance – both by
pension funds in developed32 and developing economies. For example, Pfau (in numerous articles, alone and with
colleagues), argues for international diversification, even concluding that: “on average, over half of the pension
portfolios of emerging market countries should be in international assets in order to maximize the expected utility of
moderate and conservative pension fund participants.”33 The OECD (1998) also previously concluded that: “the
benefits of global portfolio diversification apply particularly to developing-country pension assets because the
volatility of asset returns is high while the risk tolerance of pensioners is low.” 34 Davis (2002), having studied both
OECD and selected emerging market economies with funded pension systems, concludes that: ‘international
investment allows superior investment performance in terms of risk and return.”

Studies have also been undertaken looking at the impact of deregulation of international investment restrictions on
pension funds individual countries. Pfau (2009) considered the impact of international diversification on the public
pension system in Pakistan and concluded that: “international diversification could dramatically help to create
sustainability for Pakistan's main public pension system available to private workers.” Hu et al (2007) conclude that
allowing for international diversification, along with other deregulation of investment limits, would benefit Chinese
pension funds. Swinkels et al (2005), in looking at the home bias in Latvian pension funds, note (using empirical
analysis) that international diversification lowers investment risks for Latvian pension investors and that the high
levels of domestic investment are suboptimal.35

The OECD finds that in ten European countries and countries with small or no domestic capital markets, pension
funds had a high share (over 30%) of investments abroad in 2015 – with Kosovo leading at 91.9%, the Netherlands
at 81.3% and Estonia with 75.8%. The proportion of foreign investments in the portfolio of pension funds was
higher in 2015 than 11 years earlier in several countries (e.g. Slovak Republic, Israel, Chile, Bulgaria, Peru and the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia), with the trend in the Latin American countries attributed to the loosening
of the regulatory limit for foreign investments that took place in recent years.



32
   For impact on pension funds in developed economies, see, for example Vanguard (2013), Fadhlaoui et al (2009), among
others. Didier et at (2013) discuss parallel evidence on unexploited gains from international diversification in the mutual fund
industry.
33
   See Ajantha and Pfau (2011), Pfau (2011) also quantifies the costs of prohibiting international diversification.
34
   Musalem and Pasquini (2012) notes that lower volatility in pension returns is associated with restrictions on foreign
investing.
35
   Raddatz et al (2014) consider the impact on benchmarks on international asset allocation.
                                                                                                                               16
17
       Figure 18: Foreign investments of pension funds from selected OECD and non-OECD countries, 2015
                                       as a percentage of total investment
                            Kosovo                                                                                                      91.9
                       Netherlands                                                                                               81.3
                            Estonia                                                                                       75.8
                   Slovak Republic                                                                                     72.0
                          Lithuania                                                                                 68.8
                              Latvia                                                                         61.6
                           Namibia                                                                          61.4
                           Portugal                                                                       58.5
                                 Italy                                                                   57.6
                           Bulgaria                                                               52.0
                 Hong Kong, China                                                          45.5
                                Chile                                                     44.2
                          Slovenia                                                       43.0
                                Peru                                                  40.2
                       Switzerland                                                    39.8
                           Canada                                              34.2
                         Botswana                                          30.1
                            Norway                                         29.7
                FYR of Macedonia                                         27.8
                   United Kingdom                                       26.8
                          Denmark                                      25.8
                            Iceland                                  23.8
                          Mauritius                                  23.4
                              Japan                               20.2
                       South Africa                               20.1
                               Israel                         16.1
                    Czech Republic                           15.5
                            Croatia                        13.3
               Papua New Guinea                           12.8
                            Mexico                        12.7
              Trinidad and Tobago                       10.4
                            Zambia                     9.7
                           Jamaica                   8.4
                          Romania                  6.5
                        Costa Rica                5.8
                         Colombia               3.5
                          Thailand           0.7
                             Turkey          0.6
                              Brazil         0.2
                                         0                   20                  40                      60                80              100

Source: OECD Global Pension Statistics

Nonetheless, many emerging market countries have regulations that strictly limit the choice of investments for
pension funds, in some cases excluding international assets entirely - notably in several African countries. Some
Latin American countries are seeing allocations at or approaching limits (e.g. Peru 40.2% allocation vs. a 42% limit).

                                                        Figure 19: Foreign Investment Limits




Source: OECD (2015c)

                                                                                                                                                 18
There is often much resistance to allowing pension fund assets to invest overseas as governments and authorities
wish to see domestic savings used for domestic purposes. Macroeconomic factors clearly play an important role –
including foreign exchange regime, capital flows and policy and availability of foreign currency held by a country’s
central bank. Indeed, foreign exchange risk cannot be ignored and is a major consideration in more developing
economies where hedging instruments are scarce and/or expensive. However, deciding on the amount and
allocation of these international investments should be done in a systematic fashion. One important consideration
is the correlation between the size of the pension funds asset under management (AUM) as a percentage of
domestic GDP and the percentage of foreign investment required. Other factors – such as a size of pension fund
assets compared with the size and turnover of domestic capital markets or capital flows and currency movements –
and the amount of foreign investment allowed should also be linked. The countries where the pension assets as a
percentage of GDP is fairly low (under 20%) but foreign investments are high (around 50% of more) are mainly
smaller Eastern European countries (Estonia, Kosovo, Slovenia, Slovak Republic, Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania), with
limited domestic capital markets, but ample investment opportunities in the region in the same or correlated
currencies.

              Figure 20+21: Pension Fund AUM % GDP vs. Pension Fund Foreign Investments % AUM




 Source: OECD Global Pension Statistics


       Figure 22+23: Pension Fund AUM, Domestic Stock Market Capitalization, Stock Turnover as % GDP /
                                 Diversification vs. Stock Market Capitalization




                                                                                                                 19
Source: OECD, World Bank databases

Chile provides a good example of a country, which has more systematically increased its overseas investment limits
– raising these as the pension fund assets have grown and become increasingly too large for the domestic markets
to absorb. The regulatory authorities in Peru have also gradually increased their limits on several asset classes,
particularly those on foreign investments, private equity, and other alternative securities. The regulators in Peru
adopted a similar approach.


      Figure 24: Chile Pension Fund Foreign            Figure 25 Peruvian Private Pension Fund System
        Investment vs. Regulation Ceiling                         Foreign Investment Limits




 Source: Superintendencia Chile

Governance
Finally, it should be stressed that strengthening the governance and management of pension funds is an important
precondition for diversifying their portfolios. The OECD – along with the World Bank36 - have argued that this is a
particularly important consideration for social security and public pension reserve funds (PPRF), which may be
subject to political pressure, which can undermine the perceived certainty and long-term investment horizon of the



36
  See OECD (2014b), Yermo (2008). Previous World Bank reports on the topic include the work of Rajkumar and Dorfman
(2011), Carmichael and Palacios (2003), Palacios (2002), Iglesias and Palacios (2000).
                                                                                                                      20
asset base, directly influencing their asset allocation decisions. Improving their governance is key to developing
their investment capacity and impact.

Souto and Musalem (2012) created a ‘Transparency and Governance Index’ (TGI) to rank public pension funds
globally according to a set of criteria which are taken as proxies for good governance.37 Stewart and Remizova
(forthcoming) seeks to take this analysis a step further by linking the governance of the funds to the composition of
their investment portfolios. Initial findings suggest that good governance and investment performance are linked,
with the better governed funds running more diversified investment portfolios.

Figures 26+27: Public Pension Fund Transparency + Governance Rankings vs. Portfolio Diversification




 Source: (Stewart and Remizova – forthcoming)


Conclusions
The potential for pension funds to contribute to capital market and thereby economic growth has been argued on a
theoretical basis and demonstrated empirically. However, the development of funded pension systems has not had
the economic impact hoped for. Pension fund portfolios in some countries have remained highly exposed to low
yield traditional assets with a short-term horizon, such as bonds (mostly government issued) and bank deposits.
This, in turn, has led to low investment returns in some areas – and thereby potentially undermining retirement
adequacy.

Links between the performance of pension systems in general and the diversification of investments are suggested
in the OECD Global Pension Statistics database. However, more granular analysis based on types of funds and other
industry structures within national systems would be warranted – and are suggested for further research.

Many factors may lie behind this apparent lack of diversification of pension fund portfolios – with regulations
certainly playing a part. Asset class restrictions, which protect pension fund members from overly volatile returns,
may be over restrictive, forcing investment into more traditional investments (bonds) which may be less risky but
which may deliver less than alternative asset classes and may reduce the accumulated assets for retirement over
the long-term. Even where these assets class restrictions are not the main impediment to portfolio diversification,
other factors – from investment manager incentives to requirements for relative return guarantees, to switching –
may also be leading pension funds to invest in more traditional holdings. Improving investment regulation – by
using lifecycle rather than straight investment limits, removing relative return guarantees, benchmarking

37
  Proxy ratings for transparency include publication of an annual report, investment returns etc. Ratings for good governance
include the composition, hiring and removal procedures for members of the fund’s governing body.
                                                                                                                            21
outcomes, measuring performance and fees over a long-term period and reducing incentives for frequent switching
etc. - can have an impact on pension fund portfolio construction, allowing for greater diversification and ultimately
potentially higher pension fund returns. However, over and above investment restrictions, pension funds in
emerging markets often have difficulties in diversifying their portfolios due to a lack of investment opportunities.
This is compounded if overseas investment is restricted. A combination of the deliberate creation of innovative
domestic investment instruments and reasonable overseas investment limits (based on the size of pension fund
assets relative to macroeconomic and market factors) can help pension funds deliver the long-term investment
returns which are needed.

Finally, improving the governance of pensions – particularly the large, public sector and social security funds which
dominate many emerging markets – is key to improving security, diversification, and returns.




                                                                                                                   22
References

Ajantha, S.K., and Pfau, W.D., (2011), ‘Would Emerging Market Pension Funds Benefit from International
Diversification? An Application of the Bootstrap Approach’
Alonso, J., Arellano, A., Tuesta, D., (2015), ‘Factors that Impact on Pension Fund Investments in Infrastructure under
the Current Global Financial Regulation’, Pension Research Council, Wharton University, Research Paper CP2015-01
Berstein, S., Fuentes, O., Villatoro, F., (2013), ‘Default investment strategies in a defined contribution pension
system: a pension risk model application for the Chilean case’, Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 12, pp
379-414

Blake, D., Cairns, A., Dowd, K., (2008), ‘Turning Pension Plans into Pension Planes: What Investment Strategy
Designers of Defined Contribution Pension Plans Can Learn from Commercial Aircraft Designers’

Carmichael, J., Palacios, R., (2003), ‘Framework for Public Pension Fund Management’

Chan-Lau, J., A., (2004), ‘Pension Funds in Emerging Markets’, IMF Working Paper 04/181

Davis, P.E., (2002), ‘Pension Fund Management and International Investment – A Global Perspective’

de la Torre, A., Ize, A., and Schmukler, S., (2011), ‘Financial Development in Latin America and the Caribbean: The
Road Ahead,’ World Bank.

Didier, T., Rigobon, R., and Schmukler, S., (2013), ‘Unexploited Gains from International Diversification: Patterns of
Portfolio Holdings around the World,’ Review of Economics and Statistics, 95:5, 1562-1583

Didier, T., Schmukler, S.(Eds.), (2014), ‘Emerging Issues in Financial Development: Lessons from Latin America,’
World Bank

Escriva, J.,L., Fuentes, E., Garcia-Herrero, A., (2010), ‘A Balance of Projections of the Experience in Infrastructure of
Pension Funds in Latin America’, BBVA Publication

Fadhlaoui, K., Bellalah, M., Dherry, A., (2009), ‘An Empirical Examination of International Diversification Benefits in
Central European Emerging Equity Markets’, International Journal of Business, 14(2), 2009

Fuentes, O., Morales, A., Stewart, F., (forthcoming), ‘Impact of Switching on Pension Funds’ Portfolios’

Groenewold, M., (2012), ‘Sourcing Capital through Mexico’s CKD Structure: The Next Phase’, EMPEA Legal &
Regulatory Bulletin.

Hu, Y., Stewart, F., Yermo, J, (2007), ‘Pension Fund Investment and Regulation: An International Perspective and
Implications for China’s Pension System’ OECD

Iglesias, A., Palacios, R., (2000), ‘Managing public pension reserves - Part I: evidence from the international
experience’, No. 21311 Social Protection and Labor Policy and Technical Notes, World Bank

Musalem, A. R., Pasquini, R., (2012), ‘Private Pension Systems Cross-Country Investment Performance’, World Bank
SPL discussion paper 1214

Niggemann, T., Rocholl, J., (2010), ‘Pension funding and capital market development’

OECD, (2017), ‘Pension Funds in Figures’

OECD, (2016), ‘Pension Markets in Focus’


                                                                                                                        23
OECD, (2015a), ‘Pension Markets in Focus’

OECD, (2015b), ‘Annual Survey of Large Pension Funds and Public Pension Reserve Funds: Report on Pension Funds’
Long-term Investments’

OECD, (2015c), ‘Annual Survey Pension Fund Investment Regulation’

OECD, (2014a), ‘Pension Markets in Focus’

OECD, (2014b), ‘Survey of Large Pension Funds’

OECD, (2014c), ‘Annex to the report on effective approaches to support implementation of the G20/OECD high-level
principles on long term investment financing by institutional investors’

OECD, (1998), ‘Liberalizing Foreign Investments by Pension Funds: Positive and Normative Aspects’, in Maintaining
Prosperity in an Ageing Society

Palacios, R., (2002), ‘Managing public pension reserves Part II: lessons from five recent OECD initiatives’, World Bank
Working Paper No. 33407

Pfau, W.D., (2011), ‘Emerging Market Pension Funds and International Diversification’, Journal of Developing Areas,
Volume 45, Single Issue, Fall 2011

Pfau, W.D., (2009), ‘The Role of International Diversification in Public Pension Systems: The Case of Pakistan’,
Economic Issues, Vol. 14, Part 2, 2009

Price, W.J., Rudolph, H., (2013), ‘Reversal and Reduction, Resolution and Reform: Lessons from the Financial Crisis in
Europe and Central Asia to Improve Outcomes from Mandatory Private Pensions’

Raddatz, C., Schmukler, S., (2013), ‘Deconstructing Herding: Evidence from Pension Fund Investment Behavior,’
Journal of Financial Services Research, 43:1, 99-126

Raddatz, C., Schmukler, S., and Williams, T., (2014), ‘International Asset Allocation and Capital Flows: The
Benchmark Effect,’ World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6866. Latest version available as HKIMR
Working Paper No.04/2015.

Rajkumar, S., Dorfman, M., (2011),’Governance and Investment of Public Pension Assets’, World Bank

Randle, A., Rudolph, H., (2014), ‘Pension Risk and Risk-based Supervision in Defined Contribution Pension Funds’,
World Bank Working Paper WPS 6813
Schwarz, A., M., Arias, O., S., (2014),’The Inverted Pyramid’, World Bank
Souto,P., Musalem, A., (2012), ‘ Assessing the Governance and Transparency of National Public Pension Funds’,
Review of European Studies Vol. 4, No. 2, June 2012
Srinivas, P.S., Yermo, J., (1999), ‘Do Investment Regulations Compromise Pension Fund Performance?’, World Bank

Stewart, F., (2014), ‘Providing incentives for long-term investment by pension funds: the use of outcome-based
benchmarks’, World Bank Policy Research Paper WPS6885

Stewart, F. and Remizova, I., (forthcoming), ‘Governance, Diversification and Performance of Public Pension Funds’

Swinkes, L., A., P., Vejina, D., Vilans, R., (2005), ‘Why Don’t Latvian Pension Funds Diversify More Internationally?’

Vanguard, (2013),’Global equities: Balancing home bias and diversification’

Vittas, D., (1998), ‘Institutional investors and securities markets: Which comes first?’

                                                                                                                         24
Vittas, D., (1996), ‘Pension Funds and Capital Markets,’ FSD Note No.71, February, World Bank

Yermo, J., (2008), ‘Governance and Investment of Public Pension Reserve Funds in Selected OECD Countries’, OECD
Working Papers on Insurance and Private Pensions, No.




                                                                                                              25
