                                                       WPS8171


Policy Research Working Paper                         8171




           Revisiting the Effect of Food Aid
                      on Conflict
                    A Methodological Caution

                                Paul Christian
                             Christopher B. Barrett




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8171


  Abstract
 A popular identification strategy in non-experimental                              this strategy is susceptible to bias arising from spurious
 panel data uses instrumental variables constructed by                              trends. Re-randomization and Monte Carlo simulations
 interacting exogenous but potentially spurious time series                         show that the strategy identifies a spurious relationship
 or spatial variables with endogenous exposure variables to                         even when the true effect could be non-causal or causal
 generate identifying variation through assumptions like                            in the opposite direction, invalidating the claim that aid
 those of differences-in-differences estimators. Revisiting a                       causes conflict and providing a caution for similar strategies.
 celebrated study linking food aid and conflict shows that




  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the
  world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at pchristian@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                 Revisiting the Effect of Food Aid on Conflict:
                               A Methodological Caution
                 By PAUL CHRISTIAN* AND CHRISTOPHER B. BARRETT†




        JEL C36, D74, F35, H36, O19, O57, Q18
        Keywords: Aid Delivery, Humanitarian Assistance, Agricultural
        Policies, Conflict and Violence




* Development Economics Research Group, World Bank (email: pchristian@worldbank.org).
†
  Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management and SC Johnson College of
Business, Cornell University (email: cbb2@cornell.edu). Thank you to Jenny Aker, Marc
Bellemare, Brian Dillon, Teevrat Garg, Eeshani Kandpal, Erin Lentz, Stephanie Mercier, Nathan
Nunn, Marc Rockmore, Steven Ryan, and seminar audiences at Cornell, Minnesota, Tufts, UC-
Davis and the World Bank for helpful comments, and to Utsav Manjeer for excellent research
assistance. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
  In a highly publicized recent article, Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian (2014,
hereafter NQ) demonstrate a new strategy to identify what would be the first
causal estimate of the effect of United States (US) food aid deliveries on the
global incidence of conflict. Using an instrumental variables (IV) strategy popular
in recent panel data studies, they report that increasing the quantity of food aid to
a given country causally increases the incidence and duration of civil conflict in
the recipient country. The IV method NQ employ involves interacting a plausibly
exogenous time series variable with a potentially endogenous cross-sectional
exposure variable so as to generate a continuous difference-in-differences (DID)
estimate of the causal effect of inter-annual variation in the time series variable on
the outcome of interest among relatively exposed units compared to relatively
unexposed units.
  The NQ estimation approach holds intuitive appeal in contexts where a plausibly
exogenous instrument is available for an endogenous regressor, but is limited in
variation to such an extent as to raise concerns about spurious correlation. If the
instrument’s influence on the endogenous regressor is known to vary along an
observable dimension, then causal identification of the effect of interest can be
recovered by interacting the instrument with this source of heterogeneity, but only
under the assumption that control variables fully capture the endogeneity. The
assumption is that conditional on the controls, the error term is independent of the
interaction of the instrument and the exposure variable, which is only true if either
the exposure variable is uncorrelated with the error term or the correlation is
constant across time or space. If aid is directed toward countries that experience
conflict and the risk of conflict is both grouped together in adjacent years and only
experienced by some countries and not others, this assumption is more likely to be
violated. We argue that non-parallel trends can cause a violation of this core
assumption, and document how the violation manifests within the specific policy
context studied by NQ.




                                           2
   NQ’s efforts to improve the rigor of research on such an important policy
question, the data they painstakingly assembled to allow them to explore patterns
in food aid allocation and conflict that remain poorly understood, and the care they
take in subjecting their findings to a range of robustness and falsification checks all
speak to a careful and deliberate effort to improve understanding of sensitive
policies.1 Nonetheless, we show that the estimation strategy they employ is
vulnerable to this hitherto underappreciated source of confounding in panel data IV
estimation that calls into question the exclusion restriction on which their causal
identification depends. Using placebo tests, randomization inference tests, and
Monte Carlo simulations, we find that their core claim–that food aid causes civil
conflict in recipient countries–does not stand up to close scrutiny. Randomization
inference tests in which we randomly assign the variation that underlies
identification show that the spurious and endogenous trends in the data almost
always lead in these data to a positive effect of aid on conflict, no matter the within-
year allocation of aid. The Monte Carlo simulations show that this upward bias can
even be consistent with a data generating process in which food aid shipments
prevent conflict, the opposite of the effect found in the NQ strategy that is reported
as causal.
   This specific, high profile example more generally highlights a potential source
of inferential error in other attempts to use a similar panel data IV strategy based
on a continuous DID estimator. The essence of the problem in a time series
framework is that if the longer-run trend dominates the year-on-year variation in
the plausibly exogenous time series and the contemporaneous trends in the outcome
variable are not parallel across the exposure domain – especially if the non-parallel
trends are nonlinear and thus not controlled for adequately with fixed effects or



   1
     Chu et al. (2016) undertake another set of robustness checks using a semiparametric endogenous estimation procedure
and cannot reject NQ’s parametric specifications and declare their findings robust.




                                                            3
time trends – then this sort of continuous DID estimator suffers from the same
problem as do conventional DID estimators that violate the standard parallel trends
assumption. Analogous concerns would exist in a spatial framework.
     This clever approach has been similarly used in other prominent recent papers.
For example, Giovanni Peri (2012) investigates how intertemporal variation in
immigrant populations differentially affects employment and total factor
productivity growth among US states by interacting immigration population over
time with time invariant distance from the Mexico border; Oeindrila Dube and
Juan Vargas (2013) study the effects of international commodity price shocks on
civil conflict within Colombia by interacting price time series with cross-sectional
measures of intensity of production of the commodity in question. And Rema
Hanna and Paulina Oliva (2015) explore how pollution reduction resulting from
the closure of refineries affects labor supply in Mexico by interacting a time series
on oil refinery closure with individuals’ time invariant distance to the refinery. As
we describe below, in these other prominent cases that use this technique, the
spurious trends we identify in the NQ study may not affect specific findings. But
to date the literature does not appear to recognize the vulnerability of this method
to the problem we highlight, and the approaches taken to argue for the validity of
exclusion restrictions vary across papers. Hence the methodological caution we
offer in unpacking one prominent, and highly policy relevant, recent paper.


I.    The Nunn and Qian Estimation Strategy
     NQ construct an impressive panel dataset including 125 non-OECD countries
over 36 years with information on the conflict status (defined as a country
experiencing more than 25 battle deaths in a year), quantity of wheat delivered to




                                            4
the country by the US as food aid, and a rich set of characteristics of countries and
years that they use as controls.2
  Using these data, they estimate two types of regressions to describe the
relationship between food aid and conflict. The first is an ordinary least squares
(OLS) specification where the indicator variable for the presence of conflict in a
given country during a given year is regressed on the quantity of wheat food aid
delivered to that country, including country and time fixed effects and a broad set
of controls. In this specification, additional food aid is associated with a lower
incidence of conflict, but this result is not statistically significant. This result
implies with within countries, years when a greater quantity of wheat aid is received
from the United States are associated with no greater risk of conflict, and within
years, countries that receive a greater quantity of wheat aid have no greater risk of
conflict. NQ justifiably worry that this relationship could be biased, however,
because food aid deliveries may be endogenous to conflict incidence if the US
government either prefers to send aid to conflict affected countries, which would
bias the OLS estimate upward, or avoids sending aid to such countries, which would
bias the estimate downward.
  To obtain a causal estimate of the effect of food aid on conflict, they estimate a
two stage least squares (2SLS) specification using an IV constructed from the
interaction of lagged annual total wheat production in the US with a country’s
propensity to receive food aid over time, defined as the proportion of the 36 years
that the country received at least some food aid in the form of wheat from the US.
Their justification for such an instrument is that US domestic commodity price
stabilization policies obligate the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) to
purchase wheat in high production years in order to keep supply shocks from



  2
    The main variables of interest are taken from the UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset Version 4-2010 (conflict), the
Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) FAOSTAT database (food aid deliveries), and the USDA (wheat production).




                                                           5
lowering the price. This practice, NQ argue, causes high wheat production to result
in additional food stocks that the US aid agencies then deliver as aid the following
year. Shocks to domestic wheat production thereby create a source of plausibly
exogenous variation in the quantity of food aid the US delivers each year. Given
that the wheat production measures are annual and so potentially related to annual
changes that might determine conflict, they interact US wheat production with the
proportion of years in the panel in which each country receives aid. They show that
countries that regularly get food aid receive the most additional food aid in years
following a year of relatively high US wheat production as compared to countries
that receive aid infrequently. Hypothesizing that windfall government wheat stocks
are therefore shipped disproportionately to countries that routinely receive US food
aid, they use the exogenous variation in US wheat output interacted with group
status – regular or irregular food aid recipient – to identify the food aid-conflict
relationship.
  The basic IV specification they estimate is:

(1)                       Cirt = βFirt + XirtΓ + ϕrt + ψir + νirt

(2)                   Firt = α(Pt-1 x   ) + XirtΓ + ϕrt + ψir + Εirt


  Equation (1) is the equation of interest, where Cirt is an indicator variable which
equals one if country i in region r experiences at least 25 deaths from battle
involving two parties in year t, Firt is the endogenous quantity of wheat aid
shipments to country i in year t, Xirt is a set of country and year controls, ϕrt is a set
of region specific year fixed effects, and ψir is a set of country fixed effects. The
first stage is shown in equation (2), where the instrument is the interaction of Pt-1,




                                             6
annual US wheat production lagged by one year,3 and	                 , the proportion of the 36
years in which country i received a non-zero quantity of wheat aid from the US.
Note that 	      is almost surely endogenous since it includes food aid receipts from
all years in the sample.4 NQ exploit the plausible exogeneity of Pt-1 to identify the
key parameter of interest, β, in the second stage.
    The justification for this first stage is that when additional wheat is available
because of high production (Pt-1), additional aid is sent to regular food aid
recipients, which goes disproportionately to the favored aid partners. Including the
country and year fixed effects, α is then analogous to a difference-in-difference
(DID) coefficient estimate, where the variation in the instrument comes from
comparing aid between high and low wheat production years and between regular
and irregular aid recipients. Any confounding variables that have a common effect
on conflict across all countries within a region in the same year, such as weather or
climate or global market prices, or characteristics of countries that have a constant
effect on conflict prevalence over time are controlled for through region-year and
country fixed effects.
    In their preferred specification, NQ estimate equation (1) via 2SLS with the
interacted instrument in first stage equation (2) used for endogenous aid quantity,
and find that “a 1,000 MT increase in US wheat aid increases the incidence of
conflict by .3 percentage points.” At the sample means, their estimated food aid
elasticity of conflict incidence is 0.4, a large enough magnitude to warrant serious
policy attention.



3
  Lagged one year due to the time required to plan and implement food aid deliveries.
4
  US food aid shipments exhibit strong persistence over time. Barrett (1998) shows that historically
the probability of a country receiving future food aid flows conditional on past food aid receipt is
85% or greater out to horizons of 35 years of prior food aid receipt. See Appendix 2 for similar
results in these data. A shock, like conflict, that sparks initial food aid flows is likely to have
persistent effects on food aid flows. Note that NQ find no evidence that food aid causes conflict to
begin.




                                                  7
  But NQ’s conclusions depend on the credibility of the exclusion restriction
behind their IV strategy, which is that US wheat production conditional on the set
of controls reported in the paper is correlated with conflict only through the
following channel. Positive shocks from higher wheat production year-on-year lead
the US government to purchase more wheat in order to maintain a target price for
wheat, which loosens the budget constraints for aid agencies and allows them to
distribute more wheat aid the following year. The extra aid sent as a result causes
conflict prevalence to increase.5
  We show below that including year fixed effects does not eliminate the influence
of seemingly spurious correlation between wheat production and conflict because
both variables display a similar inverted-U shape trend over the period, and,
crucially, this trend is much more pronounced for regular aid recipients than for
irregular ones. This is akin to violating the parallel trends assumption essential to
identification in DID estimation; the differences are that in the NQ context – and in
other recent papers that use a similar technique – the trends are nonlinear and the
exposure variable is continuous, not binary. Including region-year and country
fixed effects, even a time trend variable, does not permit causal identification unless
either (i) the controls employed by NQ absorb all of the trend effects other than aid,
or (ii) inter-annual US wheat production fluctuations and resulting food aid are in
fact the dominant sources of the conflict trends.
  These assumptions are much stronger than those described by NQ as the
necessary and sufficient conditions for their strategy to reveal a causal effect of aid
on conflict. Because the causal effect of aid on conflict is a relationship of


5
  The exact channel by which this last stage occurs is not clear. NQ argue that the extra food aid is
vulnerable to theft, which allows rebels to continue fighting longer than they otherwise would. But
this seems to contradict findings in the literature that show that exogenous sources of income growth
are often associated with lower conflict (Blattman and Miguel, 2010). The mechanisms that would
explain why income from aid deliveries would be more likely to be stolen by rebels and increase
conflict while income from other sources often reduces fighting have not been established.




                                                   8
substantial interest to policy makers, and because the clever econometric trick they
employ appears in other empirical papers on other topics, we deem it important to
highlight the caveats to the NQ conclusions and to demonstrate their vulnerability
to spurious correlation due to nonlinear heterogeneous trends unrelated to the
hypothesized mechanism. Indeed, we can go further and show, via Monte Carlo
estimation, that a data generating process directly contrary to their hypothesized
causal mechanism generates remarkably similar parameter estimates in the
presence of the sorts of trends found in their data. A data system in which food aid
reduces rather than exacerbates conflict incidence produces the NQ results if trends
in wheat production and conflict are non-linear across countries and years.
Understanding the sources of spurious and endogenous correlation between the
instrument and the outcome variable sheds important light on cautions to take when
implementing a similar IV strategy in panel data.


II. Placebo Test Failures

  We begin the analysis of the 2SLS strategy by showing how policy changes over
the period can demonstrate the risk of misidentification. The mechanism driving
variation in the NQ setup is the assertion that US wheat price stabilization policies
oblige the USDA to purchase food in high production years. NQ argue that this
extra wheat aid is mostly sent to the countries that are the most regular recipients
of wheat aid from the US, and exploit the resulting difference in additional
allocations between high and low US wheat production years across regular and
irregular recipients of aid to try to identify a causal effect of food aid on conflict in
recipient countries.
  Two fundamental problems exist, however. First, the connection between US
wheat production and USDA purchases is highly stylized, neglecting dramatic
changes in US farm support and food aid procurement policies during the study
period (Barrett and Maxwell, 2005). Most notably, the wheat price support policies



                                            9
that are the exogenous mechanism linking wheat production to food aid shipments
changed, starting with the 1985 Farm Bill and culminating in the 1996 Farm Bill
which formally uncoupled government purchases from price or production targets
(Willis and O’Brien, 2015).6,7 This policy change implies that NQ’s hypothesized
first stage relationship between US wheat production and food aid deliveries should
be strongest prior to 1985 and should disappear or at least attenuate after 1996.
    Thus, the latter portion of the NQ data offer a natural placebo test as the
mechanism tapered off after that point. When we re-estimate for sub-samples
before 1985, from 1985-1996, and after the wheat price stabilization policy ended
in 1996, however, rather than finding the hypothesized positive first and second
stage relationship in the pre-1985 period and no correlation in the latter period, we
find a positive association both between aid deliveries and wheat production (first
stage) and between conflict and aid as instrumented by wheat production (IV result)
in both the early (pre-1985) and latter (post-1996) periods, as reflected in Appendix
1.8 The results from the pre-1985 period where the posited policy mechanism was
indeed active are statistically indistinguishable from those from the post-1996
period when it no longer existed. And the estimated relationship during the policy
change period of 1985-1996 is negative, not positive, and statistically insignificant,


6
  The details of the policy and how it affects the estimation strategy are described in more detail in
Appendix 1, which also explains why the mechanism NQ posit is largely irrelevant today, given
changes in both US farm and food aid policies.
   7
     Following the 1996 Farm Bill, the USDA was still enabled, though not obligated, to purchase
wheat through the Commodities Credit Corporation (CCC). It is possible that wheat yields would
remain associated with price or supply changes that could differentially create incentives to purchase
wheat for aid under the Bill Emerson Humanitarian Trust or 416(b) programs in years with elevated
wheat production, rather than draw on government-held stocks. However, such episodes have been
relatively infrequent and when they have occurred, the bulk of the wheat procured has been used
primarily for non-emergency Title II shipments that are monetized by the recipient NGO, i.e., not
in emergency situations where food aid might prolong a conflict, as NQ hypothesize.
   8
     Except where additional data sources are added and explicitly noted, we use the dataset posted
by Nunn and Qian on the replication files page at:
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.6.1630. These data are described in further
detail in the original NQ paper. Where relevant, we refer to these data as the NQ replication file.




                                                  10
inconsistent with the NQ interpretation that aid causes conflict. Although it is
possible that discretionary purchases in the post-1996 period exactly mirrored the
pre-1985 period when purchases under certain market conditions were mandated,
the channel for the link between wheat production and aid shipments would be
much more speculative and open to concerns that the channel was associated with
potentially omitted variables such as price changes or supply shocks. This placebo
test suggests that something other than the hypothesized causal mechanism
identified by the mandates of pre-1985 US farm policy might drive the correlation
NQ document between food aid flows and conflict.
  Given the concerns raised by the policy robustness checks, we show through a
more general approach that NQ’s identification strategy is susceptible to a
particular and previously unappreciated problem that can arise when using an
interacted variable as an instrument in panel data. Intuitively, the first stage of the
IV strategy is a form of DID estimator. If the standard parallel trends assumption
in DID is violated, the exclusion restriction underpinning the IV approach fails.
  In the NQ context, the problem arises because one component of the interacted
instrument is a time series variable (US wheat production) that is constant across
recipient country observations within the same year. The other component
(propensity to receive US food aid) varies only across cross-sectional observations,
not over years, and is likely to be endogenous to the outcome of interest (conflict
incidence), since food aid response to complex humanitarian emergencies
involving conflict is a central part of the main food aid program’s mission. On
closer inspection, we find that the time series variable exhibits strong nonlinear
trends strikingly similar to those observed in the outcome variable of interest in the
more exposed group of countries but not in the less exposed group, and that most
of the variation in the temporal component of the instrument comes from long term
trends rather than from year-on-year short term variation around the trend. Because
of the inter-group differences in the long-run nonlinear trend in the outcome




                                           11
variable, the plausibly exogenous inter-annual variation in US wheat production are
likely not identifying the correlation between the IV and the dependent variable;
rather the differential underlying trends are.
  Appendix 2 presents a detailed analysis of these heterogeneous nonlinear trends
along the (potentially endogenous) regular-irregular aid recipient dimension NQ
use for identification. This is problematic because NQ construct an instrument that
interacts the exogenous time series variable and the endogenous cross-sectional
variable, attempting to control for endogeneity through region-year and country
fixed effects, and in some specifications with linear time trends. The problem is
that inclusion of region-year and country fixed effects or a linear time trend does
not preclude the possibility that an observed relationship between the
(instrumented) endogenous variable and the outcome variable arises from spurious
correlation from dominant nonlinear trends.
  In the NQ setting, wheat production and conflict both show strong trends over
time that swamp the more plausibly exogenous year-to-year variation. The trend in
conflict propensity is most apparent for countries that receive aid most often and
weakest for countries that do not receive aid frequently, meaning that including
year fixed effects as controls does not eliminate this source of endogeneity.
  Figure 1 summarizes the source of the problem in the NQ identification strategy.
The essence of the NQ story is that elevated wheat production in the US obliges the
US government to purchase wheat in order to maintain a price target, leading to
higher stocks of government owned wheat. The surplus wheat is used the following
year to provide food aid to recipient nations, with the bulk of the excess directed to
particularly favored recipients who frequently receive aid shipments. This excess
aid then causes sustained conflict in recipient countries. The panels in Figure 1 trace
through the story on the time dimension for the NQ data. Panel A shows that periods
of elevated production are strongly clustered in the middle of the period,
demonstrating that most of the variation arises from decadal changes in




                                           12
production.9 Panel B shows that these higher production years were associated with
a spike in US government holdings of wheat, but that the stocks seem to be much
more influenced by the overall trend in production–and by policy changes
(described in Appendix 1)–than by year-to-year variation around the trend. Panel C
shows the trends in food aid receipt dividing by countries’ propensity to receive
aid; this variation is the key source of NQ’s identification. Almost all of the
variation comes from a powerful, approximately quadratic trend among only the
most frequent aid recipients. Finally, Panel D shows the trends in conflict among
categories of countries grouped by their frequency of US wheat aid receipt. Among
the most regular recipients of wheat aid, conflict prevalence shows a strong
inverted-U shape quite like that of wheat food aid shipments to that same group of
countries.
  Together, these results indicate how spurious correlation could easily drive the
NQ results. The 1980s and 1990s were periods of elevated civil conflict. In the
same period, US wheat production happened to be high and the US had elevated
wheat aid shipments. Most of the wheat distributed as food aid in that period was
sent to countries experiencing conflict. These very broad trends reflect the variation
off of which NQ’s IV strategy identifies, but in no way does this identification
imply a causal connection between wheat shipments and aid. It is possible, as NQ
argue, that the trending wheat production caused aid shipments to be higher and
that these elevated aid shipments were responsible for the bulge in conflict shown
in this trend. But it seems at least as plausible that the relationship is entirely
spurious, driven by a simple coincidence of trends for three variables (wheat
production, total quantity of food aid shipments, and conflict) that evolve according


   9
     NQ mainly describe wheat production as sensitive to climatic fluctuation in the US, which would
be plausibly exogenous to many drivers of conflict, but production is also driven by producers’
decisions about the area to be devoted to cultivation of wheat, which is potentially both endogenous
to US policies regarding price support and purchase for foreign aid, and is also more likely to evolve
gradually than in year-to-year fluctuations.




                                                  13
to highly autocorrelated nonlinear processes that happened to track each other over
the relatively short period NQ study, but differentially among regular and irregular
food aid recipients. Given that periods when wheat yields are elevated are clustered
together, the fact that conflict is high only in these periods does not force one to the
conclusion that aid is causing conflict. The fact that aid was mostly sent to the
countries that experienced conflict could just be a consequence of the fact that aid
is mostly shipped to places experiencing humanitarian disasters such as conflict,
exactly the simultaneity bias that the strategy is meant to circumvent.
  An intuitive way to show graphically how such time trends influence NQ’s IV
estimate is to reproduce the plots NQ use to explain and demonstrate their strategy,
highlighting changes across decades. Figure 2 reproduces the NQ’s Figures 3 and
4, which show the relationship between US wheat production and the proportion of
countries in each year who are experiencing a conflict. The bottom panel shows the
relationship among only the 50% of countries that receive aid from the US most
frequently, while the top panel is the 50% of countries that receive aid least
frequently during the study period. NQ use these plots to show that that wheat
production is related to conflict, but only among frequent recipients of US aid,
presenting an intuitively appealing demonstration for what is effectively the
reduced form in their IV strategy.
  But given that wheat production displays pronounced trends, it is useful to group
observations that are near each other in time. Our Figures 3 and 4 reproduce the
preceding figure for the high food aid recipients, with different markers and colors
representing different decades. As we know from the fact that both wheat aid and
conflict followed an inverted-U shape trend during this period, all of the years with
high wheat production and elevated incidence of conflict occur in the 1980s and
1990s (grey diamonds and dark blue squares, respectively), while all the years with
low wheat production and high conflict occur in the 1970s and 2000s (light blue
circles and black triangles, respectively).




                                              14
  These time trends are important for NQ, because their instrument is based on the
interaction of wheat production and long-term propensity to receive aid. Lagged
wheat production is the part that drives the plausible exogeneity of the instrument,
but it only varies by year. NQ’s results depend on conflict increasing more among
regular recipients than in irregular recipients when lagged US wheat production is
high.
  Figures 3 and 4 show what happens when depicting the reduced form relationship
between wheat and conflict for irregular and regular recipients separately by
decade. In Figure 4, for irregular recipients, we see that if anything, within any
given decade, aid and conflict are negatively correlated. What had previously
appeared to be a flat relationship in the top panel of Figure 2 was driven by the fact
that wheat and conflict were both higher in the 1980s and 1990s. Among the regular
recipients, aid appears related to conflict in the 1970s and possibly the 2000s, but
not at all in the 1980s and 1990s. As shown in Figure 1, what appeared to be a
globally positive relationship between wheat production and conflict in the NQ
paper was entirely driven by a transition in the late 1970s to a period of high wheat
production and high conflict and back to a period of lower wheat production and
conflict by the 2000s. This transition corresponds to a period of dramatic shifts in
US farm price policy (Appendix 1) that broke the hypothesized narrative of a
mandated link between wheat production and government-held wheat stocks and
during which US food aid policy began expressly prioritizing the shipment of
emergency food aid to conflict-affected countries.
  What matters for the average relationship that NQ identify is the difference in the
conflict-wheat relationship between regular versus irregular aid recipients, so this
is shown in Figure 5. Their hypothesized effect seems present in the 1970s, but
otherwise, the global relationship is almost entirely driven by the long-term changes
rather than the more plausibly random short-term fluctuations of wheat output
around that trend. Moreover, if there is an upward relationship in the differences




                                          15
shown below for the 1990s, then it is entirely driven by the fact that average conflict
was declining in irregular recipients when wheat production was low rather than
the fact that it was increasing in regular recipients, among whom it was actually flat
or declining, as shown in Figures 4 and 3, respectively.
  By itself, the coincident trends between wheat production and conflict do not
necessarily mean that NQ’s IV strategy does not identify a causal effect of aid on
conflict. Again, one interpretation of this correspondence is that higher wheat
production in the early 1980s and 1990s led the US government to procure greater
quantities of wheat, which was then shipped abroad as food aid, sustaining
conflict according the mechanisms proposed by NQ.
  But since variation in wheat and conflict is mostly driven by long decadal
changes rather than year to year variation, there could well be omitted factors that
are related to both wheat production and conflict. It is entirely possible that the
evolution of two unrelated processes could coincide over time by coincidence.
Given that food aid is, by program design, intentionally directed toward countries
most at risk of conflict, such coincidence would generate spurious correlation and
bias in NQ’s IV estimates.
  Depicting the variation over time in Figures 3 to 5 clearly shows how spurious
and endogenous variation could swamp more plausibly quasi-random variation
even with country and region-year fixed effects. To demonstrate the importance of
this effect we introduce a simple placebo test of whether the source of plausibly
exogenous inter-annual variation (US wheat production) on which the NQ strategy
relies – as do similar panel data IV strategies in other papers – indeed accounts for
the observed correlation. Our results strongly suggest that the NQ results are driven
by spurious correlation. Tests of this form should be widely applicable to similar
applications.
  The placebo test we introduce is a form of randomization inference, and rests on
the simple principle that introducing randomness into the endogenous explanatory




                                           16
variable of interest (a country’s food aid receipts in a given year) while holding
constant the (potentially endogenous) cross-sectional exposure variable (	         ), the
instrument (US wheat production) and everything else should eliminate, or at least
substantially attenuate, the estimated causal relationship if indeed exogenous
inter-annual shocks to the endogenous explanatory variable (wheat food aid
shipments) drive outcomes (conflict in recipient countries). Within a given year,
we hold constant the following variables: the quantity of wheat produced, the
identity of the countries that receive any wheat food aid from the US (thereby
fixing both 	   and the timing of food aid receipts), observable fixed and time-
varying characteristics of countries, and the aggregate distribution of wheat food
aid allocations across all countries each year. But we randomly assign the key
variable of interest, the quantity of aid delivered to a particular country. For
example, in 1971, 60 countries received any wheat food aid from the US. In our
simulation, we randomly reassign (without replacement) the quantity of wheat aid
deliveries among these 60 countries, while holding constant the (true) zero value
of food aid receipts in the other countries. For example, instead of receiving the
2,100 tons it actually received in 1971, Nepal could be randomly assigned the 800
tons actually shipped to Swaziland that year. We similarly reshuffle the wheat aid
allocations among the 62 countries who received aid in 1972, and so on for every
year in the sample.
  This new pseudo-dataset preserves the two sources of endogeneity we worry
about – time trends and endogenous selection into being a regular food aid
recipient –but sweeps out the source of variation that NQ have in mind by
randomizing among countries the assignment of specific food aid shipment
volumes. To keep with the earlier example, Swaziland’s food aid receipts cannot
plausibly have caused civil conflict within Nepal. This way, conflict can remain
spuriously related to wheat production because neither the conflict time series nor
the wheat production time series nor the exposure variable that distinguishes




                                          17
between groups are altered, but the causal mechanism has been rendered non-
operational by randomization since it is no longer the case that in expectation
particular countries receive the randomly generated additional aid in a given year.
In this placebo test, the only reason why the quantity of wheat aid delivered
would be positively related to conflict in NQ’s baseline 2SLS specification would
be that countries that regularly experience conflict are also the countries that
regularly receive food aid (which is what we would expect if aid were targeted to
humanitarian crises) and the years of high wheat production happen to be years in
which conflict is elevated (which with only 36 years and strong trends could well
be spurious).
  Figure 6 shows the distribution of coefficient estimates generated by 1,000
randomizations of food aid allocations and then (re-)estimating the baseline 2SLS
model. If the true causal relationship between food aid allocations and conflict
were positive and the identification was otherwise unaffected by selection bias
and spurious time trends, the distribution of coefficients would shift left relative
to the NQ coefficient estimate–and if the share of countries in which aid causes
conflict is small relative to a large enough sample, would center around zero–
because the randomization of food aid allocations would attenuate the estimated
relationship between aid and conflict. Instead, we find the opposite. The
distribution of parameter estimates clearly shifts to the right of the NQ 2SLS
coefficient estimate. This implies that the identity of aid recipient countries and
the overall trends in global conflict prevalence, US wheat production, and total
food aid deliveries drive the estimated relationship, not inter-annual fluctuations
in food aid receipts by a given country. Indeed, to the extent that the IV does
contain some component of random aid allocation, this test also signals that the
true association between inter-annual variation in food aid receipts and conflict
must be negative since eliminating that source of variation causes an increase in
coefficient estimates.




                                           18
  A third class of placebo test corroborates the confounding due to non-parallel
nonlinear trends. If spurious trends explain the NQ results, then any variable that is
elevated in the 1980s and 1990s relative to the 1970s and 2000s would correlate
spuriously with the outcome variable in the regular food aid recipient group, even
when keeping NQ’s instrument as a control. The placebo test is whether we can
replicate NQ’s findings using an obviously spurious instrument that follows the
same inverted U pattern over the sample period, even while controlling for their
instrument, just so as to ensure that the spurious instrument is not serving as a
coarse proxy for the true causal mechanism represented by the instrument.
Rejection of the null hypothesis that the spurious instrument has no effect indicates
failure of this placebo test. As detailed in Appendix 3, instrumenting for food aid
deliveries using a time series of global audio cassette tape sales, a clearly spurious
instrument chosen for its inverse-U time series over this period, rather than US
wheat production, generates remarkably similar IV results to NQ’s. When we
include NQ’s instrument as a control the point estimate is effectively zero while the
coefficient estimate on the spurious IV term in the second stage is statistically
insignificantly different from NQ’s original point estimate and significantly
different from zero. This test corroborates the hypothesis that their original
estimates are picking up long-run trends rather than the inter-annual variation that
underpins their hypothesized causal mechanism.


III. Monte Carlo Evidence

  The preceding set of placebo tests call into question the causal interpretation NQ
give their IV estimates. To show that it is possible to replicate the NQ estimates
without the need to interpret their findings causally, we go one step further and
show that their results are in fact entirely consistent with a data generating process
in which either (i) food aid is statistically independent of conflict in recipient




                                          19
countries or (ii) food aid receipts prevent conflict, the exact opposite of NQ’s causal
claim.
  We use Monte Carlo simulations to show that NQ’s IV estimation method
generates parameter estimates similar to those NQ report, suggesting a positive,
causal effect of food aid on conflict, even when the true data generating process
(DGP) expressly has no such effect. The details of the constructed data generating
process and the simulation results are reported in Appendix 4.
  The takeaway message is powerful. We can replicate the NQ results even if US
food aid agencies prefer to send food aid to conflict-affected countries–as is the
stated policy of the US food aid program (but opposite to how NQ explain the sign
shift between their OLS and 2SLS estimates) – and food aid has no causal effect
on–or even prevents (not prolongs) – civil conflict in recipient countries. The key
drivers of this result are (i) greater long-run variation than short-run variation in the
exogenous component of the instrument (US wheat production) and the outcome
variable (conflict), combined with (ii) spurious correlation in those longer-run
trends, as we demonstrate in Appendix 2.
  This Monte Carlo exercise underscores that one needs to carefully explore the
longer-run time series patterns that might overwhelm the inter-annual variation
used to identify true causal effects, thereby generating spurious correlation in IV
panel data estimates. Because wheat production and conflict in regular aid
recipients both show pronounced, parallel trend patterns in the time series, but the
conflict incidence trend in irregular aid recipients does not parallel that of regular
aid recipients – and aid receipt is likely endogenous – NQ’s estimation strategy falls
prey to precisely this problem. This Monte Carlo result reinforces the conclusion
of the preceding placebo tests.
  NQ recognize the possibility that trends could confound their inference. The
robustness checks NQ use, however, fail to identify the problematic relationships
in the model that drive these results. In Appendix 4, we show theirs to be a low




                                            20
power test. This should serve as a cautionary tale to others attempting similar panel
data IV estimation strategies.


IV. Conclusions

  This paper calls into question NQ’s empirical findings that US food aid shipments
cause conflict in recipient countries. We focus on the NQ results because they have
been widely publicized and inform an intensely debated policy issue that is
especially timely as the future of US foreign assistance and food aid in particular
under the next Farm Bill are under serious scrutiny. If a policy commonly labeled
“humanitarian” actually causes violent conflict, that policy should be revisited. We
show through a series of placebo tests that their results appear to result from longer-
run, spurious trends and then use Monte Carlo simulation to demonstrate that their
results could actually arise from a data generating process in which food aid is
independent of or even reduces conflict, contrary to their core claims that it
prolongs and thereby increases the incidence of conflict.
  The broader methodological point, however, is that a panel data IV estimation
strategy that has become popular among researchers may be subject to heretofore
unrecognized inferential errors. An instrumental variable constructed as the
interaction of two variables, one that plausibly meets the exclusion restriction but
has limited time series variation, and another that has greater cross-sectional
variation in the sample but may be endogenous generates a continuous DID
estimator that is subject to the same parallel trends assumption as any other DID
estimator. In the presence of nonlinear non-parallel trends, standard fixed effects
controls may not suffice to isolate the exogenous inter-annual variability that is
intended to identify the causal effect of interest. Much like Bazzi and Clemens
(2013), we offer a caution about instrument validity and strength in panel data IV
estimation, and like Bertrand et al. (2004), we offer a caution about inference based
on DID methods.



                                           21
  The results reported by NQ have also been disputed by USAID (2014), who
report on robustness of the NQ strategy to controlling for other forms of non-food
aid external support for actors in civil conflicts including use of external military
bases and economic support for rebels. USAID suggests that when these variables
are included as controls, the statistical significance of food aid disappears.
Unfortunately, the USAID results are not directly comparable to the NQ strategy
for two reasons. First, external support to combatants only occurs by definition
when a conflict exists. Food aid, on the other hand is sent to both countries that are
experiencing conflict and those that are not, so that the NQ dataset can leverage
information from countries that are not actively experiencing conflict. Second, the
external aid variable is not available for the earliest years of NQ’s dataset. If NQ
identify a causal effect that is strongest in the early period, the USAID strategy
would miss the effect from those years. USAID argues that the NQ results are
fragile with regard to these robustness checks, but they are not able to fully explain
why the NQ strategy identifies an effect of aid on conflict. The threat to
identification we outline can explain both why NQ found an effect and why USAID
did not find an effect in their robustness checks. In addition to explaining why the
effects appear in the NQ data, our approach provides a template of checks that can
be used to assess the validity of similar approaches.
  The best remedies for this prospective confounding are three. First, prudence
dictates acknowledging that one can only confidently identify associations, not
causal effects, as Peri (2012) does using this method. Second, try to identify
credible instruments also for the endogenous exposure variable, following Dube
and Vargas (2013). Third, carefully explore the patterns in the time series under
study. For example, Hanna and Oliva (2015) use the timing of the closing of a
refinery (which is plausibly exogenous but has limited variation) interacted with
the (endogenous) location of worker residence relative to the facility to identify the
effect of pollution exposure on labor supply. They present graphically the trends in




                                          22
outcomes, which allows the reader to visually assess whether pre-existing trends
are likely to create spurious correlation to drive their results, a practice we applaud.
  We recommend that authors using panel data IV strategies similar to NQ
explicitly investigate and report on trends in their instruments and outcome
variables to assess whether non-parallel trends could drive spurious results. The
simple randomization inference exercise we introduce, randomly resampling
without replacement the variable that generates the identifying source of variation,
while holding constant the trends meant to be controlled by fixed effects, may offer
a useful placebo test of similar identification strategies as a means to test whether
spurious trends rather than exogenous inter-annual variation are the true source of
statistical identification in the panel data.




                                            23
REFERENCES

Barrett, Christopher B. (1998). “Food Aid: Is It Development Assistance, Trade
  Promotion, Both or Neither?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics
  80(3): 566-571.
Barrett, Christopher B. and Daniel G. Maxwell (2005). Food Aid After Fifty Years:
  Recasting Its Role. New York: Routledge.
Bazzi, Samuel and Michael A. Clemens (2013). “Blunt Instruments: Avoiding
  Common Pitfalls in Identifying the Causes of Economic Growth.” American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(2): 152-186.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2014). "How much
  should we trust differences-in-differences estimates?" Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 119(1): 249-275.
Chu, Chi-Yang, Daniel J. Henderson, and Le Wang (2016). “The Robust
  Relationship Between US Food Aid and Civil Conflict.” Journal of Applied
  Econometrics http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jae.2558.
Dube, Oeindrila, and Juan F. Vargas (2013). "Commodity price shocks and civil
  conflict: Evidence from Colombia." Review of Economic Studies 80(4): 1384-
  1421.
Farm Service Agency and National Agricultural Statistics Service, USDA (2006).
  “Appendix table 9--Wheat: Farm prices, support prices, and ending stocks,
  1955/56-2005/06.”            Accessed          14          May           2015.
  www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/DataFiles/
Hanna, Rema and Paulina Oliva (2015), “The Effect of Pollution on Labor Supply:
  Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Mexico City.” Journal of Public
  Economics 122 (1): 68–79.
Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian (2014). “US Food Aid and Civil Conflict.”
  American Economic Review 104(6): 1630-66.




                                          24
Peri, Giovanni (2012). “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from
  U.S. States.” Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1): 348–358.
USAID (2014). “(Re)Assessing The Relationship Between Food Aid and Armed
  Conflict.” USAID Technical Brief.
Willis, Brandon and Doug O’Brien. “Summary and Evolution of U.S. Farm Bill
  Commodity Titles.” National Agriculture Law Center. Accessed 26 January
  2015. http://nationalaglawcenter.org/farmbills/commodity/




                                        25
                                                                                  Figures




                                                                                         End of Year Gov. Wheat Stocks
                                                       A: Wheat                                                                                     B:stocks
     US Wheat Production

     40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                               0 200 400 600 800
                                                                                                (Million Bushels)
         (millon MT)




                               1970            1980          1990      2000      2010                                      1970             1980          1990      2000      2010
                                                             Year                                                                                         Year

                                                 Lowess             US wheat Prod.                                                                         Stocks



                                                         C: Aid                                                                                     D: Conflict
                                                                                         Proportion of Countries
                                                                                          Experiencing Conflict
     Wheat Aid Receipts

                          50 100 150




                                                                                                                   .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
        (1,000 MT)
                          0




                                       1970     1980         1990      2000      2010                                               1970     1980         1990      2000      2010
                                                             Year                                                                                         Year

                                              Least Regular            2nd Quartile                                                        Least Regular            2nd Quartile
                                              3rd Quartile             Most Regular                                                        3rd Quartile             Most Regular




                                                               FIGURE 1: TIME TRENDS IN KEY NQ VARIABLES
Notes: Panel A shows US wheat production over time. Panel B is US government holdings of wheat stocks over time; the
vertical lines represent Farm Bill years that substantially changed government wheat procurement. Panel C is the average
physical volume of US wheat food aid shipments within each quartile of regularity of aid receipts over time. Panel D is
proportion of conflict by each quartile of aid receipt regularity over time. The data for Panels A, C, and D are taken from the
NQ replication file. Data for panel B is taken from the Farm Service Agency and National Agricultural Statistics Service,
USDA (2006).




                                                                                        26
                                FIGURE 2: THE ESSENCE OF THE NUNN AND QIAN IV STRATEGY
Notes: The figure above replicates the core results from figures 3 and 4 in NQ. Because this paper focuses on the presence
of any type of conflict as the headline result from the NQ study, the y-axis is proportion of countries experiencing any type
of conflict rather than only intrastate conflicts as in the original NQ figures. The figures are qualitatively very similar if only
intrastate conflicts are used. All data are taken from the NQ replication file.




                                                                 27
FIGURE 3: LINEAR TRENDS IN CIVIL CONFLICT INCIDENCE FOR COUNTRIES WITH          ≥ 0.3	(REGULAR AID RECIPIENTS) BY
                                                  DECADE
     Notes: Data on conflict and US wheat production are taken from the NQ replication file.




                                                          28
FIGURE 4: LINEAR TRENDS IN CIVIL CONFLICT INCIDENCE FOR COUNTRIES WITH          < 0.3	(IRREGULAR AID RECIPIENTS) BY
                                                  DECADE
 Notes: Data on conflict and US wheat production are taken from the NQ replication file.




                                                          29
FIGURE 5: LINEAR TRENDS IN THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN AVERAGE CIVIL CONFLICT INCIDENCE FOR COUNTRIES WITH   ≥
             0.3	AND COUNTRIES WITH < 0.3 (REGULAR MINUS IRREGULAR AID RECIPIENTS) BY DECADE
  Notes: Data on conflict and US wheat production are taken from the NQ replication file.




                                                           30
          FIGURE 6: DISTRIBUTION OF 2SLS COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES USING RANDOMIZED FOOD AID ALLOCATIONS
Notes: The density plot depicts the distribution of 2SLS coefficient estimates using the set of baseline controls with 1,000
draws of randomized allocations of wheat aid food volumes among actual recipients in a particular year. The dark shaded
area indicates the bottom and top 5% of draws. The light shaded area shows the top and bottom 10%. The kernel density
function and percentiles are estimated on the full set of 1,000 iterations, but the plot trims the largest 20 and smallest 15
values of the distribution for scale. All data for the simulations are taken from the NQ replication file.




                                                              31
                                   APPENDICES


     Appendix 1: Further Details on US Farm Price Support and Food Aid
                                 Policy Evolution


  US commodity price stabilization and food aid policies experienced dramatic
changes during the period Nathan Nunn and Nancy Qian (2014, hereafter NQ)
study. We demonstrate that results of the NQ strategy do not correspond to the
periods in which the true policy regime was closest to the one they describe,
indicating that a source of variation other than US commodity price stabilization
and associated food aid policy is likely driving their results. Furthermore, the type
of policy regime they have in mind effectively ended in the mid-1990s, calling into
question the current policy relevance of their results given dramatic changes in the
way aid is distributed in recent decades.

     A. Changes in Commodity Price Support and Surplus Disposal Policies

  The mechanism NQ describe to generate the relationship between wheat
production and quantity of aid is the following: “The USDA accumulates wheat in
high production years as part of its price stabilization policies. The accumulated
wheat is stored and then shipped as food aid to poor countries.” The US long had a
policy of agricultural commodity price supports that indeed created a link between
aggregate annual production and government procurement of wheat that was
subsequently used as food aid; indeed, surplus disposal was an explicit policy
objective of the main US food aid program launched in 1954 (Barrett and Maxwell,
2005). However, US commodity price support and food aid procurement policies
changed dramatically during the period of the NQ data, and the true form of policy
has an important bearing on the interpretation of NQ’s IV strategy.




                                            32
   In practice, policies that link production to US government procurement were not
in place for the entire duration of the NQ study period. In the 1970s and early 1980s,
the start of the NQ time series, purchases took place through USDA’s system of
non-recourse loans, which were essentially loans that the USDA made to US
farmers through the USDA’s Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC).10 The USDA
would purchase a farmer’s grain production at a fixed rate if the market price fell
below that rate. In order to avoid having these large reserves putting downward
pressure on future grain prices, the USDA donated commodity stocks to countries
beyond its commercial marketshed as food aid through Section 416(b) of the
Agricultural Act of 1949, and subsequently through the food aid programs
authorized under Public Law 480 (PL480), passed in 1954, which became the
principal vehicle for US food aid shipments. Section 416(b) and PL480 shipments
driven by surplus disposal objectives thus became the primary connection between
food aid and civil conflict (Barrett and Maxwell, 2005; Schnepf, 2014). In this
system, USDA wheat purchases (i.e., grain forfeitures for nonpayment of non-
recourse commodity loans) were a function not only of the price, but also of the
underlying loan rates. However, the only period during the NQ study window when
loan rates fluctuated around market prices was a brief window between 1981 and
1986 (Westcott and Hoffman, 1999). This led government stocks of wheat to climb
sharply, with government stocks reaching 62% of average annual wheat production
1981-1987 (Wescott and Hoffman, 1999). This represented a peak for government
intervention in wheat markets, sparking changes to federal farm price support
programs in the mid-1980s.



   10
       A farmer could take out a non-recourse commodity loan proportionate to his or her harvested quantity of wheat at a
fixed unit rate with the grain held as collateral. Within a nine-month window, if the selling price of grain dipped below the
loan repayment rate, the farmer could forfeit the grain rather than repay the loan. Effectively, this guaranteed the farmer the
minimum of the rate fixed by CCC or the world price, and caused the CCC to purchase wheat when market prices were low.
Government procurement was therefore a function not only of production and prices, but also of the level at which CCC set
the loan repayment rate, a policy variable subject to revision in various Farm Bills.




                                                               33
  High levels of procurement during that period and the excessive stocks that
resulted led to market reforms that de-linked wheat production and US food aid
procurement, particularly following the Farm Bills in 1985 and 1990. Finally, the
1996 Farm Bill uncoupled the link between wheat production and government held
stocks for good (Willis and O’Brien, 2015). CCC stocks of wheat were fully
exhausted by 2006, and indeed, the Section 416(b) food aid program has been
inactive since 2007 because of the unavailability of CCC-owned grain stocks
(Schnepf, 2014). Since the 1990s, a majority of US food aid has been procured on
open market tenders by USDA (Barrett and Maxwell 2005).
  These differences in how NQ describe the policy and the historical realities of
commodity price support and food aid policy are important for the NQ
identification strategy. Given that federal law began to unravel the link between
wheat prices (and therefore wheat production) and government commodity
procurement for use in food aid programs starting with the 1985 Food Bill and
severed it in the 1996 Food Bill, if the mechanism NQ posit indeed drove their
findings, then the first stage of NQ’s IV strategy should be strongest prior to 1985
and non-existent after 1996. That turns out not to be the case. The post-1996
estimation is a sort of placebo test since the causal mechanism did not exist during
that sub-sample.
  Table A1 implements this simple robustness check by reproducing the first stage
of the NQ strategy dividing the sample into three periods corresponding to the
passage of the Farm Bills that successively decoupled US wheat production from
government held wheat stocks. As expected, the connection between wheat
production and food aid shipments is strongest prior to 1985 but statistically
insignificant. In the years 1985 to 1996 the effect turns negative and statistically
insignificant, then is inexplicably similar to the NQ baseline result in the post 1996
period but still not statistically significant. The fact that we see a relationship
between wheat production and wheat food aid shipments after the US formally




                                          34
ended the policy link that underpins NQ’s identification strategy suggests that the
first stage may be identifying spurious correlation not related to the claimed
exogenous mechanisms.

                B. Changing Modalities and Priorities of US Food Aid

  Given changes in procurement policies, the post-1996 relationship between
production and procurement is likely spurious, but it is possible that the NQ strategy
identifies a causal effect in the 1970-1985 period when US wheat production was
more closely linked to food aid shipments. But the question of whether the results
are driven by the period prior to 1985 is important, because US food aid policies
have changed dramatically over the period of NQ’s study in ways that are not taken
into account by the policy conclusions they offer based on their findings.
  Food aid from the US is procured and distributed under multiple policies, each
with its own legal authorization, priorities, and processes. Both historically and
today, the bulk of food aid is distributed through PL480, which authorizes
procurement and distribution of aid by USDA, along with distribution of Title II of
PL480 by the US Agency for International Development (USAID) (Barrett and
Maxwell, 2005). But PL480 consists of several titles which describe very different
forms of aid.
  Aid distributed by USDA through Title I of PL480 provides concessional sales
of food aid directly to foreign governments. Recipient governments have
historically sold off the vast majority of Title I food aid, treating these more as
balance of payments transfers in kind than as food for direct distribution. Title I aid
constituted the majority of food aid in the early period of NQ’s study, accounting
for 63% of US international Food Assistance Outlays between 1970 and 1979
(Schnepf, 2014). But the role of this direct-to-government concessional aid




                                           35
declined precipitously over the period and no allocations at all have occurred under
Title I since 2006.
  In contrast to Title I the role of aid distributed through Title II of PL480 has
increased dramatically. Title II permits USAID to allocate aid in response to
humanitarian emergencies and non-emergency food insecurity as an outright grant.
Unlike Tittle I, the vast majority of Title II food aid shipments are directly
distributed to food consumers; today only the statutory minimum of 15% of Title
II non-emergency shipments are sold (‘monetized’ in food aid jargon). Title II aid
is delivered through non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and private voluntary
organizations (PVOs) like CARE or CRS or through intergovernmental
organizations like the United Nations’ World Food Programme (WFP) rather than
directly to country governments. Title II accounted for less than 40% of US
international food assistance outlays in 1970-1979, but accounts for 88% of food
assistance today (Schnepf, 2014). If food aid distributed to governments is more
likely to fuel conflict (either because it is easier to steal or because governments
use the food to feed their own troops or the proceeds of food aid sales to finance
military operations) then it might be reasonable to expect that food aid in the 1970s
would be more likely to fuel conflict than food aid in more recent periods. But this
does not imply that the food aid distribution system that prevails today would have
this effect.
  Table A2 reproduces NQ’s IV estimate of the relationship between food aid and
conflict, but splitting the sample by the same periods as in Table A1. Consistent
with the lack of a strong first stage relationship, we find no relationship between
aid and conflict in the period between the 1985 and 1996 Food Bills. As expected
given that the instrument is strongest in the pre-1985 period, the coefficients on aid
for this period are slightly bigger than those presented by NQ for the full sample.
In the post 1996 period, the coefficient is also very close to the one in the NQ paper.
The coefficient is not quite significant at standard levels, but given the smaller




                                           36
number of observations in that period, we cannot reject the null hypothesis of
equivalence of the coefficients prior to 1985 and following 1996. Strikingly, despite
the fact that food aid was administered very differently in the 2000s than in the
1970s, the coefficients for these two periods are nearly identical. Thus, one is left
with two possible conclusions. Either, the delivery mechanisms behind food aid is
irrelevant to the degree to which food aid translates into elevated conflict – which
seems unlikely – or the NQ IV strategy is picking up something other than a causal
effect of aid on conflict.

       C. Incompatibility of OLS Results with Stated Goals of Aid Agencies

  An additional indication of a problem with interpreting NQ’s results is their
implausible claim that the modest, statistically insignificant negative association
between food aid and conflict in their OLS estimates suffers significant negative
bias. The NQ explanation for that claim is the possibility that donors condition food
aid flows on characteristics correlated with low levels of conflict, i.e., that the US
actively seeks to avoid sending foreign aid to conflict-affected countries. This
explanation directly contradicts USAID’s Food for Peace program’s stated
objective “FFP provides emergency food assistance to those affected by conflict
and natural disasters and provides development food assistance to address the
underlying causes of hunger.” (USAID, 2015, emphasis added) In the NQ dataset,
less than 22% of countries experience conflict in the average year, and yet between
1975 and 2006, there were only 2 years when there were more countries receiving
food aid and not experiencing conflict than countries who were both receiving food
aid and experiencing conflict.
  As US food aid shifted from Title I lending to governments to Title II emergency
assistance through PVS/NGOs and WFP, food aid has grown increasingly
concentrated on populations dealing with conflict, contrary to the NQ hypothesis.




                                          37
If food aid deliveries intentionally directed toward countries that have conflict
rather than away from such countries, reconciling a positive IV coefficient with a
negative OLS coefficient becomes difficult. If humanitarian assistance during
conflict is a primary source of endogeneity, one would have expected the OLS
coefficient to be upward biased rather than downward as would be implied by NQ’s
reported effects.




                                        38
               TABLE A1: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INSTRUMENT AND FOOD AID SHIPMENTS BY FARM BILL ERA


                                               (1)               (2)               (3)                  (4)            (5)
                                             US wheat          US wheat          US wheat             US wheat       US wheat
                                          aid   (1,000      aid   (1,000      aid   (1,000         aid   (1,000   aid   (1,000
  VARIABLES                               MT)               MT)               MT)                  MT)            MT)
  Panel A: Pre-1985
                                               0.00416            0.00261          0.00262            0.00216         0.00256
  Baseline interaction instrument
                                              (0.00290)          (0.00181)        (0.00195)          (0.00148)       (0.00175)
  Observations                                  1,460              1,460            1,460              1,460           1,460
  R-squared                                    0.73574            0.73809          0.75020            0.75813         0.76167
  Panel B: 1985 to 1996
                                               -0.00043           -0.00211         -0.00261           -0.00192        -0.00218
  Baseline interaction instrument             (0.00132)          (0.00214)        (0.00274)          (0.00229)       (0.00246)
  Observations                                   1,384              1,384            1,384              1,384           1,384
  R-squared                                    0.60490             0.63565         0.65284            0.65952         0.66482
  Panel C: Post-1996
                                               0.00149            0.00039          0.00100            0.00165         0.00181
  Baseline interaction instrument             (0.00083)          (0.00076)        (0.00094)          (0.00107)       (0.00114)
  Observations                                  1,245              1,245            1,245              1,245           1,245
  R-squared                                    0.69145            0.69852          0.72413            0.73353         0.73564
  Controls (for all panels):
  Country FE                                     Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes
  Region-year FE                                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes
  US real per capita GDP x avg.
   prob. of any US food aid                      No                Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes
  US Democratic president x. avg.
   prob. of any US food aid                      No                Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes
  Oil price x avg. prob. of any US
   food aid                                      No                Yes               Yes                Yes             Yes
  Monthly recipient temperature
   and precipitation                             No                 No               Yes                Yes             Yes
  Monthly weather x avg. prob. Of
   any US food aid                               No                 No               Yes                Yes             Yes
  Avg. US military aid x year FE                 No                 No               No                 Yes             Yes
  Avg. US economic aid x year FE                 No                 No               No                 Yes             Yes
  Avg. recipient cereal imports x
   year FE                                       No                 No                No                No              Yes
  Avg. recipient cereal production x
  year FE                                        No                 No                No                No              Yes
Notes: An observation is a country and a year. The sample includes 125 non-OECD countries for the years 1971-1984 (panel A), 1985
to 1996 (Panel B), and 1997 to 2006 (Panel C). Coefficients are reported with standard errors clustered at the country level in
parentheses. Data are from the NQ replication file.




                                                            38
                                 TABLE A2: 2SLS ESTIMATES OF FOOD AID ON CONFLICT BY FARM BILL ERA

                                                               (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
                                                              Any               Any              Any              Any              Any
  VARIABLES                                                 Conflict          Conflict         Conflict         Conflict         Conflict
   Panel A: Pre-1985
  U.S. wheat aid (tonnes)
  - from FAO                                                 0.00218           0.00331          0.00327           0.00397          0.00357
                                                             (0.00182)        (0.00294)        (0.00291)         (0.00322)        (0.00286)
  Observations                                                 1,460            1,460            1,460             1,460            1,460
  R-squared                                                   0.43882          0.20773          0.25901           0.12822          0.24196
  KP F-Stat                                                    2.050            2.078            1.813             2.140            2.138
  Panel B: 1985 to 1996
  U.S. wheat aid                                              0.00097          -0.00140         -0.00162          -0.00415         -0.00386
  (tonnes) - from FAO                                        (0.00744)        (0.00241)        (0.00206)         (0.00465)        (0.00408)
  Observations                                                 1,384             1,384            1,384             1,384            1,384
  R-squared                                                   0.60715           0.63300          0.63867           0.34016          0.41052
  KP F-Stat                                                    0.106             0.968            0.901             0.700            0.790
  Panel C: Post-1996
  U.S. wheat aid                                              0.00457          0.01265          0.00567           0.00368          0.00281
  (tonnes) - from FAO                                        (0.00301)        (0.02416)        (0.00600)         (0.00322)        (0.00258)
  Observations                                                 1,245            1,245            1,245             1,245            1,245
  R-squared                                                   0.56814         -0.43313          0.52204           0.65228          0.69256
  KP F-Stat                                                    3.219            0.256            1.141             2.384            2.527
  Controls (for all panels):
  Country FE                                                    Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
  Region-year FE                                                Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
  US real per capita GDP x avg.
                                                                 No              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
   prob. of any US food aid
  US Democratic president x.
                                                                 No              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
   avg. prob. of any US food aid
  Oil price x avg. prob. of any US
                                                                 No              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
   food aid
  Monthly recipient temperature and
                                                                 No               No               Yes              Yes              Yes
   precipitation
  Monthly weather x avg.                                         No               No               Yes              Yes              Yes
   prob. Of any US food aid
  Avg. US military aid x year FE                                 No               No                 No             Yes              Yes
  Avg. US economic aid x year FE                                 No               No                 No             Yes              Yes
  Avg. recipient cereal imports x                                No               No                 No             No               Yes
   year FE
  Avg. recipient cereal
   production x year FE                                          No               No                 No             No               Yes

Notes: An observation is a country and a year. The sample includes 125 non-OECD countries for the years 1971-1984 (panel A), 1985
to 1996 (Panel B), and 1997 to 2006 (Panel C). Coefficients are reported with standard errors clustered at the country level in
parentheses. In these shorter panels, collinearities arising when adding country characteristics cause fixed effects for several countries to
be dropped, leading to the change in r-squared from column 4 to 5. Data are from the NQ replication file.




                                                                       39
             Appendix 2. Heterogeneous Time Trends in the Data

   We now explore the secular time trends in the data and potential sources of the
coincident time trends in wheat production, food aid shipments, and conflict. In
Appendix 4 we use these findings to assess whether the controls included by NQ
can address the bias in their estimation results. If the trends are unrelated and due
only to spurious association due to persistence in the evolution of both variables,
then one can eliminate the bias only by knowing the exact structure of the process
driving the system. The linear fixed effects controls NQ employ are not sufficient.
We also explore whether the controls can eliminate the bias if the trends in conflict
are attributable only to the influence of a known and measurable variable that
follows a trend over the period. Using the example of variation in sea surface
temperature associated with El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events, we show
through additional simulations that controlling for the confounding variable after
the manner of NQ will only eliminate the bias if the relationship between the
confounding variable and conflict follows very particular patterns.

                       A. Global Time Trends in Key Variables
  Figure 1, Panel A, shows US wheat production by year with a lowess plot
overlaid to show the underlying trend. Although there is substantial variation year
to year, a powerful nonlinear trend is also evident. US wheat production increased
rapidly between 1970 and the early 1980s. Wheat output then peaked in the middle
of the period, between 1981 and 1998, and then declined from the latter 1990s. A
pattern like this suggests that anything that was increasing in the 1970s, peaked
around 1990 and then declined, will be correlated with US wheat production,
whether spuriously or causally.
  Food aid flows follow a very similar pattern. Figure A1 shows the trend average
US wheat food aid flows by year.




                                          40
  That food aid to particular countries is persistent has been well established in the
literature (Barrett, 1998; Jayne et al, 2002; Barrett and Heisey, 2002). Figure A2
demonstrates this persistence for wheat aid in the particular years and countries of
the NQ dataset by showing the distribution of aid spells by length, where a “spell”
is defined as a continuous stretch of years in which a country receives aid in each
year and spells are separated by those where there was a conflict in the country in
the first year of the spell and those where the country was not in conflict when the
spell began. Once aid starts, the country is likely to continue receiving aid for many
subsequent years. This is especially true if there is a conflict in the country when
the spell starts. This highlights the fact that aid allocations are highly endogenous;
once aid starts flowing to a country, it is likely to continue, and this is especially
true in conflict situations.
  The degree of persistence has also changed over time as aid allocation priorities
have changed. Figure A3 shows the percentage of aid spells that last at least five
years by the year in which the spell started. Wheat aid was significantly more
persistent in the 1970s when most food aid flowed as (Title I PL480) annual
concessional exports to governments with established Title I programs. This
persistence lessened in the 1980s and 1990s as Title II grants to NGOs and WFP
began to replace Title I, catering to a different set of countries. The persistence grew
stronger again in the 2000s when USAID began concentrating non-emergency Title
II flows on just a few countries that routinely had emergency Title II flows for two
reasons: First, an aspiration that non-emergency might preempt some of the need
for emergency food aid flows, and, second, the administrative logistical advantages
in rapid emergency response that come from having non-emergency food aid
distribution pipelines in place and operational already when a disaster strikes or a
conflict erupts (Barrett and Maxwell, 2005).
  Figure A4 shows a lowess plot of conflict incidence over the period in Nunn and
Qian’s study. On average, the incidence of conflict followed a similar trend to




                                           41
wheat production, increasing in the early 1970s before peaking around 1990 and
declining for the rest of the period. Strikingly, the years in which the highest
proportion of countries experienced conflict seem to be the same as those in which
US wheat output was the highest and the years with the lowest wheat production
also had the lowest number of countries experiencing conflict. So, is this the causal
relation NQ claim or a spurious correlation? Given that NQ do not find any effect
on conflict onset, and that both aid and conflict are persistent, spurious correlation
seems the more likely explanation.

                      B. Differential Trends by Aid Recipients

  Trends in the conflict and wheat production variables are not problematic for
NQ’s strategy if they are unrelated to the propensity to receive aid, since trends that
are common to all countries will be absorbed by the region-year fixed effects. A
simple way to check whether the trends vary by aid propensity is to graph conflict
by quartiles of aid receipt regularity, as shown in Figure 1, panel D. The darkest
line shows the trend for the quarter of countries which received aid in the greatest
percentage of years in the dataset. The lightest shaded line represents the countries
which receive aid in the lowest percentage of years. The most regular aid recipients
show a much stronger trend in conflict prevalence over the period, a trend that is
strikingly similar to that of US wheat production. As a result, NQ’s instrument will
pick up variation in conflict driven by this trend.
  This does not differentiate trends by region, which is important, because Nunn
and Qian include interactions of the year dummies with dummies for six regions
used by the World Bank to group clusters of countries. If most of the difference in
conflict trends between regular and irregular aid recipient countries is driven by
differences in these regions, then NQ’s strategy would account for the differential
trends.




                                           42
  Figure A5 shows the trends in conflict separately for irregular and regular
recipients within the six regions, in order to assess whether the differences between
the conflict experience of regular and irregular recipients arises from differences
across or within regions.
  In all six regions, the trends between regular and irregular recipients are quite
different. With the exception of the Middle East and North Africa, all regions
display a strikingly similar pattern, wherein the highest propensity to conflict
occurs in the countries which are the most regular aid recipients and peaks around
the year 1990. This suggests that interacting the region dummies with the year fixed
effects will do a poor job of absorbing the trends, because the coefficient on the
interaction will be a combination of the two distinct trends in the regular and
irregular recipients.




                                          43
                                 60
          Average Recipient's Wheat Aid Shipment

                                 40       50
                         (Tonnes)
       10      20       30




                                                   1970        1980                 1990                2000        2010
                                                                                    Year


                                                          FIGURE A1: TIME TRENDS IN AVERAGE WHEAT AID
Notes: Y-axis is the mean quantity of wheat shipped to across recipient countries in a given year including zero values for
countries who did not receive aid. Dots show within year means, and the trend line is a lowess plot of wheat aid shipments
in tonnes on the year. Data are taken from the NQ replication file.




                                                                               44
                         FIGURE A2: LENGTH OF AID SPELLS IN YEARS BY INITIAL CONFLICT STATUS
    Notes: An aid spell is the number of uninterrupted years between observing a country receiving any wheat aid following
either a year with no wheat aid or the start of the dataset, and the first subsequent year in which that country does not receive
aid. The histogram shows the density of aid spells for countries not experiencing a conflict in the first year of the dataset.
The overlaid kernel density plot shows the density of all aid spells for countries that did have a conflict in in the starting
spell. Data are from the NQ replication file.




                                                                45
                                     FIGURE A3: STARTING YEARS OF LONG AID SPELLS
  Notes: Lowess plot of an indicator for whether an aid spell in a given year lasted ≥5 years by the starting year of the spell.
Data are from the NQ replication file.




                                                               46
                         .3
          Proportion of Countries in Conflict
       .15           .2            .25




                                                1970   1980                   1990               2000                      2010
                                                                              Year

                                                       Lowess conflict on year           Mean of conflict by year


                                                         FIGURE A4: TIME TRENDS IN CONFLICT
   Notes: The y-axis is the proportion of all countries experiencing a conflict in each year. Dots are the average of an indicator
for whether a country experiences conflict in a given year, the trend line shows the lowess plot of this variable over time.
Data are from the NQ replication file.




                                                                         47
     Proportion of Countries in Conflict




                                                                                           Proportion of Countries in Conflict




                                                                                                                                                                    Proportion of Countries in Conflict
                                                               East Asia & Pacific                                                    Europe & Central Asia                                               Latin America & Caribbean




                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                           0 .1 .2 .3 .4
                                           0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                                                                 .6
                                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                 0
                                                             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                                 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                       Year                                                                     Year                                                                 Year

                                                                 Low Aid      2nd Quart.                                                  Low Aid      2nd Quart.                                                  Low Aid      2nd Quart.
                                                                 3rd Quart.   High Aid                                                    3rd Quart.   High Aid                                                    3rd Quart.   High Aid
     Proportion of Countries in Conflict




                                                                                           Proportion of Countries in Conflict




                                                                                                                                                                    Proportion of Countries in Conflict
                                             Middle East & North Africa                                                                     South Asia                                                          Sub-Saharan Africa
            0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                                                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .1
                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                        1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                                      1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                                                 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                                                  Year                                                                          Year                                                                     Year

                                                                 Low Aid      2nd Quart.                                                  Low Aid      2nd Quart.                                                  Low Aid      2nd Quart.
                                                                 3rd Quart.   High Aid                                                    3rd Quart.   High Aid                                                    3rd Quart.   High Aid




  FIGURE A5: NONLINEAR TRENDS IN THE PROPORTION OF COUNTRIES EXPERIENCING CONFLICT BY REGULARITY OF AID
                                           RECEIPT AND REGION
   Notes: The y-axis is the proportion of all countries experiencing a conflict in each year. The trend line shows the lowess
plot of an indicator for whether a country is experiencing a conflict in a given year by year. “Low Aid” is the quartile of
countries receiving aid in the fewest proportion of years in the data. “High Aid” is the quartile of countries receiving aid in
the highest proportion of years in the data. Data are from the NQ replication file.




                                                                                                                                                48
                        Appendix 3. Spurious Instruments

  As the placebo tests based on randomizing food aid allocations demonstrate, what
really seems to drive the NQ findings is the fact that conflict incidence follows
nonlinear trends that are not parallel between irregular and regular recipients of aid.
US wheat production interacted with regularity of aid receipt from the US identifies
an effect of food aid on conflict because US wheat production, US food aid
shipments, and conflict in regular aid recipients follow a similar parallel trend that
is not shared by conflict incidence in irregular recipients. We therefore expected
that any variable that exhibited the same inverted U time series pattern – high in
the 1980s and 1990s, lower in the 1970s and 2000s – would “work” as an
instrument, no matter how spurious the association with food aid shipments. This
exercise illustrates the fragility of the NQ estimation method when identification
depends on differentiation between likely endogenous groups (regular and irregular
food aid recipients, in the present case) that exhibit heterogeneous trends in the time
series whose variation is used to identify the causal parameter of interest.
  To show that NQ’s IV approach identifies only spurious correlation and not a
causal effect, we replicate their IV strategy exactly, but replace wheat production
with the value of music cassette sales globally. The music cassette sales time series
data are taken from IFPI (2009). It is hard to imagine any plausible causal
mechanism by which an increase in global audio cassette tape sales would drive
increased US food aid shipments. In what follows, we demonstrate that using a data
series of global audio cassette sales in place of the US wheat production instrument
yields estimates of the relationship between food aid deliveries and conflict nearly
identical to those estimated by NQ. Furthermore, to show that the cassette sales
instrument is identifying only the spurious correlation of food aid shipments and
conflict in recipient countries rather than proxying for a causal effect of lagged US
wheat production, we also implement a second specification where we use cassette




                                           49
sales in the place of lagged US wheat production in the instrument and control for
lagged US wheat production.
  Specifically, we implement the following replication of NQ’s strategy:

(13)                      Cirt = βFirt + XirtΓ + ϕrt + ψir + νirt

(14)                  Firt = α(Zt-1 x    ) + XirtΓ + ϕrt + ψir + Εirt


where Zt is the value of global music cassette sales, which replaces lagged US wheat
production in the NQ estimation. Otherwise, the estimation is identical to NQ’s,
including the vector of controls Xirt and the inclusion of region-year and country
fixed effects ϕrt and ψir. The results are shown in Table A3. Panel D reports the first
stage relationship between global music cassette sales and food aid shipments. The
coefficient estimate on the interaction term suggests that an increase of $1 million
in audio cassette sales is associated with an increase in US wheat aid shipments to
regular aid recipients of 80 MT. This result is highly statistically significant, with a
Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic of 8.61 in NQ’s preferred baseline specification. These
results suggest that cassette tape sales are statistically significantly correlated with
aid to regular recipients and this variable satisfies weak instrument tests.
       Panel C of Table A3 reports the 2SLS coefficients. For the baseline
specification in Column 5, an additional 1,000MT in wheat aid is associated with
an increase in the incidence of conflict by .22 percentage points, remarkably similar
to – and not statistically significant different from – NQ’s coefficient of .30. The
coefficient estimate on wheat aid calculated by 2SLS using the cassette tapes
instrument is significant at the 10% level. Since music cassette sales clearly have
no causal impact on food aid volumes – much less that specifically allocated to
regular recipients of US food aid – this correlation only arises because of the
spurious correlation arising because of the nonlinear parallel trends among cassette




                                             50
sales, food aid, and conflict incidence in regular countries and the non-parallel
trends in conflict between regular and irregular recipients.
  It could be argued that the instrument based on cassette sales only identifies the
food aid effect in Table A3 because it is a close proxy for lagged US wheat
production, and wheat production has a causal effect on aid through the policy
mechanism NQ hypothesize. To test whether this explains the results in Table A3,
we re-replicate the NQ strategy with the cassette tape sales instrument, but now
include NQ’s instrument (lagged wheat production interacted with propensity to
receive aid) as a separate control.
  The results are shown in Table A4. Including lagged wheat production interacted
with propensity to receive food aid as a control does not qualitatively alter the
coefficients of interest. As shown in Panel D, cassette tape sales are still positively
and statistically significantly correlated with food aid allocations to regular aid
recipients. The coefficient estimate of wheat aid on any conflict estimated by 2SLS
and shown in Panel C is almost identical to when lagged wheat production was not
included as a control, and is statistically significant at the 10% level in all but one
column.
  The reason why an instrument based on cassette sales identifies an effect of aid
on conflict is shown in Figures A18 and A19, which show lowess plots of cassette
sales overlaid with conflict incidence by regularity of aid receipt and overlaid with
lagged US food aid. Cassette sales follow a very similar trend to both average food
aid allocations and conflict incidence among regular wheat aid recipients, but the
trend is not shared by conflict in irregular aid recipients, which causes the
instrument to identify a positive effect of wheat aid shipments on conflict. These
results suggest that a variable showing similar trends will identify a positive effect
of aid on conflict and that controlling for potential confounders such as region-year
fixed effects, country fixed effects, and even NQ’s proposed mechanism between




                                           51
the trends and food aid does not eliminate the problem. Given this problem it is
highly unlikely that NQ’s findings represent true causal effects.




                                          52
                                              TABLE A3: NQ SPECIFICATION WITH CASSETTE TAPES INSTRUMENT

                                                        Parsimonious specifications                              Baseline Specification
                                             Any           Any            Any                               Any
Dependent Variable (panels A, B, C):        Conflict      Conflict       Conflict      Any Conflict        Conflict      Intrastate     Interstate
                                              (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)            (7)
Panel A: OLS Estimates
U.S. wheat aid (1,000 MT)                   -0.00006     -0.00007       -0.00005         -0.00007          -0.00011       -0.00005       -0.00011
                                           (0.00018)     (0.00018)      (0.00017)        (0.00017)        (0.00017)      (0.00017)      (0.00004)

R-squared                                 0.5083          0.50846        0.51751          0.53352          0.54904        0.52336        0.38477

Panel B: Reduced form estimates (x 1,000)**
Cassette Tape Sales (Million USD)            0.23451      0.30509        0.28718          0.23429          0.18690        0.11036        -0.01709
 x avg. prob. of any US food aid            (0.08095)    (0.09193)      (0.09405)        (0.11322)        (0.11204)      (0.10821)      (0.03398)

R-squared                                   0.51847       0.52033        0.52820          0.53982          0.55435        0.52577        0.38194

Panel C: 2SLS Estimates                     0.00575       0.00370        0.00352          0.00294          0.00221        0.00131       -0.00020
U.S. wheat aid (1,000 MT)                  (0.00227)     (0.00172)      (0.00158)        (0.00135)        (0.00124)      (0.00111)      (0.00036)


Dependent variable (panel D):                                                           US wheat aid (1,000 MT)
Panel D. First-stage estimates
Cassette Tape Sales (Million USD)           0.04078       0.08249        0.08154          0.07977          0.08442        0.08442        0.08442
x avg. prob. of any US food aid            (0.01242)     (0.03276)      (0.03084)        (0.02474)        (0.02877)      (0.02877)      (0.02877)

KP F-Stat                                    10.77          6.34           6.99            10.40             8.61           8.61           8.61

Controls (for all panels):
Country FE                                    Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
Region-year FE                                Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
US real per capita GDP x avg.                                                                                Yes
                                               No           Yes            Yes              Yes                             Yes            Yes
 Prob. of any US food aid
US Democratic president x.                                                                                   Yes
                                               No           Yes            Yes              Yes                             Yes            Yes
 avg. prob. of any US food aid
Oil price x avg. prob. of any US                                                                             Yes
                                               No           Yes            Yes              Yes                             Yes            Yes
 food aid
Monthly recipient temperature and                                                                            Yes
                                               No           No             Yes              Yes                             Yes            Yes
 Precipitation
Monthly weather x avg.                                                                                       Yes
                                               No           No             Yes              Yes                             Yes            Yes
 prob. Of any US food aid
Avg. US military aid x year FE                No            No              No              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
Avg. US economic aid x year FE                No            No              No              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
Avg. recipient cereal imports x
                                               No           No              No              No               Yes            Yes            Yes
 year FE
Avg. recipient cereal                                                                                        Yes
                                               No           No              No              No                              Yes            Yes
 production x year FE
Observations(for all panels):                3,896         3,896          3,896            3,896            3,896          3,896          3,896
Notes: An observation is a country and a year. The sample includes 125 non-OECD countries for the years 1973-1984. The first two years of
 the NQ dataset are excluded because cassette sales data were only available starting in 1973. Coefficients are reported with standard errors
clustered at the country level in parentheses. The controls included are indicated in the table by Y (yes) or N (no). Coefficients are reported
  with standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. **In panel B, the point estimates and standard errors are multiplied by
    1,000 for presentation purposes. Panel D reports Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics. Data are from the NQ replication file and International
                                                   Federation of the Phonographic Industry.




                                                                         53
                              TABLE A4: NQ SPECIFICATION WITH CASSETTE TAPES INSTRUMENT & LAGGED WHEAT PRODUCTION CONTROLS


                                                              Parsimonious specifications                                    Baseline Specification
                                                  Any            Any             Any                                    Any
Dependent Variable (panel B & C):                Conflict       Conflict        Conflict       Any Conflict            Conflict      Intrastate     Interstate
                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)                   (5)            (6)            (7)
Panel B: Reduced form estimates (x 1,000)**
Cassette Tape Sales (Million USD)            0.20495             0.26317         0.23956          0.17352              0.12655         0.04992        -0.01103
 x avg. prob. of any US food aid            (0.07843)           (0.08772)       (0.08986)        (0.10930)            (0.10847)       (0.10323)      (0.03444)
Lag US wheat production (1,000 MT)           0.00543             0.00557         0.00630          0.00817              0.00807         0.00809       -0.00081
 x avg. prob. of any US food aid            (0.00198)           (0.00188)       (0.00197)        (0.00247)            (0.00256)       (0.00247)      (0.00115)

R-squared                                        0.51937        0.52119          0.52925          0.54117              0.55559         0.52723        0.38202

Panel C: 2SLS Estimates
U.S. wheat aid (1,000 MT)                         0.00680        0.00394         0.00369          0.00280              0.00194         0.00077        -0.00017
                                                (0.00351)       (0.00207)       (0.00192)        (0.00169)            (0.00155)       (0.00140)      (0.00047)
Lag US wheat production (Million MT)             -0.00782       -0.00265        -0.00182          0.00146              0.00309         0.00612        -0.00038
 x avg. prob. of any US food aid                (0.00936)       (0.00383)       (0.00409)        (0.00477)            (0.00471)       (0.00401)      (0.00176)


Dependent variable (panel D):                                                                   US wheat aid (1,000 MT)
Panel D. First-stage estimates
Cassette Tape Sales (Million USD)                0.03016         0.06679         0.06491          0.06196              0.06522         0.06522        0.06522
x avg. prob. of any US food aid                 (0.01346)       (0.03033)       (0.02878)        (0.02384)            (0.02775)       (0.02775)      (0.02775)
Lag US wheat production (1,000 MT)               0.00195         0.00208         0.00220          0.00240              0.00257         0.00257        0.00257
 x avg. prob. of any US food aid                (0.00064)       (0.00056)       (0.00059)        (0.00065)            (0.00067)       (0.00067)      (0.00067)
KP F-Stat                                         5.017           4.849           5.087            6.758                5.522           5.522          5.522
Controls (for all panels):
Country FE                                         Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes
Region-year FE                                     Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes
US real per capita GDP x avg.
                                                    No             Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes
 Prob. of any US food aid
US Democratic president x.
                                                    No             Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes
 avg. prob. of any US food aid
Oil price x avg. prob. of any US
                                                    No             Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes
 food aid
Monthly recipient temperature and
                                                    No             No              Yes              Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes
 precipitation
Monthly weather x avg.
                                                     No             No             Yes               Yes                  Yes            Yes              Yes
 prob. Of any US food aid
Avg. US military aid x year FE                       No             No             No                Yes                  Yes            Yes              Yes
Avg. US economic aid x year FE                       No             No             No                Yes                  Yes            Yes              Yes
Avg. recipient cereal imports x
                                                     No             No             No                No                   Yes            Yes              Yes
 year FE
Avg. recipient cereal                                                                                                     Yes
                                                     No             No             No                No                                  Yes              Yes
 production x year FE
Observations(for all panels):                       3,896         3,896           3,896            3,896                 3,896          3,896            3,896
    Notes: An observation is a country and a year. The sample includes 125 non-OECD countries for the years 1973-1984. Coefficients are reported with
 standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. The controls included are indicated in the table by Y (yes) or N (no). Coefficients are reported
   with standard errors clustered at the country level in parentheses. The OLS Estimates in Panel A are not reported to save space. **In panel B, the point
 estimates and standard errors are multiplied by 1,000 for presentation purposes. Panel D reports first-stage Kleibergen-Paap F-statistics. Data are from the
                                         NQ replication file and International Federation of the Phonographic Industry.




                                                                                54
                                              1500




                                                                                                                                                                  .35
           Value of Global Music Cassette Sales




                                                                                                                              Proportion of Countries in Conflict
                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                  1000
                       (Million USD)




                                                                                                                                          .2     .25
                      500




                                                                                                                                .15
          0




                                                                                                                              .1
                                                     1970        1980                1990                2000          2010
                                                                                     Year

                                                                   Cassette Sales                             ̅ ≥.3)
                                                                                                     Any War (D
                                                                   Any War(D̅ <.3)


                                                            FIGURE A6: CASSETTE SALES AND INCIDENCE OF CONFLICT
Notes: Cassette sales data are in millions of USD and taken from IFPI (2009). Any war is a dummy variable for whether a country has
experienced civil conflict in that year taken from NQ’s dataset. is the proportion of years in which a country received any wheat aid
shipments from the US in the NQ replication file. The median value of is 0.3, so that the conflict trend is split by countries that are
above and below the median propensity to receive aid. All data come from the NQ replication file.




                                                                                     55
                                              1500




                                                                                                                               80
           Value of Global Music Cassette Sales




                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                Wheat Aid (1,000 MT)
                                  1000
                       (Million USD)




                                                                                                                                        40
                      500




                                                                                                                               20
          0




                                                                                                                               0
                                                     1970       1980               1990                2000             2010
                                                                                   Year

                                                               Cassette Sales                                  ̅ ≥.3)
                                                                                                    Wheat Aid (D
                                                                          ̅ <.3)
                                                               Wheat Aid (D


                                                            FIGURE A7: CASSETTE SALES AND FOOD AID SHIPMENTS
Notes: Cassette sales data are in millions of USD and taken from IFPI (2009). Wheat Aid is the quantity of wheat shipped as food aid
from the NQ replication file. is the proportion of years in which a country received any wheat food aid shipments from the US in the
NQ dataset. The median value of is .3, so that the conflict trend is split by countries that are above and below the median propensity
to receive aid.




                                                                                   56
 Appendix 4. A Monte Carlo Assessment of the Effect of Long Run Time Trends in
                        the Nunn and Qian Estimation Strategy

                   A. A simple model of the confounding effect of trends

  NQ rely on predicting changes in aid through changes in the total quantity of wheat
produced in the US. Since they argue that wheat production is mostly a function of climatic
changes, then variation in aid conditional on climate is plausibly exogenous. This is an
appealing argument if wheat production varies considerably from year to year so that wheat
production in adjacent years is unrelated, because it would be hard to explain fluctuations
in aid and conflict that vary from year to year in exactly the same way as wheat. As we
show below, however, wheat production and conflict in regular aid recipients both show
pronounced parallel trend patterns in the time series. Given that the trend in conflict
incidence in irregular aid recipients does not parallel the others, these trends can generate
spurious correlation that fully explains the NQ results, much like the violation of the
parallel trends assumption in DID estimation can lead to spurious results.
  We motivate the importance of these patterns by presenting a simple model that
highlights how persistent and parallel trends of wheat production and conflict can generate
patterns similar to those reported by NQ without any underlying causal effect of aid
producing or extending conflict. We then simulate coefficient estimates using the NQ
estimation strategy to show via Monte Carlo analysis that even when food aid flows do not
cause conflict in the true data generating process (DGP), the NQ estimation strategy yield
estimates spuriously suggesting a causal effect in the presence of these heterogeneous
trends among potentially endogenous groups.
  Suppose that wheat production follows the following pattern:

(3)                              Wheatit = f(t) + zt


  Where f(t) is a function of time and z is a random variable distributed N(0,1) that is
independently distributed across years. Define a random variable ft =f(t) for a fixed time
period that over the study period where the variance of ft over the studied period, σf, is
substantially larger than the variance of zt, σz. In such a framework, observations of wheat


                                              57
production that are temporally proximate are strongly related due to the underlying trend,
ft, while most of the idiosyncratic variation in wheat production occurs as relatively
moderate deviations around the mean. This describes a basic pattern of the data shown in
Figure 1 panel A, wherein wheat production shows strong trends.
  In our simple model conflict occurs whenever a latent variable representing conflict risk
exceeds a threshold, where conflict risk is also subject to trends as follows:

(4)                            Conflictit = 0 if θit < θ

(5)                   Conflictit = 1 if θit > θ		where θit = ai*vt


and ai is a random variable uniformly distributed between 0 and 1 and specific to countries
which captures each country’s vulnerability to outbreak of conflict induced by a globally
common shock vt.. We refer to ai as fragility as it represents a country’s specific risk to
factors that affect conflict. vt is the globally common shock to countries and consists of a
trending component and a temporally idiosyncratic component such that vt = g(t) + ut. As
with wheat production, ut ̴ N(0,1), and we consider a context where if we define gt as a
random variable defined by g(t) for a range of years, then within the study period σg is
substantially larger than σu. Modeling conflict this way matches a feature of the data
(shown below) that conflict prevalence is similar in adjacent periods and a large portion of
the time series variance is explained by long-term trends.
  The main worry in identifying the causal effect of aid on conflict is that aid may be
directed toward countries that experience additional conflict. To capture this concern, we
model aid, following stated US government policy, as determined by conflict and assess
whether NQ’s IV strategy removes the bias from this source. To capture the simultaneous
relationship:

(5)                         aidit = Max(0, Conflictit*μit)


where μit ̴ N(0,1). The function describing aid allocation has three features: 1. Countries
that are not experiencing conflict never receive aid, i.e., aid is only sent to countries



                                                58
experiencing conflict,11 2. Some countries that are experiencing conflict do not receive aid
for exogenous reasons on account of a low draw for uit (which can be thought of as features
of the current political relationship with the US, for example) and 3. The amount of aid
received conditional on aid receipt can be random and independent of a country’s risk of
conflict and can be determined by factors other than conflict, such as politics or ease of
transport, here modeled as a high draw for uit.
   To show how the time trends arising from the functions f(t) and g(t) can influence the
NQ results, we choose functional forms for these components that correspond
approximately to patterns observed in the data, and show through Monte Carlo simulations
that NQ’s results are reproducible without the need to assume any causal effect of aid on
conflict or any correlation beyond those above. Indeed, below we even introduce a negative
causal effect of aid on conflict – the opposite of what NQ claim to find – and show that we
can still replicate their findings.
   In the first simulations, we assume that g(t) = f(t) = t-(1/36)*t2 where t=1… 36. This form
forces both prevalence of conflict and wheat production to follow an inverted “U” shape
over a time horizon of 36 periods, the number of years in the dataset. The plots below
simulate one draw of a fabricated dataset with 126 countries and 36 years for this model to
show how the conflict and wheat production dynamics work. Figure A8 shows how the
secular trend g(t) and the country-specific conflict vulnerability combine to determine
conflict risk. Dark shaded dots are countries with high fragility, ai, while lighter shaded
dots are less fragile countries, those with a low ai. Within any year, some countries are at
greater risk of conflict than others because of their higher fragility, represented by the fact
that dark dots always appear higher than light dots on the vertical axis. Any dots above the
horizontal line are those whose conflict risk exceeds the threshold and are considered to be
in active conflict. Across years, the overall risk of conflict is increasing in early periods
and falling in later periods as shown by the shift of the dark dots up the vertical (conflict
risk) axis in the first half of the period and shift down in the second half. The consequence
of this DGP is that some (high fragility) countries nearly always experience conflict and


   11
       This is an oversimplification of the real aid process. In the NQ dataset, countries that are not experiencing conflict also receive
aid, but the percentage of countries receiving aid is substantially and statistically significantly higher in countries that are experiencing
conflict than in countries that are not (47.0% vs. 34.6%). We will soon relax this assumption to show that allowing components of aid
to be unrelated to conflict does not change the estimation results and can explain other features of the results reported by NQ.

                                                                      59
some low fragility ones are almost never in conflict, but because of the secular trend, the
countries with similar conflict risk tend to enter and exit the conflict state in the same years.
Once a country enters conflict, it tends to remain so until global conditions improve enough
to bring it back below the conflict threshold.
  Because we imposed an inverted “U” shaped trend for g(t) and f(t), conflict and wheat
both follow a pattern of starting and finishing the period at low levels and peak in the
middle of the period, as shown in Figure A9. This corresponds with observable patterns in
wheat production and conflict in the 36-year period in the NQ data. Because we have
chosen forms such that σg > σu and σf > σz, the variance in both conflict and wheat is
dominated by the trend rather than by year-on-year idiosyncratic variation around the trend,
as is true in the actual data.
  In this model, there is no true causal effect of aid on conflict in the DGP. If there is a
correlation between aid and conflict, it comes from aid agencies preferring to send food aid
to more conflict prone places. We now replicate NQ’s identification strategy by drawing
100 random samples of 36 years and 126 countries using the model above and then estimate
the relationship using 2SLS that mirrors NQ, with the following first and second stages:

(6)                       aidit = π wheatit-1*d + Ci + Tt + Xit

(7)                        conflictit = β     + Ci + Tt + Xit


where Ci are country fixed effects, Tt are year fixed effects, and Xit are country and year
level controls. Figure A10 shows the density of estimated β coefficients from the second
stage for two specifications. The “parsimonious controls” specification includes only time
and country fixed effects and the “lagged dependent variable” specification includes
conflict in period t-1 as a control. This corresponds to the estimated coefficient of aid on
conflict in the parsimonious specification of NQ’s IV strategy. The distribution of
estimated β’s never includes the true zero value; rather all the estimates of the relationship
between aid and conflict are positive. Clearly, including the year and time (region-year in
NQ) fixed effects or the control for lagged conflict does not prevent the IV coefficient from
picking the up the bias that arises from the endogenous determination of aid and conflict



                                                 60
and the confounding that arises from the strongly related time trends influencing both
prevalence of conflict and wheat production.
   This simple model suffices to generate a strictly positive estimated relationship between
aid and conflict even in the absence of a causal effect of aid on conflict. But a few additions
are necessary to describe other key features of the data. In particular, in the simple model,
the OLS relationship would always be positive, because in this model aid never flows to
places that never experience conflict.12
   In NQ’s analysis, the authors argue that the positive IV relationship is generated by a
causal effect of aid on conflict while a small negative and insignificant OLS coefficient
estimate is explained either by measurement error13 or a hypothesis that food aid programs
are on average effective at targeting aid away from places where conflict is prevalent or at
least away from places where aid causes conflict. The idea that USAID directs aid away
from places at risk of conflict directly contradicts the stated objective of the agency and the
patterns in the data, making this an unattractive candidate explanation.


                            B. An Expanded Model with Endogenous Time Trends
   Simple adjustments to our simulation model can generate the observed negative OLS
coefficient and an upwardly biased IV estimate without the need to assume a causal effect
of aid on conflict. In fact, the mechanism that generates the relationships in the extended
case is an assumption that aid prevents some conflict, but coincident trends dominate the
IV estimation and obscure the true relationship. If one keeps all the components of the
model but allows for some component of aid to be unrelated to conflict and allows for food
aid flows to reduce the risk of conflict, the negative OLS relationship found by NQ can be
generated by the model as well.
   To show this, we modify the aid and conflict dynamics as follows:

(8)                                  Aidit = Max(0, I(θit > θ	)*uit) + wit



   12
      In our simulations of this baseline model where aid and conflict have a joint inverse-“U” trend, the IV estimates are always upward
biased relative to OLS.
   13
      In order for measurement error in the conflict variable to drive the results, the measurement error would have to be systematic in
such a way as to actually flip the sign of the observed relationships. It is not clear what would generate such measurement error in this
context.

                                                                    61
                       Where wit       =          2*Max(0, ηit) with probability .5
                                                  0 with probability .5
                               ηit     ̴ N(0,1)


  The new aid function allows the possibility that not all food aid is determined by conflict.
Rather, food aid flows can vary on both the intensive and extensive margin in idiosyncratic
ways, for example because aid may be shipped as a response to natural disasters. The
component of aid that arises for these reasons is described by wit, which has two sources
of idiosyncratic variation. The first part, ηit, represents the part that is correlated with the
quantity of the food aid shipment, for example, the intensity of a natural disaster. The
second part is the exogenous reasons that a country with a positive draw of ηit will receive
any aid or not. This is modeled by the fact that a given country in a given year that has a
positive draw of ηit has a 50% chance of receiving aid and a 50% chance of not receiving
aid.
  In contrast to the earlier model, there are now two reasons that countries receive food
aid. The proportion of countries experiencing conflict will vary by year, but in expectation,
50% of the countries experiencing conflict will receive some aid because of their conflict
status. Aid for non-conflict reasons such as disasters does not systematically vary by time.
In expectation, 50% of countries will experience a disaster that warrants aid shipments, and
50% of the countries that experience such a shock receive aid.
  The second modification is that aid flows can prevent conflict, as advocates of food aid
hope. We now modify the model so that if a country receives aid for any reason, either
because of a high risk of conflict or because of a disaster, it will not experience conflict in
that year. Thus, all countries that would experience conflict (those with θit > θ	)	can receive
aid, but only some receive it. Any countries that receive aid for this reason or because of
the idiosyncratic component wt will not experience conflict in that year so that:

(8)                            Conflictit = 0 if Aidit>0


  These modifications to the model capture several plausible features of the true DGP:
        1. Countries that are at risk of conflict are likely to get aid for that reason.


                                                  62
       2. Countries also receive aid for idiosyncratic reasons that are not related to
           conflict, such as political considerations, natural disasters, etc.
       3. Aid can prevent conflict, for example by alleviating the conditions that cause
           people to fight or because delivery of US food aid is associated with actions
           and investments that control conflict, such as the deployment of peacekeeping
           troops.
  Modifying the model in this way and repeating the Monte Carlo simulation 100 times
leads to the distribution of OLS and IV coefficients shown in Figure A11.
  The OLS relationship from NQ’s specification is negative in all instances of the
simulation, just as they find, reflecting the fact that although countries that experience
conflict receive the most aid, they experience conflict only in the years when for exogenous
reasons they do not actually receive aid. The IV relationship is still positive due to the
parallel time trends problem. The negative OLS estimates capture the effects of aid flows
that arise both because of conflict risk and other unrelated sources. The instrument
misleadingly focuses on differences in aid that are endogenous to conflict for two reasons.
Countries that experience the most conflict are most likely to get aid and conflict and wheat
production are spuriously related over time.
  These results highlight the fact that a comparison of the OLS results with the IV results
in NQ’s analysis does not compel a conclusion that aid causes conflict. In fact, in the
expanded model above, the same parameter estimate patterns they find appear in a context
where aid actually prevents rather than causes conflict.


                              C. A Low Power Robustness Test
  NQ recognize that spurious time trends could be a threat to identification of causal
effects, so they propose and implement a robustness check to assess whether trends drive
their relationship between wheat production and food aid flows. In their primary
specification, they report the effect of their instrument on current food aid volumes. As a
robustness check, they compare this correlation to the estimated relationship between their
instrument and aid lagged by two periods. They argue that lagged aid could not be causally
related to current wheat production, but would show a similar relationship as their first
stage if spurious trends were behind the observed relationship. In their view, failing to find

                                               63
a correlation between current wheat production and past wheat aid provides suggestive
evidence that trends do not account for their first stage. They find a positive and statistically
significant effect of their instrument on current wheat aid, but a small negative and
statistically significant relationship between the instrument and past aid. They argue that
the lack of relationship between wheat and past aid supports their assertion that spurious
trends are not behind their results.
  But conflict and aid in both reality and in our Monte Carlo model are functions not only
of the time trends but also current period shocks. It is possible that while the IV estimates
a positive relationship in contemporaneous periods, it may not identify an effect on conflict
lagged by two periods. To test how compelling this robustness check is as a test of whether
secular trends could drive their result, we implement the test on our simulated dataset. If
this robustness check is convincing, we should find that the main IV specification and the
correlation of wheat production with past wheat food aid should show a similar
distribution. If, however, the coefficients on the instrument in separate regressions on
contemporaneous and lagged aid are dissimilar, the robustness check is not convincing.
  Figure A12 shows the density of estimated coefficients between the instrument and the
dependent variables in NQ’s preferred first stage (current aid) and the dependent variable
of the robustness check (past aid) for our expanded model.
  The coefficient on the instrument as a regressor for current aid is positive in all draws of
the simulation suggesting that wheat production is associated with additional wheat food
aid shipments to preferred recipients. The distribution of estimated coefficients from
regressing twice lagged aid on the instrument falls largely to the left of the first stage
coefficients, and is close to zero. These simulations show that this robustness check has
very low power to diagnose the trend problem and should not be taken as evidence that
trends do not underlie the results NQ present.



     D. Potential Sources of Coincident Trends in Wheat Production, Aid, and Conflict

  One of the fundamental assumptions for identifying a causal effect from an IV strategy
is that conditional on the controls, the instrument is related to the dependent variable of
interest only through its correlation with the endogenous regressor. Given the diversity of

                                                64
factors that could be related to both wheat production and conflict at a global scale – many
of them, such as geopolitical factors, difficult to measure – and the complex ways in which
the effect of a particular factor on conflict or aid may manifest, it is unlikely that we can
adequately control for all factors.
  It is nevertheless worth asking whether including linear controls for these variables, as
NQ do, solves the problem. We therefore explore how heterogeneous effects of variables
potentially driving the observed trends can undermine the effectiveness of the controls.
Given that there are alternative channels linking wheat production and conflict, the role of
controls in validating this assumption is crucial. We focus here on one source of potential
violation of the exclusion restriction and assess the role of model specification to
demonstrate that without a very clear understanding of exactly how conflict is determined,
it is difficult to use controls in a way that recovers the causal interpretation.
  An obvious candidate variable that jointly causes conflict and wheat production is
climatic variation. Fluctuations in rainfall or temperature are important determinants of
wheat production in the US (Barkley et al, 2013) and may be related to fluctuations globally
because the global climate is a closed system. Weather and rainfall are well known to be
related to conflict risk (Hsiang, Burke, Miguel, 2013). To address this concern, NQ include
controls for monthly mean temperature and precipitation.
  But this is not sufficient to preclude any partial relationship between residual weather
and conflict, as weather fluctuations can involve far more than mean temperature and
rainfall. For example, (Hsiang, Meng, and Cane, 2011) show that surface ocean
temperature variation associated with ENSO – a multi-year climate cycle in which surface
ocean temperatures oscillate between warm and cool periods (called El Niño and La Niña,
respectively) – is related to global conflict risk, even controlling for monthly temperature,
rainfall, and cyclonic windspeed. These oscillations cause global fluctuations in weather
that have recently been strongly linked with global wheat production (Iizumi et al, 2014),
macroeconomic performance (Cashin et al, 2014) and conflict (Hsiang, Meng, and Cane,
2011). In this example, we therefore use variation in sea surface temperatures associated
with the ENSO phenomenon.
  NQ’s claim that including average monthly precipitation and temperature in recipient
countries eliminates weather as a channel for bias rests on two important assumptions.

                                                65
First, average monthly precipitation and temperature must fully capture all the impacts of
weather. Despite the Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2011) result, we find that adding their
ENSO measure as an additional control does not qualitatively alter NQ’s core result.14
  The second and more problematic assumption is that the effects of weather events like
ENSO variation are constant within countries across years and across countries within
years. To demonstrate how non-constant effects of weather and climate variation can be
problematic, we simulate conflict risk as a product of a function of ENSO variation and
show that failing to account for heterogeneity in the relationship between climate and
conflict can generate a spuriously positive estimated influence of aid on conflict without
the need to assume that aid causes conflict.
  Figure A13 shows the trend in sea surface temperatures associated with El Niño over the
NQ study period.15 The trends are noisier than for conflict and wheat production, but share
the basic feature that temperatures were substantially lower in the 1970s and were highest
between 1980 and 1995.
  To show how heterogeneity of influence omitted variables can create concerns in the
approach from the NQ paper, we model two different versions of a channel linking El Niño
oscillations to conflict with an endogenous link between aid and conflict, and show that
adding linear controls only obviates endogeneity if the omitted variables bias arises in a
very particular form. Suppose that these sea surface temperature variations are the only
factor influencing conflict risk and that they are potentially correlated with wheat yields.
Further refining the DGP in our Monte Carlo model, suppose that conflict occurs whenever
a country exceeds a threshold level of latent conflict risk, and that conflict risk can take
either of two forms

(9)          Riskit = NINOt + c where c is constant across countries and over time

(10)              Riskit = f(i,t)*NINOt where f(i,t) is nonlinear in i and t




  14
       Details available on request.
  15
       The trend shown is the variable nino3_annual in Hsiang, Meng, and Cane (2014).

                                                     66
  We call the first version (Equation 9) the linear model of conflict risk and the second
(Equation 10) the heterogeneous model. We simulate a version of this model where f(i,t) =
(αt – βt2)(δi – γi2) where α, β, δ, and γ are fixed parameters, t=1…32 are years and i=1…126
represent an index identifying countries. Figures A14 and A15 show how simulated
conflict risk varies by year according to the function f(i,t) in Equation 10. In all countries,
conflict risk peaks in the middle of the period, consistent with the observed facts, but the
intensity of the trend varies by country. Similarly, conflict risk varies across countries in a
nonlinear way.
  Figures A14 and A15 show how the linear and heterogeneous models produce different
conflict risk. In both models, however, conflict risk is highest in the middle period, because
ENSO surface temperatures are highest in this period, but the heterogeneous model
(Equation 10, shown in Figure A16) differs in two regards. First, the tendency of conflict
risk to peak in the middle of the period is more pronounced. Second, for any given year,
conflict risk varies by country, so that country 126 is always at the highest risk of conflict
and country 1 is always at the lowest, though risk of conflict in country 60 is higher in 1985
than for country 1 in 1970.
  To demonstrate the importance of this kind heterogeneous response to conflict risk, we
simulate 100 draws of the system where

(11)       Conflictit = 1 if θit> θ̄ where θit = riskit + εit and εit ̴ U(0, 0.01)

(12)              Aidit = α * max(riskit - εit,0) where α is a constant


  The aid allocation again captures three stylized facts about modern food aid allocations.
First, additional aid is given to countries chronically at higher risk for conflict, as is clearly
true in the data. Second, surprise realizations of conflict risk may be associated with lower
allocations in the immediate year in which they occur because aid is more difficult to
mobilize and deliver. Third, aid allocations cannot be negative. We use the actual data for
realizations of wheat production and ENSO sea surface temperatures to simulate this
system. Figure A18 shows the distribution of coefficients of food aid and conflict using
NQ’s IV strategy and their OLS strategy for the heterogeneous model and including year
and country fixed effects (not ENSO) as controls. Clearly such a model is capable of

                                                  67
generating the effects shown by NQ where the OLS is modestly negative and the IV effect
is positive, yet food aid has no causal effect on conflict in the true DGP.
  Figure A19 demonstrates how different relationships between ENSO and conflict affect
the key parameter estimates. In the linear model, if the ENSO variable is not included as a
control, the estimated coefficient of aid on conflict is positive, even though we have
included year and country fixed effects and have assumed that aid is related to conflict only
because more aid is sent to places that are at higher risk for conflict. Including the ENSO
control does lead to a distribution of the coefficient that is centered around zero (the true
causal effect), but only in the linear model. Country and year fixed effects would also have
solved this problem, because across countries within a year, the influence of ENSO is
constant. In the heterogeneous model, adding the ENSO control removes some of the
upward bias, but not all of it, because the time trends in conflict differ exactly on the
dimension in which aid is endogenously allocated to countries by conflict experience in a
way that is not captured by constant linear control for ENSO.
  These simulations highlight two important facts:
  i.     Unless every pathway between wheat production and conflict is included as a
         control, the relationship between aid and conflict is likely to be biased even if the
         pathway only varies at the year or country level.

  ii.    Even if a confounding pathway can be measured and included as a control,
         including it as a linear control may not eliminate the bias, because heterogeneous
         time trends and country responses to those trends imply that differencing out the
         average effects will still leave nonlinear trends in residuals of the first stage that
         are potentially correlated with the error term of the reduced form.

  Given the substantial differences in conflict experience over time and across countries
(particularly across countries that do or do not regularly receive aid), it is hard to assure
that all sources of the heterogeneity have been controlled for appropriately, particularly
given that the sources of this heterogeneity are unknown.
  We illustrated this problem using ENSO data. But other examples exist of potential
threats to the exclusion restriction NQ assume. For example, policies that affect relative
food prices may influence both incentives to plant wheat in the US and conflict incidence

                                              68
worldwide. It is doubtful whether a simple dummy variable for whether the US President
is a Democrat—the control NQ use—can sufficiently capture all these threats to the validity
of their IV strategy.
  Another plausible threat to causal identification arises from the possible link from US
wheat production to conflict potential disruptions of local markets. NQ recognize that if
US wheat production affects global prices it could threaten their identification, but argue
that this is not a problem for two reasons. First, they argue that region specific time trends
likely absorb this variation. But given that conflict experience differs more across
regularity of aid recipients within regions than it does among regions, it does not seem that
regions are the right level at which to control for the trends. They further argue that US
wheat production is not closely linked to wheat prices because the US only accounted for
10.3% of global wheat production in 2000 and because “US price stabilization policies
have been quite effective in breaking the link between US wheat production and wheat
prices during our period of study” (p. 1638). But US wheat production accounts for a much
bigger share of the wheat traded globally, over 30 percent in 1990-1996 (Wescott and
Hoffman, 1999). And as Appendix 1 details, price stabilization policies were abandoned
prior to the end of the study period and the 1981-86 period when price stabilization had the
greatest effect was the period in which the estimated first and second stage effects
contradict the expected relationships.
  As with the ENSO effects, unless one knows the precise nature of the omitted
relationship, controlling for these mechanisms using conventional dummy variable
controls does not guarantee satisfaction of the core exclusion restriction on the instrument.
As a result, one should be skeptical of this panel data IV strategy.




                                              69
FIGURE A8: SIMULATED RISK OF CONFLICT OVER TIME BY FRAGILITY LEVEL IN THE MODEL




                                       70
FIGURE A9: SIMULATED WHEAT PRODUCTION AND AVERAGE CONFLICT RISK IN THE MODEL




                                     71
                 FIGURE A10: DISTRIBUTION OF SIMULATED COEFFICIENTS FOR IV SPECIFICATION OF SIMPLE MODEL
Notes: Coefficients are the coefficient on aid in the second stage of the IV specification. Parsimonious specification includes year and
country fixed effects in both the first and second stage. The lagged dependent variable specification includes only. Data are simulated
across 100 simulations of a dataset following the model with 126 countries and 30 years.




                                                                   72
  FIGURE A11: DISTRIBUTION OF SIMULATED COEFFICIENTS FOR IV SPECIFICATION AND OLS SPECIFICATION OF EXPANDED MODEL
Notes: Coefficients are the coefficient on aid in the second stage of the IV specification and the OLS specification. Parsimonious
specification includes year and country fixed effects in both the first and second stage. The lagged dependent variable specification
includes only. Data are simulated across 100 simulations of a dataset following the model with 126 countries and 30 years.




                                                                  73
FIGURE A12: DISTRIBUTION OF SIMULATED COEFFICIENTS FOR FIRST STAGE OF IV WITHOUT AND WITHOUT PAST FOOD AID CONTROLS
Notes: Coefficients are the coefficient on aid in the first stage of the IV specification. Both specifications include year and country fixed
effects. In the past robustness check model, the dependent variable is aid in period t-2 rather than aid in period t. Data are simulated
across 100 simulations of a dataset following the model with 126 countries and 30 years




                                                                      74
                               FIGURE A13: NONLINEAR TRENDS IN CONFLICT BY EL NINO INTENSITY
Notes: Local polynomial plot with 95% confidence interval of degrees of surface temperature variation of ocean in the El Nino Zone.
Reproduced from NINO3 variable in (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane, 2013).




                                                                 75
                     FIGURE A14: COEFFICIENT ON NINO IN MODEL SIMULATING RISK OF CONFLICT BY COUNTRY
Notes: Plots the coefficient of on NINO in the simulated conflict risk function for each country, where the coefficient is a quadratic
function of a country fixed effect. Country 1 has the lowest risk, and country 127 has the highest. This coefficient varies by year, with
the coefficients for 3 years shown in the figure. Data are simulated except for NINO3 variable taken from (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane,
2013).




              FIGURE A15: COEFFICIENTS ON EL NINO VARIABLE IN CONFLICT RISK FUNCTION BY YEAR AND COUNTRY
Notes: Plots the coefficient of on NINO in the simulated conflict risk function for each country, where the coefficient is a quadratic
function of year. Conflict risk is lowest in the starting and ending point, and highest in the middle. The shape of the quadratic functions
also depends on the country. Three countries, the highest risk, lowest risk, and moderate risk are shown. Data are simulated except for
NINO3 variable taken from (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane, 2013).



                                                                     76
                      FIGURE A16: TRENDS IN SIMULATED QUADRATIC RISK OF CONFLICT FROM EL NINO, BY COUNTRY AND YEAR
Notes: Plots the total simulated risk of conflict from the quadratic model. Dots show the risk in a given year, and lines show a lowess
plot of this risk on year. Data are simulated except for NINO3 variable taken from (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane, 2013).
                     2.5         2
           Simulated Conflict Risk
          .5     1   0 1.5




                                     1970                  1980                   1990                  2000                  2010
                                                                                  Year

                                                                Country 1                      Country 60
                                                                Country 126                    Trend 1
                                                                Trend 60                       Trend 126


                                     FIGURE A17: TRENDS IN SIMULATED LINEAR RISK OF CONFLICT FROM NINO, BY COUNTRY AND YEAR
Notes: Plots the total simulated risk of conflict from the linear model. Dots show the risk in a given year, and lines show a lowess plot
of this risk on year. Data are simulated except for NINO3 variable taken from (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane, 2013).




                                                                               77
                                                                                                                                  1500
                       400




                                                                                                                                  Density of OLS Coefficients
           Density of IV Coefficients
                               300




                                                                                                                                                   1000
                    200




                                                                                                                                     500
          100          0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                           0             .005            .01          .015               .02               .025
                                                                          Coefficient

                                                           IV Coefficients                   OLS Coefficients


                                        FIGURE A18: DISTRIBUTION OF ESTIMATED IV AND OLS COEFFICIENTS IN QUADRATIC MODEL
Notes: Kernel density plots of coefficients obtained from 100 simulations of the quadratic model estimating an IV and an OLS
specification of the effect of aid on conflict. Data are simulated except for NINO3 variable taken from (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane, 2013).




                                                                               78
                      800
          Density of IV Coefficients
          200        400
                      0         600




                                       -.01    0                      .01                         .02                        .03
                                                                   Coefficient

                                              IV-Lin, No Control                          IV-Lin, w/Control
                                              IV-Het, w/Control                           IV-Het, No Control


   FIGURE A19: COEFFICIENTS OF AID ON CONFLICT WITH RISK FROM EL NINO IN IV AND OLS FOR LINEAR AND NONLINEAR MODELS
Notes: Kernel density plots of coefficients obtained from 100 simulations of the IV and OLS specifications of the linear and quadratic
risk models with and without controls. The green line is the coefficient from the quadratic model not including a linear control for NINO
intensity, the blue line shows coefficients for the quadratic model including a linear control for NINO intensity, the black line is the
coefficients from the linear model not including a NINO control, and the red line shows the coefficients from the linear model with a
linear control for NINO. Data are simulated except for NINO3 variable taken from (Hsiang, Meng, and, Cane, 2013).




                                                                    79
                                  APPENDIX REFERENCES

Barrett, Christopher B. (1998) “Food Aid: Is It Development Assistance, Trade Promotion,
  Both, or Neither?” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 80(3): 566-571.
Barrett, Christopher B. and Kevin C. Heisey (2002). “How Effectively Does Multilateral
  Food Aid Respond to Fluctuating Needs?” Food Policy. 27(5-6): 477-491.
Barrett, Christopher B. and Daniel G. Maxwell (2005). Food Aid After Fifty Years:
  Recasting Its Role. New York: Routledge.
Barkley, Andrew, Jesse Tack, Lawton Lanier Nalley, Jasong Bergtold, Robert Bowdens,
  Allan Fritz (2013). “The Impact of Climate, Disease, and Wheat Breeding on Wheat
  Variety Yields in Kansas, 1985–2011.” Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment
  Station and Cooperative Extension Service. Bulletin 665.
Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel (2010). “Civil War.” Journal of Economic
  Literature. 41(1): 3-57.
Cashin, Paul, Kamiar Mohaddes, Maziar Raissi, and Mehdi Raissi (2014). “The
  Differential Effects of Oil Demand and Supply Shocks on the Global Economy.” Energy
  Economics, 44: 113-134.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, Edward Miguel (2013). “Quantifying the Influence
  of   Climate    on    Human       Conflict”     Science,    341,    1235367    (2013).DOI:
  10.1126/science.1235367
Hsiang, Solomon M. , Kyle C. Meng & Mark A. Cane (2011). “Civil conflicts are
  associated with the global climate” Nature: Letter. 476(25): 438-440.
Iizumi Toshichika, Jing-Jia Luo, Andrew J. Challinor, Gen Sakurai, Masayuki Yokozawa,
  Hirofumi Sakuma, Molly E. Brown, and Toshio Yamagata (2014). “Impacts of El Niño
  Southern    Oscillation    on    the   Global      Yields   of     Major   Crops.”   Nature
  Communications.5(3712).
International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. “Recording Industry in Numbers.”
  Accessed 26 Aug 2015. https://musicbusinessresearch.wordpress.com/2010/03/29/the-
  recession-in-the-music-industry-a-cause-analysis/.

                                                80
Jayne, Thomas S., John Strauss, Takashi Yamano, Daniel Molla (2002). “Targeting of
 Food Aid in Rural Ethiopia: Chronic Need or Inertia.” Journal of Development
 Economics, 68: 247-288.
Nunn, Nathan, and Nancy Qian (2014). “US Food Aid and Civil Conflict.” American
 Economic Review. 104(6): 1630-66.
Schnepf, Randy (2014). “International Food Aid Programs: Background and Issues.”
 Congressional Research Service.
USAID. “(Re)Assessing The Relationship Between Food Aid and Armed Conflict.”
 USAID Technical Brief. October 2014.
USAID. “Office of Food for Peace.” 5 March 2015. Accessed 15 May 2015.
 http://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/bureaus/bureau-democracy-conflict-
 and-humanitarian-assistance/office-food
United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. “Glossary.” 11
 March 2014. Accessed 26 January, 2015. http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/farm-
 economy/farm-commodity-policy/glossary.aspx
United States Department of Agriculture Farm Service Agency. “Fact Sheet: Commodity
 Credit    Corporation.”   November        1999.   Accessed     26   January,   2015.
 http://www.fsa.usda.gov/Internet/FSA_File/ccc_fact_sheet.pdf
Wescott, Paul C. and Linwood A. Hoffman (1999). “Price Determination for Corn and
 Wheat: The Role of Market Factors and Government Programs.” Market and Trade
 Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
 Technical Bulletin No. 1878.
Willis, Brandon and Doug O’Brien. “Summary and Evolution of U.S. Farm Bill
 Commodity Titles.” National Agriculture Law Center. Accessed 26 January 2015.
 http://nationalaglawcenter.org/farmbills/commodity/




                                           81
