                                                          WPS8006


 Policy Research Working Paper                           8006




 Assessing the Role of International Organizations
in the Development of the Social Enterprise Sector
                                    Angela Hoyos
                               Diego F. Angel-Urdinola




 Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
 March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8006


  Abstract
 This paper examines the contribution of international orga-                         international organizations’ contributions to developing sec-
 nizations to the development of the social enterprise sector                        tor-specific policies have been limited. Furthermore, many
 worldwide, and assesses the types of programs and policies                          programs that are supported by international organizations
 international organizations are using to promote this agenda                        remain largely unassessed. The paper proposes a set of policy
 globally. The results indicate that international organizations’                    recommendations directed primarily to international orga-
 support to the social enterprise sector has consisted primar-                       nizations and the public administration, to improve and
 ily of providing financial resources, notably grants. However,                      enhance the development of the social enterprise sector.




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at dangelurdinola@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
    Assessing the Role of International Organizations in the Development of the
                              Social Enterprise Sector 1



                  Angela Hoyos                                      Diego F. Angel-Urdinola
             Northwestern University                                      World Bank




JEL Classification: L30, L31, L33, F53, O35.


Keywords:                         Social enterprise, social innovation, international organizations,
                                  entrepreneurship, public-private partnerships

Corresponding Author:             Diego F. Angel-Urdinola (dangelurdinola@worldbank.org)


1
 This study was prepared with support from the Middle East and North Africa Multi-donor trust fund (MDTF)
(TF015739 – Promoting Social Entrepreneurship in MENA). The authors benefited from valuable comments, strategic
guidance, and support from Professors Dr. Anand Sharma and Stephen Glenn Harding, MPA (Northwestern
University).
I.        Introduction

        This paper examines the contributions of International Organizations (IOs) to the
development of the Social Enterprise (SE) ecosystem worldwide. In the context of this paper,
international organizations, from now on also referred as IOs, are defined as organizations
constituted primarily by member nations (sovereign states or a single state), have an international
scope and presence in many countries, and are responsible for administering official development
assistance (ODA). IOs could be multilateral2 or bilateral.3 The study constitutes the first attempt
to develop an inventory of interventions supported by IOs to promote the SE sector globally. Based
on the assessment of the inventory, the paper also proposes a policy framework, directed mainly
to IOs’ support of the sector, to improve and enhance its development, as well as increase public
awareness of its importance and potential influence in poverty reduction and social welfare
worldwide.
        SEs operate under many models of service delivery (NGOs, cooperatives, traditional start-
ups), financing, and regulatory frameworks (Darko and Quijano, 2015). Despite the differences,
however, there are common features in the concept of SE, such as limited distribution of profits
(unless beneficiaries are communities themselves), high social effect, and a social purpose as well
as a commercial purpose. In different countries, SEs may take the form of sustainable citizen sector
organizations, grassroots social initiatives with earned incomes, cooperatives, enterprises that
trade for a social purpose, enterprises with high social influence, businesses with a social mission,
local initiatives, and branches of global ones (Defourny and Nyssens, 2010 and Kerlin, 2006). SEs
are not governmental bodies (owned and run by the state), they are not charities (which rely merely
upon donations), and they are not private businesses (which operate solely to make profits).
Instead, they lie somewhere in the middle of traditional profit and non-profit models.
        While definitions vary, one clear fact is that such organizations are not necessarily a new
phenomenon. Indeed, social enterprises have a proven record in the provision of high-quality and
cost-effective health care services to low-income communities in a myriad of fields such as aging,
disability, HIV/AIDS, reproductive rights, mental health, post-trauma care, rehabilitation and
prevention (Drayton, 2006). Also, social enterprises foster alternative and innovative commercial
platforms for the provision of goods and services to the poor (Poon, 2011). SEs have also received
attention in recent years due primarily to their potential contribution to employment and social
welfare (Buckingham & Teasdale, 2013).
        Historically, IOs have supported the SE sector, especially during times of economic crisis.
IOs often operate under complex guidelines and procedures that may undermine their capacity to
respond to such crises efficiently and rapidly. To address these issues, IOs have opted to
collaborate with grassroots organizations at the local level that are more flexible and are able to
mobilize quickly and attend to the needs of the population in times of shocks (Borzaga and Galera,
2012 and Makoba, 2002). Indeed, during times of economic or social crisis (such as after a natural


2 Multilateral IOs are created as a consequence of international treaties between sovereign member states and/or other international
organizations responsible for distributing the countries’ official development assistance (ODA) such as the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), the World Bank (WB), the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the United Nations Social Impact Fund, and
the European Union (EU).
3
  Bilateral IOs are major development agencies created by a sovereign state with an international scope and presence responsible
for administering civilian foreign aid, such as the UK Department for International Development (DFID), the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID), and the Japan International Corporation Agency (JICA).

                                                                 2
disaster), contracting out the delivery of some services to grassroots organizations has become a
standard policy option (Bornstein and Davis, 2010).
         Furthermore, many SEs worldwide have emerged and evolved because of technical and
financial support from IOs, notably grants (World Bank, 2016). An example is the well-known
Grameen Bank in Bangladesh. Since its establishment, the Grameen Bank has financed its
activities with funds obtained at concessionary rates from external and domestic sources. To
expand its programs, international donors provided most of the bank’s funds in the form of grants
and low-interest loans. By the mid-1980s, donor agencies from other countries, including the
Norwegian Agency (NORAD), the Swedish Agency (SIDA), and the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), had donated more than 230 million Tk. (Bangladeshi Taka),
equivalent to approximately 3 million US dollars, to this institution (Schreiner, 2003), while the
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) provided most of Grameen’s initial
operating funds at a 3% interest rate (Khandker, Khalily & Khan, 1995). Indeed, the Bangladeshi
story, in which the Grameen Bank was an important protagonist, triggered IOs’ interest in
considering SEs important conduits of foreign aid. The Grameen Bank proved that it was possible
for SE models to reduce poverty levels on a large scale (Khandker & Koolwal, 2010).
         Notwithstanding, little systematic research has compiled information about IOs that
conduct programs to support the development of the SE sector (types of programs, the number of
beneficiaries, the size of investments, effects achieved, among others). As such, this study is a
pioneer in the field to attempt to provide an inventory of programs and policies supported by IOs
(multilateral and bilateral) to foster the development of the SE sector worldwide. Moreover, it is a
first comprehensive attempt to compile an inventory and systematic review of the programs
available that are financed by IOs. The review assesses the different mechanisms, interventions,
and platforms that these organizations use to promote the SE’s global agenda.
         The paper is structured as follows. Section II provides a description of the methodology
used to gather the program inventory. Section III presents the program inventory (main results)
and Section IV provides a detailed description of available evaluations of programs included in
the inventory. Section V summarizes the main conclusions of the study and proposes concrete
policy recommendations directed to IOs supporting the SE sector.

II.    Data and Methodology

        Data were collected based on an in-depth review of available programs financed by large,
mostly multilateral and bilateral international organizations (IOs) that support the social enterprise
agenda worldwide. The review takes stock of the different mechanisms, interventions, and
platforms that these IOs are using to promote the social enterprise’s global agenda offered by IOs
as of June 2016.
        The first step was to establish a database of multilateral and bilateral institutions actively
supporting the social enterprise sector around the world. International organizations (IOs), or
organizations composed primarily of sovereign states (referred to as member states) or of other
international organizations, were divided as multilateral and bilateral. Multilateral organizations
were defined as those IOs created as a consequence of international treaties between sovereign
member states and/or other international organizations responsible for distributing the countries’
Official Development Assistance (ODA), such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World
Bank (WB), the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the United Nations Social Impact
Fund, and the European Union (EU). Bilateral international organizations were defined as major

                                                  3
development agencies created by a sovereign state with an international scope and presence
responsible for administering civilian foreign aid such as UK Department of International
Development (DFID), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida), Austrian Development Agency (ADA),
and the Japan International Corporation Agency (JICA). 4
        The inventory includes information about programs sponsored by seven of the biggest
multilateral donors (World Bank, UNDP, ADB, IDB, AfDB, UN, and EU), and by the bilateral
development agencies with the largest ODA portfolios, including USAID (USA), JICA (Japan),
SADC (Switzerland), Sida (Sweden), DFAT (Australia), ADA (Austria) and DFIF (UK).
        Data collection ensured proper program representation across regions using the World
Bank’s geographical coding to specify regions: Africa, East Asia and the Pacific, Europe and
Central Asia (ECA), Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), the Middle East and North Africa
(MENA), South Asia, and North America (USA and Canada). Programs supported collectively or
in partnership with various multilateral or bilateral donors were also taken into consideration.
        First of all, a data collection template was designed to collect information for the database
in a systematic manner. The inventory's template collected the following information:
     Type of intervention. This described whether the program consisted of technical assistance
        (TA), grant subsidies, access to finance, or web-based platforms.
     Program objectives and approach. This described the program's development objective and
        the methodological approach for its design and implementation.
     Geographical area of intervention.
     Type of financing. This described whether the finance assistance was in the form of a grant
        or a loan.
     Target population. This variable included different target groups by demographic condition
        (youth, women), by level of education (university graduates, technicians, and low skilled
        workers), and by socio-economic conditions (such as poor individuals, physically disabled,
        ethnic minorities, and former prisoners).
     Legal structure of beneficiary social enterprises. This item described the legal status (either
        NGOs, cooperatives, or microenterprises) that social enterprises needed to have to be
        eligible for a program.
     Direct or indirect beneficiaries. Direct beneficiaries are the different social businesses or
        organizations receiving support. Indirect beneficiaries are the individuals who would
        benefit from the program implementations (workers, clients, communities, etc.).
     Sectors of intervention. Sectors included education, health, agriculture, water, energy,
        sanitation, financial services, information technology (IT), financial services, and housing.
     Information on program budget (in US$ per enterprise per year) and program duration (in
        months) is also collected.
     Geographical target. This has to do with whether a program has an urban or a rural focus.

       The majority of the variables (such as sector, target population, and type of financing) were
not mutually exclusive, as many programs included more than one type of service, financing, etc.
After the template was tested and adjusted (some adjustments were made after collecting

4 International organizations that are primarily private foundations were not included in the inventory. Many private foundations
support the social enterprise agenda and most of their funding comes from private sector contributions. By contrast, the scope of
this study is limited to government’s support of this global agenda, whereby resources that are allocated come directly or indirectly
from Official Development Assistance (ODA).

                                                                 4
information from a couple of available programs), a web-based search was undertaken, which
thoroughly combed through various existing lists and databases maintained by large donors and
international agencies operating in different regions. In most cases, a survey non-experimental
research method relying on questionnaires or interview protocols, directly contacting project
officers and program managers, for data collection, led to a more detailed review of available
secondary information and, to collect as much information as possible, some of which was not
available on the web. In many cases, interviews took place via e-mail exchange in order to collect
all of the information necessary to fill up items within the template.

III.         The Inventory

        This section provides a summary of the main descriptive statistics of the program
inventory. The inventory compiles information about 36 programs supported by IOs (56% by
bilateral and 44% by multilateral organizations) (see Annex 1). The main descriptive statistics are
as follows5 :

            Program Type: The great majority (83%) of all programs included in the inventory
             provided access to finance while about half provided some form of training as well as
             coaching and incubation services. Financial support provided by the programs was mainly
             in the form of grants (63%) while 20% provided loans. Only 17% of all programs provided
             both grants and loans (Figure 1).

                                           Figure 1: Type of programs supported
            Type of Services included in the program                                         Type of Financing Provided
100.0%                                                                            100.0%

    90.0%                            83.3%                                         90.0%

    80.0%                                                                          80.0%
    70.0%                                                                          70.0%   63%

    60.0%       55.5%                                                              60.0%
                                                            50.0%
    50.0%                                                                          50.0%
    40.0%                                                                          40.0%
    30.0%                                                                          30.0%                  20%
                                                                                                                          17%
    20.0%                                                                          20.0%
    10.0%                                                                          10.0%
     0.0%                                                                           0.0%
                Training        Access to finance   Coaching and incubation                Grant          Loan            Both




            Target Region: The majority of all programs in the inventory were implemented in the
             South Asia (45%) and Africa regions (42%); which are also the world regions with the
             highest poverty rates. About 17% of all programs were implemented in the East Asia and
             MENA regions; while the share of programs in high-middle income regions (notably ECA
             and LAC) was 14%. Only 6% of all programs in the inventory (2 programs only) were
             implemented in North America (US and Canada) (Figure 2).




5   Data collected are available upon request.

                                                                              5
               Figure 2: World Regions were programs are implemented


         North America (USA and Canada)          5.6%
                              South Asia                                           44.4%
             Middle East and North Africa                16.7%
    Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC)               13.9%
                 Europe and Central Asia                13.9%

                   East Asia and Pacific                 16.7%
                                   Africa                                      41.7%

                                            0%    10%    20%      30%      40%         50%




   Type of Social Enterprise Supported: The majority of all programs (72%) supported
    NGOs that traded and aimed at becoming sustainable, social enterprise start-ups (67%),
    and development of cooperatives (56%). About one-third of all programs (31%) supported
    micro-finance institutions (mainly by supplying capital) that provided small loans to self-
    employed individuals.

   Program cost and program size: Programs in the inventory display great dispersion in
    terms of the amounts invested by beneficiary enterprise per year. Nevertheless, the pattern
    that emerged from assessing the data is that over a third of all programs involve investments
    that are larger than US$0.5 million per enterprise per year (i.e., large programs) while
    another third of all programs involve micro-investments (less than US$20,000 per
    enterprise per year). The remaining one-third of the programs lies somewhere in the middle
    (Figure 3). In terms of program enterprise supported, a majority of programs (41%) tend
    to support less than 10 enterprises; notably the ones that involve large investments per
    enterprise. On the other hand, programs that tend to benefit a larger number of enterprises
    tend to be associated with lower investments per enterprise.

   Program Evaluation: During data collection, particular importance was given to
    identifying if programs in the inventory disposed of a program evaluation and, if yes, assess
    the evaluation type and the availability of the results to the grand public. Here, it is worth
    mentioning that over 70% of all programs in the inventory are still ongoing. As such, their
    evaluations (albeit planned in some cases) have not been finalized. Taking this into
    consideration, we noted that almost half of all programs included in this inventory (47%)
    did not have any type of program evaluation, 25% conducted a quantitative valuation, 25%
    conducted a qualitative evaluation. Only one program in the sample has conducted a
    randomized impact evaluation (to assess program impacts on SEs and their beneficiaries).




                                                 6
                                  Figure 3: Program cost and program size

        Program cost (US$ per entreprise / year)                      Program Size: Number of Entreprise Supported
60.0%                                                         60.0%

50.0%                                                         50.0%
                                                                            48.3%
40.0%                                                         40.0%
                                                                                                 37.9%
                                                      35.7%
30.0%                                                         30.0%
        28.6%
20.0%                                                         20.0%


10.0%                         14.3%                           10.0%                                                   13.8%
                  10.7%                   10.7%

 0.0%                                                          0.0%
        <= 20K   21K - 50K   51K-200K   201K - 500K   >500K           0 - 10 entreprises   11 - 50 entreprises   > 50 entreprises




IV.     Program Evaluations

        This section provides a brief overview of the available evaluations and monitoring reports
assessing the impacts and outcomes of the different programs supported by IOs included in the
inventory. Information about the various program evaluations was generated from published and
unpublished reports available to the public. Unfortunately, as described before, only a few
programs have information about program outputs and impacts. This occurs, partly, because many
of the programs included in the inventory are ongoing, and their evaluations have not been yet
completed. As such, data availability limits the capacity to generalize results or to make robust
conclusions about the effectiveness of a particular program type. However, the information
collected served to identify patterns related to multiple achievements reached by different social
enterprises in terms of their capacity to outreach to populations that are traditionally not attended
by traditional public or private actors and in terms of their cost-effectiveness to deliver some social
services.

4.1.    The United States Agency for International Development (USAID)

       Social Entrepreneurship Accelerator at Duke (SEAD): The primary objective of this
program is to create an integrated global health social enterprise hub for diverse stakeholders
across the globe. The program supported a first cohort of 13 social entrepreneurs in 2012 as they
already presented successful models. Although the program will be completed in 2017, an early
evaluation demonstrated that enterprises supported by the program had developed successful
models that provide social services (contributing to the expansion of access and quality of health
services delivered to families in extreme poverty) in Sub-Saharan Africa. LifeNet, one of the social
enterprises evaluated, for example, had strengthened the capacity of local health care center
partners by building their medical and administrative capacities and by granting them access to
pharmaceutical and medical equipment. The evaluation report found that partner clinics saw a 72%
increase in the quality of patient care as proxied by a quantitative analysis. Northstar, another
social enterprise supported, developed a network of converted shipping container clinics placed
along Africa's transport corridors. The social enterprise currently serves over 215,000 people in 13

                                                              7
countries that were previously left out of the national health care system. Northstar had partnered
with over 70 public and private organizations including Chevron, Heineken, UPS, and others that
provide financing and technical support.

       Development Innovation Ventures Program DIV: This program brings together a diverse
set of partners to discover, test, and scale breakthrough innovations to solve development
challenges such as food security and nutrition, child/maternal mortality, access to water and
electricity, child literacy, financial inclusion, and human rights among others. The program opened
in 2014 and has already invested in 22 promising social enterprise ventures. While the program is
still ongoing, early evaluations suggest that social enterprises supported by the program have
managed to provide (mainly through the donation of chlorine dispensers) safe water to over three
million people in East Africa. These easy-to-use dispensers, located at widely accessible water
distribution points, are capable of preventing about 3.3 million cases of diarrhea and 3,200 child
deaths — at just 2% of the traditional health care cost. Another DIV grantee, Off-Grid Electric,
successfully raised $16 million in equity financing and an additional $7 million from the
International Finance Corporation in 2015. Off-Grid Electric is working with the Government of
Tanzania to bring affordable electricity to one million Tanzanian homes by 2017. Given these
promising results, in 2015, the Governments of the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Australia, and
the Omidyar Network, along with USAID, committed $200 million to expand this program.

4.2.   Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)

       Bangland webpage program: The program consists of a web platform to raise awareness
about social enterprise and, more specifically, to support Japanese social entrepreneurs that seek
to develop sustainable and inclusive business in Bangladesh. The platform supports Japanese
social entrepreneurs to connect with JICA's various stakeholders in Bangladesh such as the
government, research institutes, business associations, and NGOs. The platform collects and
disseminates information about social development and opportunities in the country. It also
provides services such as consultancy and information about access to finance to support Japanese
companies who want to develop social businesses targeting Bangladesh's base of the
pyramid (BOP). Evaluation results indicate that due to the platform, the concept of social
enterprise has gained popularity among Japanese companies and has led to some new initiatives
to develop products and services targeted to the BOP population (4 billion people worldwide).
However, the evaluation report does not provide information about how they measured such a gain
in popularity. The report also indicates that some Japanese enterprises started to trade with poor
farmers in Bangladesh and some new social enterprises (such as the Grameen Yukiguni Maitake)
were created to link small businesses to value chains.

       Water and Sanitation for Better Sustainability: The goal of the program was to conduct a
feasibility study that would support social businesses looking to improve water service delivery in
poor communities in Bangladesh. JICA would provide concessional finance to providers that
demonstrated a commercial presence in low-income areas and that had the capacity to scale up
services. The evaluation report indicated that the results of the program were mixed, and that
donors should continue to invest and develop the capacity of the private sector to deliver water
services to low-income communities. Results indicated that financing was not the only constraint
to service delivery and that key public stakeholders lacked monitoring and implementation

                                                8
capacity to develop public-private partnerships (PPPs) with private sector providers (including
national and local governments as well as water and sanitation utilities companies). According to
the report, water tariffs were not sufficient to ensure real financial sustainability and affordability
by the poorest of the poor. Also, private providers focused on attaining short-term outcomes due
to perverse incentives in the design of the programs. For example, donors would require an
implementing agency to construct 500 toilets serving 5,000 people in 2 years. That was easy
enough given the available program financing. However, neither the program nor the government
assured operational expenditures and maintenance, which undermined the sustainability and
durability of investments. The report concludes that calls for proposals should require applicants
to identify and support financially sustainable sanitation solutions instead of only building new
infrastructure.

4.3.   United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID)

       The Impact Fund Program: the program provides capital investment to social enterprises
that are otherwise unable to attract commercial investment and hence require early-stage capital
and technical support. The program is channeled through organizations that have a clear strategy
to invest in businesses that achieve positive impact on disadvantaged populations (producers
and/or workers). Two Fund Managers administered the DFID Impact Fund: Novastar Ventures
East Africa (Novastar) and Injaro Agriculture Capital Holdings (Injaro). In 2014, Novastar and
Injaro reached commitments of up to US$15 million each. Evaluation results indicate that the
Fund's portfolio was able to reach over 240,000 low-income beneficiaries in Africa and South
Asia. The Fund was also instrumental in catalyzing further investments from both private and
public investors. Several initiatives to support market building for impact investment in Sub-
Saharan Africa and South Asia were launched or scaled up as a result in 2015. These initiatives
were delivered by the Global Impact Investing Network (the GIIN) and included: (i) launching the
"Base of the Pyramid Basic Services Programming Track", which brings together investors who
are active or interested in financing access to basic services for underserved populations, and (ii)
further development of the Impact Base Platform, which seeks to provide a global online directory
of impact investing vehicles to connect impact investors. At the end of 2014, the database had
more than 1,700 subscribers (Asset Owners) and 329 contributors (Asset Managers). Nearly 40%
of subscribers in the platform indicated an interest in investing in Sub-Saharan Africa or South
Asia and piloting the fundraising and ESG (Environmental, Social & Corporate Governance)
modules of the Advancing Investment Management Skills (AIMS) Fund Manager training
program.

       The Business Innovation Facility (BIF). The main objective of the program is to support
the development of innovative business models (through a competitive call for proposals) that
make markets more inclusive and provide improved growth for poor and disadvantaged people.
To enhance knowledge and awareness among potential applicants, a practitioner hub was created.
Evaluation results indicate that during the years 2013 and 2014, more than 250 companies
participated in the awareness raising (with an average of 10–15 social entrepreneurs attending per
workshop/event). A total of 68 projects were selected and 46 projects involved individual TA
interventions. Of this total, 40 projects received financial support. As of late 2013, 32 of these 40
social enterprises (80%) were making positive progress (2 businesses were flourishing, 17 were
progressing well, and 13 were showing positive progress, albeit slow). The remaining eight

                                                  9
companies (20%) failed. The practitioner hub also displayed significant growth. By the end of
2013, the hub was reaching 6,000 unique visitors per month and had over 3,000 registered
members. Visitors to the Hub came from more than 200 different territories.

       Vietnam Business Challenge Fund. Somewhat similar to the BIF, the program's goal was
to develop innovative, inclusive business models (through a competitive call for proposals) that
deliver commercial benefits for the company and social impact for the low-income population.
Developmental benefits included creating jobs, increasing incomes, and improving access to basic
goods and services for poor communities. Evaluation results showed that 21 selected companies
demonstrated high potential to meet innovation, inclusion, and commercial viability while
targeting low-income households in Vietnam. By December 2015, supported companies had
created over 9,000 new jobs and had contributed to increase the incomes of more than 70,000
people. All beneficiary companies increased their profitability and market share. According to the
evaluation report, the success of the initiatives was explained by the fact that all business models
brought low-income individuals into the core business of the company as employees, producers,
distributors, and/or consumers.

       African Enterprise Challenge Fund (AECF). 6 The AECF awards grants and repayable
loans to companies with innovative business ideas in agriculture, agribusiness, renewable energy,
climate change and access to information and financial services. The maximum amount the AECF
awards to a single business idea is US$1.5 million, and the minimum is US$250,000. The goal is
to fund innovative and commercially sustainable business ideas that have the potential to impact
the incomes of rural households positively and to ensure that the funds have a catalytic effect by
leveraging private sector investment in different social enterprises. Program evaluation results
indicate that since the program began in 2008, and up to the end of 2014, 208 projects have been
supported across 23 countries (49% in East Africa, 26% in Southern Africa, 11% Western Africa,
9% in Northern Africa, and 3% in Central Africa). Five projects are being delivered across more
than one country. In Sub-Saharan Africa only, selected projects have benefited over 7 million rural
people in 2014 alone. In December 2014, additional financing of US$401 million to beneficiary
projects has been committed by the private sector. An in-depth analysis of 32 projects supported
by the AECF that are over three years old was conducted in 2014. Results showed that 56% of all
funded projects have had a positive growth rate in their revenue from their inception to date (20
out of 32 businesses). Successful business models were very diverse and included the provision of
financial services, agribusiness, food processing, farming, and inputs supply, suggesting that there
is no single sector or type of company on which AECF should focus and that diversity in the
portfolio is preferable. Between June 2008 and December 2012, supported firms created
approximately 3,750 new jobs. The gross revenues of participating firms in 2012 were US$100
million (about 2 million by firm, on average). Of this, AECF's contribution (net benefit) was
US$43.9 million, which was calculated by deducting baseline figures from US$100 million. The
number of households that benefited during the same period reached up to 485,000 with a total of
US$12.5 million paid out as wages. Results indicate that beneficiaries were mainly men (50% of
which were below 35 years of age).



6
 This program was supported by DFID in collaboration with the Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency (SIDA), and the Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade in Australia (DFAT).

                                                     10
       Community Led Infrastructure Finance Facility (CLIFF).7 The program supports the social
enterprise REALL, a social venture that simultaneously invests in Community Development
Enterprises working in the urban development sector and offers affordable access to financing to
low-income families for low-income housing and infrastructure projects in the Global South. The
purpose is to build self-reliant local enterprises capable of creating sustainable low-income
housing and infrastructure projects. Evaluation results indicate that between years 2010 and 2015,
beneficiary social enterprises supported the construction of low-income housing across 18
countries. In Kenya, NACHU, a local partner, became responsible for delivering more than half of
all the affordable housing stock in Nairobi. In Zimbabwe, ZINAHCO, a direct beneficiary of the
program, produced 60% of all affordable housing across the country in 2013. In Nepal,
LUMANTI, another direct beneficiary, built relationships with private financial institutions,
leveraging as much as 80% of the project costs from national banks in the form of investments. In
2014, through REALL, local social enterprises created new/upgraded housing for 170,000 people,
improved access to toilets for 277,500 indirect beneficiaries, improved access to water for 280,000
people, and secured land tenure for 1.9 million households.

4.4.    The Asian Development Bank (ADB)

       Regional Social Investment Exchange Initiative. This initiative aims at promoting growth
in the social enterprise sector by creating a social investment exchange, or a social stock exchange
(SSE). This instrument is a mechanism to link social enterprises (SEs) seeking capital with impact
investors wishing to generate both financial returns and a social impact with their investment. To
complement the initiative, the ADB provided Technical Assistance to bring promising SEs
together with impact investors through a web platform. Evaluation results indicated that the TA
component of the program was successful as it stimulated awareness within the ADB and around
the region about existing social enterprises and impact investors currently addressing poverty,
social challenges, and environmental threats in the region. The platform, also, established ADB as
an actor in the SE ecosystem, attracting interest from potential co-financers. Results indicated that
the TA also brought social enterprises and social impact investors together at various national and
regional forums, and indirectly contributed to the launching of a precursor (Impact Partners) to
develop a regional SSE. Program results indicated that that platform brought together several
practitioners and supporters of social entrepreneurship and impact investing in Bangkok, Mumbai,
and Singapore. Unfortunately, evaluation results do not specify the magnitude of the achieved
results (i.e. how much investment was attained, how many SEs benefited from the program, etc.).
Another important conclusion of the program evaluation report was that the social enterprise sector
of Asian countries remains at an early stage of development. Finally, evaluation results showed
that investors were willing to increase their involvement in impact investment over the next few
years. The vast majority of respondents favored the development of a social stock exchange, and
a large majority claimed they would trade on it.

              Microfinance for the Poorest. The primary objective of the grant was to support
Social Enterprises providing Micro Finance services to the poorest segments of the population.
Following the methodology used by BRAC in Bangladesh, the program assisted a selected group

7
 This program was supported by DFID in collaboration with the Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency (Sida).

                                                     11
of Micro Finance Institutions (MFI) that targeted rural people in Pakistan who had little income-
earning opportunities but who benefited from the existing safety nets program. The program
provided savings and lending products to the poorest segments of the population and well as
financial literacy training. A mobile banking pilot project was also completed to make financial
services available to the poorest, rural people using mobile phones. Available evaluation results
indicate that the project reached the poorest segments of the population and provided them (for the
first time) with some type of financial services. At least 15,000 clients (indirect beneficiaries)
benefited from mobile banking service units, and at least 2,000 clients participated in savings
pilots. At least 1,000 participants were trained for functional and financial literacy. Results
indicated that mobile banking had the potential to be implemented and scaled up. Three pilot tests
were implemented, completed and evaluated showing positive results in taking-up and in achieving
positive trends in savings rates for the poor. After all evaluation efforts are completed, the ADB
envisions continuing the support of social enterprises that prove to be successful. 8

       Developing Financial Cooperatives Project. The primary program goal was to improve
access and efficient provision of sustainable social enterprises providing microfinance services
that, simultaneously, enabled low-income individuals and households to smooth consumption,
manage risk, build assets and enhance their income-earning capacity. The program also aimed to
promote the development of a sustainable microfinance industry in the Philippines and to improve
the ability and performance of financial cooperatives (i.e. cooperative development authorities or
CDAs). The program invested heavily in training for cooperative staff. Additional training was
also provided to CDA regulators. Evaluation results showed that training sessions benefited over
600 cooperatives, 1,000 cooperative staff members, and 100 cooperative regulators by the end of
2008. Ten training sessions were conducted for CDA regulators by the end of 2009. Using a non-
experimental quantitative analysis showed that the regulatory capacity of CDA improved as a
result of the program, mainly by developing the agency’s management information system (to
better monitor cooperatives’ compliance). Due to the system, there was an increased rate of
cooperative compliance with higher CDA performance standard requirements. The results of the
training have not yet been assessed.

4.5.      The World Bank Group (WBG)

       Development Marketplace (DM): This program, in place since 1998, has provided start-up
capital (mainly grants) to over 1,200 social enterprises worldwide, especially in East Africa, the
Middle East, and South Asia. The primary objective is to provide advisory services and funding to
innovative SE models – through a competitive process. The program receives applications from a
broad range of social innovators and entrepreneurs. Applications go through rigorous, merit-based
scrutiny by panels of development experts from inside and outside the World Bank, who short-list
a group of finalists from a pool of applications. The finalists are then brought together at a face-
to-face Marketplace event to present their ideas to the public and participate in networking and
knowledge sharing events. At the same time, a jury comprised of corporate executives, investors

8
  The ADB expects to launch a more in-depth randomized impact evaluation of the programs (with treatment and control groups)
to assess the effects of the “financial literacy programs” on saving rates, frequency of deposits, the size of savings, and use of
savings: whether for consumption or income generation. For mobile banking, evaluation indicators will include the numbers of
savers and borrowers, the size of savings and loans, frequency of clients’ access to mobile banking services, and use of mobile
banking services.

                                                               12
and funders, development professionals, and other experts meets with the finalist teams and
collectively decides which projects merit DM funding. Traditionally, DM has been a worldwide
competition with a yearly thematic focus. In the future, DM competitions are expected to become
more country-focused (rather than thematic focus). While the program does not dispose of a formal
evaluation report, the program’s website features about 30 SEs supported by the program that are
currently trading, and are financially sustainable, and which are ready to scale-up or benefit from
additional private investment. The social enterprises that made their way to the top 20 of the 2013
India Development Marketplace went through extensive due diligence and evaluations for their
projects. Of the 20 selected enterprises in 2013, over 40% demonstrated to conduct indeed
innovative business models to support and empower women living in low-income states. Selected
enterprises proved to improve welfare outcomes of indirect beneficiaries (i.e. provided affordable
health care for families; increased earnings of participant households, improved the local
environment, etc.).

4.6.     African Development Bank (AfDB)9

      Souk At-Tanmia. The program Souk At-Tanmia (development marketplace) is a
coordination between various international organizations and implemented by the African
Development Bank (AfDB). It supports social enterprises in Tunisia providing loans, grants, and
technical assistance. The primary goal is to identify, fund, and coach innovative grassroots projects
that generate sustainable employment and distribute revenues within communities, especially in
the country's poorest regions. Projects are chosen based on profitability, feasibility, and
employment generation. The program was initiated in 2013. In 2014, the program was evaluated.
Results showed that, by the end of 2013, the program generated 437 new jobs. By the end of 2014,
the program created, additionally, 641 jobs. To date, the initiative has raised US $1.2 million,
which adds to the pool of in-kind contributions through various forms of support from partners
(coaching/mentoring, capacity-building seminars, web design). To stimulate the development of
small and medium-size social enterprises, projects eligible for loans used the seed money to secure
more funding from the banking sector. Of 71 projects funded, 42 were able to raise additional
funds from commercial banks; 63 projects operate in disadvantaged regions in Tunisia; 51% are
programs that support youth; 33 % support women; and 34% of indirect beneficiaries of the
program were unemployed.

4.7.     United Nations (UN - Global Compact Office)

       World Corporate Sustainability Initiative’s Network. This initiative is managed by the UN
Global Compact Office with the goal of facilitating business partnerships between social
enterprises, corporations, investors and other stakeholders to advance innovative business models
in emerging markets. The initiative undertakes a range of activities at the international and local
levels (from raising awareness, coordinating events, and promoting private investment). The UN
Global Compact Office offers social enterprises a webpage platform with three components:



9
 This program was conducted with support of the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID), U.S.
government (USAID), Danish government, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Development
Program, and International Labor Organization (ILO).

                                                         13
    1. The Social Enterprise Action Hub, which is an online meeting place, or web page platform,
       that helps social entrepreneurs, corporations, impact investors and policy makers to
       exchange information and engage in partnerships. This platform enables companies on the
       Social Enterprise Action Hub to apply for financing from accredited investors, institutions,
       and government agencies.
    2. The Collaboration Labs Connect, which links social enterprises and organizations of all
       sizes in interactive sessions. During the interactive sessions, stakeholders develop and
       refine solutions to current challenges, with the goal of deploying the business models
       developed.
    3. The Partnership in Action Research Groups. The goal of this component is to disseminate
       knowledge about corporate social enterprise partnership best practices through webinars.

        As of today, there are 156 countries with different global compact business participants
(25% of Fortune 500 companies are signatories). 18,000 firms in the network trade on 16 partner
Sustainable Stock Exchanges – a global sister initiative. 500 business schools have endorsed the
principles of responsible management education, also a global compact sister initiative. There are
US$45 trillion in assets under management, using the principles for responsible investment (a
global compact sister initiative). In 2015, there was a survey that evaluated the efficacy of the
program. 50% of survey respondents stated that the network has played a significant role in shaping
their company’s vision, and 60% reported that it has played a significant role in guiding their
sustainability outcomes and in motivating the company to take action towards broader goals. 17%
of large survey respondents demanded their suppliers to adhere to the global compact network.

4.8.   Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)

        The IDB has been managing the Social Entrepreneurship Program since 1985 covering the
Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) regions. Under the program, the IDB provides technical
assistance, loans, and grants to social enterprises that demonstrate innovative and sustainable
solutions to alleviate poverty and unemployment. Projects financed are, mainly, small rural
producers from marginalized communities. Projects funded are pilot initiatives that can be scaled
up, thus providing a demonstration effect in providing essential services to needy populations.
Under this program, the IDB provides, approximately, US$10 million annually to different projects
in 26 countries. The reimbursable (loan) component for each social enterprise is up to US$1
million. Moreover, the average loan size is approximately US$700,000. The repayment period for
these loans is up to 10 years, with a maximum grace period equivalent to the time of execution of
the project (between 36 and 42 months). The interest rate on the loans depends on the
characteristics of the project. The technical assistance component provides non-reimbursable funds
for strengthening the technical, operational, or administrative capacity of social enterprises. In
most cases, the maximum amount of funds for technical assistance in a project is US$250,000.
Since its inception, there have been 645 direct beneficiaries (social enterprises) and 625,000
indirect beneficiaries (consumers, workers, clients). The IDB carries out impact evaluations for
each project independently and regularly. Impact evaluations provide evidence of concrete
changes seen in project beneficiaries attributed to project activities. These evaluations produce
valuable insights and evidence to help expand, enhance or redirect their programs.




                                                14
V.     Conclusions and Policy Implications

         With a few exceptions, such as the WB and the IDB, IOs have only begun to support the
SE sector in recent years. The IOs’ support of the SE agenda focuses primarily on Southern Asia
and Sub-Saharan Africa, the world regions with the highest poverty rates. Support for the SE
agenda in the Middle East and North Africa, despite the fact that both are regions with great social
needs, has been limited. This might be because of the many cultural and regulatory factors that
restrict entry to civil organizations, religious aspects (most giving to the poor in this region is
centralized through religious giving and taxes), and a general lack of trust between the public
sector and NGOs. Nonetheless, the effectiveness, outcomes, and sustainability of programs
financed by IOs aiming to support the SE sector remain largely unassessed.
         The inventory shows that programs that support small SEs with micro-financing and start-
up capital (through grants) are the most common. These programs tend to be costly. Indeed, almost
half of the programs in the inventory supported investments surpassing US$200,000 per SE
annually. These high costs may undermine program scalability and coverage. In some cases, IOs’
support to the SE sector serves to attract private investments. Program evaluations available have
shown that financial aid provided by IOs served to test business models that traditional private
sector actors would be unlikely to fund. Once a business model was tested, its subsequent success
indicated that SEs were able to attract additional private funds that fostered their subsequent
development and growth.
         Programs that promote innovation and competition seemed to have higher levels of
achievement and benefit most from financial support. Evaluations available have shown that calls
for competitive proposals that award grants to the best projects based on their innovation and
sustainability, performed better than did programs that were designed to develop a particular pre-
identified sector, i.e., provision of potable water.
         Programs that promote awareness and information about the SE sector seem promising and
cost-effective. Given that the SE sector remains small and is novel in many economies, programs
in the inventory that supported awareness about the SE agenda and access to information (websites,
stock exchanges, etc.) seem propitious. An example is the UN Global Compact, a program that
facilitates business partnerships among SEs, corporations, investors, and other stakeholders to
advance innovative business models in emerging and frontier markets. The program evaluations
available have indicated that, in general, such platforms heighten interest among private sector
stakeholders, some of whom seem willing to invest. Further, web page platforms have proven to
be effective mechanisms to raise awareness about the SE sector. Results available have indicated
that, because of these web page platforms, the concept of SE has gained popularity among
companies and led to some new initiatives to develop products and services targeted to the poorest
segments of the population.
         IOs are not systematically supporting regulation or macro-level policies to promote the SE
sector. The inventory found no attempts on the part of IOs to either develop or advocate legal
reforms to improve the SE environment or to develop policies, such as tax/procurement policies,
to provide SEs with fiscal incentives or access to markets. Regulatory policies supporting the SE
sector permit governments to facilitate market processes and deal with market failures in a more
effective and efficient way while at the same time improving the spending of public money.
         In general, programs supported by IOs are evaluated poorly, and the effectiveness of
programs already completed remains short. Only a few evaluations available have measured the

                                                15
effect of these programs, on poverty and employment, for example, and most evaluations are based
on outputs, e.g., the number of enterprises supported. Further, the information provided in these
assessments is limited and non-scientific.

5.1.   Policy recommendations

       Based on the analysis conducted above, IOs (and policy administrators) could consider the
following policy directives when designing, scaling-up, and implementing policies and programs
to support the SE sector:

    a. Identify successful business models: Since SE is intrinsically a risky sector, IOs, in close
       collaboration with universities and think thanks, should identify which are the successful
       business models worldwide that are proven to address development challenges sustainably
       (such as micro-finance). Such business models can be tested, adopted, and adapted in
       different settings and countries. At the same time, IOs could continue to support and test
       different models of private-sector driven social innovations, and should collaborate with
       universities and business schools that are fostering social innovation labs. This approach is
       likely to reduce failure rates of social enterprise start-ups.

    b. Support access to finance: With appropriate financial strategies, SEs can access a larger
       pool of investment capital than has been available to them previously, and social businesses
       of all forms can generate financial returns that will make them attractive to the right
       investors. To do so, and to address the structural divide in funding of SEs, IOs can act as
       agents that close the financial-social return gap. For instance, IOs can play the role of equity
       holders, providing start-up/risk-capital and incubation services to social enterprises to
       make them more attractive to private investors that may be unwilling to invest in SE
       business models at an early stage. IOs should continue to facilitate the financing of SEs
       through a diverse portfolio of funding, including competitive funds to provide capital risk
       to innovative and sustainable social business models. Identifying promising beginnings,
       investing in their growth, developing them, and channeling an appropriate share of their
       financial and social returns could be achieved through various mechanisms like community
       investment schemes, crowd funding, impact investment tools, and new commercial
       platforms that deliver more capital into the system of proposed sustainable development
       goals.

    c. Promote information and awareness: IOs should continue to increase the public’s
       awareness about the sector, especially among private and public stakeholders. Such
       collaborations seem to be occurring and progressing but at a very slow pace. Awareness of
       the sector remains limited among citizens, decision makers, investors, and even
       researchers. An emphasis on its contribution and importance, together with success stories,
       could help to disseminate better the development potential of the sector. Within the last
       decade, there has been an increased interest in social investment’s potential to develop the
       SE sector. IOs can help develop awareness campaigns and take the lead in promoting the
       sector to channel private investment initiatives and mobilize resources designed to end
       extreme poverty. IOs also should invest more in research about the sector in different
       countries (providing state diagnostics about sector size, contribution to the GDP and jobs,

                                                  16
       and potential growth). As documented throughout the study, there is a general absence of
       data and information about the SE sector (size, social influence, and contribution to
       economic growth and poverty reduction). It is crucial to create a more systematic and
       scientific approach to evaluating SE programs. IOs could become key partners in building
       this body of knowledge in close collaboration with practitioners, academics, and think
       tanks.

   d. Support the development of regulation: IOs should encourage more policy dialogue to
      support the sector at the macro-level. For instance, evaluations available in Southern Asia
      have shown that governments in the region should reduce regulatory hindrances to small
      business activity and NGO financing, and improve access to “risk” capital. IOs can
      advocate changing these regulatory policies, as laws and rules pertaining to the sector could
      obstruct, rather than encourage, its development. IOs can serve as agents that support
      countries that might need to deregulate or consider modifying or creating new laws to
      provide incentives that advance the SE sector. IOs also could explore the feasibility of
      developing fiscal and procurement incentives targeted to SEs that foster their viability and
      development. For example, the legal frameworks in the UK and Vietnam give SEs access
      to market incentives (notably to public procurement). Such policies go hand in hand with
      certification so that participant SEs can demonstrate their social effects and social missions.
      In an attempt to improve the function of the market conditions for SEs, some countries
      have adopted certification programs as ways to identify, promote, and regulate SEs.

   e. Promote Certification: Certification can be a tool to evaluate whether or not SEs are
      advancing their missions and alleviating pressing needs. Through promoting certification
      programs for SEs, IOs can forge trust to provide the right incentives to “risk-averse”
      parties. They also could contribute to capacity building and auditing, as forging governance
      is a key aspect of attracting investment in the sector. IOs can also facilitate the creation of
      public-private-partnerships (PPPs) between the public sector and social enterprises for the
      delivery of some social services. These arrangements could help governments collaborate
      with the business and social sectors to provide better educational, health, employment, and
      welfare services to vulnerable populations, particularly at the local / grassroots level.

        Finally, IOs should consider systematic support of the SE sector, including a holistic
approach that removes obstacles, enables the environment, and increases awareness about the
industry’s potential. A mix of policies that enhances the overall investment climate, coupled with
higher levels of awareness about the social and economic potential of SEs, could become the
starting point of a vibrant new private sector that creates and develops the SE sector globally. The
new phase of the social enterprise movement seems to arise out of a pressing need. Governments
globally cannot alone deliver all social services to the poor; while social needs appear to keep
changing and increasing. The social sector, despite its limited size and capacity, is nowadays called
on to complement the state in providing essential services to the citizens. In such a climate,
carefully crafted social enterprises – being bottom-up or top-down – can provide practical solutions
regarding development, employment, inclusion and environmental change, and make a real
difference to the wellbeing of the population and the countries themselves.




                                                 17
REFERENCES

Bornstein, D., & Davis, S. (2010). Social Entrepreneurship: What Everyone Needs to Know. New
    York: Oxford University Press.
Borzaga, C., & Galera, G. (2012). The Concept and Practice of Social Enterprise. Lessons from
    the Italian Experience. International Review Of Social Research IRSR, 2(2), 85-102.
Buckingham, H., & Teasdale, S. (2013). Job Creation through the Social Economy and Social
    Entrepreneurship. Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
    (OECD).
Darko, E., & Quijano, T. (2015). A Review of Social Enterprise Activity in the Philippines. Ortigas
    Centre Pasig City, Philipines: British Council Philippines.
Defourny, J., & Nyssens, M. (2010). Conceptions of Social Enterprise and Social Entrepreneurship
    in Europe and the United States: Convergences and Divergences. Journal Of Social
    Entrepreneurship, 1(1), 32 - 53.
Drayton, W. (2006). Integrating social entrepreneurs into the "health for all" formula. Bulletin Of
    The World Health Organization, 84(8), 591-591.
Kerlin, J. (2006). Social Enterprise in the United States and Europe: Understanding and Learning
     from the Differences. Voluntas, 17(3), 246-262.
Khandker, S., & Koolwal, G. (2010). How Infrastructure and Financial Institutions Affect Rural
    Income and Poverty: Evidence from Bangladesh. Journal Of Development Studies, 46(6),
    1109-1137. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00220380903108330
Khandker, S., Khalily, M., & Khan, Z. (1995). Grameen Bank. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Makoba, J. (2002). Nongovernmental Organizations (NGOS) and Third World Development: An
    Alternative Approach to Development. Journal Of Third World Studies.
Poon, D. (2011). The Emergence and Development of Social Enterprise Sectors. Social Enterprise
    Journal (SIRE), 1(1).
Schreiner, M. (2003). The performance of subsidized microfinance organizations. Lewiston, NY:
     Edwin Mellen Press.
World Bank (2016). World Bank Development Marketplace. (2016). From
    http://wbi.worldbank.org/developmentmarketplace/ready-to-scale-project/summary/2798




                                                18
                          Annex 1: Programs Included in the Inventory

                                              Program Name
The Alliance for Social Entrepreneurship (USAID)
Social Entrepreneurial Accelerator at Duke (SEAD) - (USAID)
Priming the Pump Partnership (Echoing Green Global Fellows Program) - (USAID)
Development Innovation Venture (DVI) - (USAID)
Bangland (JICA)
One Village One Product (OVOP) in Malawi - (JICA)
Business Based Pro-Poor: Approach on Water and Sanitation for Better Sustainability (JICA)
Social Enterprises for Economic Development (SEED) - (DFID)
THE IMPACT PROGRAMME (DFID)
Business Innovation Facility (DFID)
SPRING: Assets to Adolescent Girls Initiative (DFID)
Vietnam Business: Challenge Fund (DFID)
Human Development Innovation Fund (HDIF) - (DFID)
Challenges and Opportunities for Employment of Marginalized Groups by Social Enterprises (SADC)
Public Private Development Partnership: Promoting Social Entrepreneurship in Latin America (SADC)
Global Innovation Fund (GIF) - (VARIOUS)
African Enterprise Challenge Fund (AECF) - (VARIOUS)
Community Led Infrastructure Finance Facility (CLIFF) - (VARIOUS)
The Energy and Environment Partnership (EEP) programme with Southern and East Africa (VARIOUS)
Regional Social Investment: Exchange Initiative (ADB)
Microfinance for the Poorest (ADB)
Developing Financial Cooperatives Project (ADB)
Impact Investment Exchange and Shujog (ADB)
India: Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Development Project (ADB)
Development Marketplace (DM) in India (WB)
Food Tech Solutions to Lower Malnutrition and Provide Rural Employment (WB)
Social Enterprise Development Program (SEDP)
Social Entrepreneurship Project in Morocco (WB)
Development Marketplace (DM) (WB and Various)
Social Entrepreneurship Program (IDB)
Market Based Solutions for the Base of the Pyramid (IDB)
Souk At-Tanmia (AfDB and Various)
United Nations Social Impact Fund (UNSIF) - (UN)
World Corporate Sustainability Initiative's Network (UN Global Compact) - (UN)
Supporting the Reintegration of Prisoner, Probationer and Ex-prisoner Women into a Law-abiding Life
(EU)
The Social Business Initiative (EU)




                                                19
