                                                    WPS8131


Policy Research Working Paper                      8131




                    Whose Power Gets Cut?
              Using High-Frequency Satellite Images
              to Measure Power Supply Irregularity

                                  Brian Min
                                Zachary O’Keeffe
                                  Fan Zhang




South Asia Region
Office of the Chief Economist
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8131


  Abstract
  In many parts of the developing world, access to electric-                        complete historical archive of sub-orbital Defense Meteo-
  ity is uneven and inconsistent, characterized by frequent                         rological Satellite Program’s Operational Linescan System
  and long hours of power outages. Many countries now                               (DMSP-OLS) nighttime imagery captured over South Asia
  engage in systematic load shedding because of persistent                          on every night since 1993. The analysis computes annual
  power shortages. When and where electricity is provided                           estimates of the Power Supply Irregularity index for all
  can have important impacts on welfare and growth. But                             600,000 villages in India from 1993 to 2013. The Power
  quantifying those impacts is difficult because utility-level                      Supply Irregularity index measures are consistent with
  data on power outages are rarely available and not always                         ground-based measures of power supply reliability from the
  reliable. This paper introduces a new method of tracking                          Indian Human Development Survey, and with feeder-level
  power outages from outer space. This measure identifies                           outage data from one of the largest utilities in India. The
  outage-prone areas by detecting excess fluctuations in light                      study’s methods open new opportunities to study the deter-
  outputs. To develop these measures, the study processed the                       minants of power outages as well as their impacts on welfare.




  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, South Asia Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at fzhang1@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Whose Power Gets Cut? Using High-Frequency Satellite Images to Measure
                         Power Supply Irregularity1

                                         Brian Min
                                   University of Michigan

                                     Zachary O’Keeffe
                                   University of Michigan

                                          Fan Zhang
                                          World Bank




Key words: Power outages, load shedding, nighttime lights, remote sensing,
DMSP, India



1 This paper is part of a broader analytical effort to assess the cost of power sector distortions
in South Asia conducted by Office of the Chief Economist of the South Asia Region. The authors
are grateful to Chris Elvidge, Kim Baugh, Yue Li and Virgilio Galdo for providing access to the
data. We thank Martin Rama and Kwawu Mensan Gaba for helpful comments on the
methodology of the study. Priyamvada Trivedi and Fatima Najeeb provided excellent
research assistance. Financial support from the Partnership for South Asia Trust Fund is
greatly appreciated.


                                                1
  I.   Introduction

Almost 1.2 billion people in the world live without electricity. A billion more only
have an unreliable and intermittent supply. Maintenance failures, transmission
congestion, and inadequate generation all contribute to frequent and long hours of
blackouts in the developing world. According to World Bank Enterprise Surveys,
firms in a third of developing countries experience at least 20 hours of power
outages in a typical month. The situation is even worse in South Asia, where
businesses report almost one outage a day, lasting on average 5.3 hours each.

Power outages impose sizable costs on households, firms, and the environment.
Lack of access to reliable electricity is a major barrier to economic advancement for
underserved populations (Samad and Zhang, 2016 and 2017). Unreliable power
supply also negatively affects firms’ productivity, resulting in lost output and
revenue (Reinikka and Svensson 2002; Alby, Dethier et al. 2011; Allcott, Collard-
Wexler et al. 2014, Andersen and Dalgaard, 2013, Grainger and Zhang, 2017a, b).
Blackouts also lead to environmental damages when households have to rely on
kerosene for lighting and businesses use diesel-based self-generators. Both
kerosene lamps and diesel generators are major sources of black carbon,
contributing to climate change and degraded air quality.

Although power outages have severe economic and environmental consequences,
tracking when and where power outages occur is often difficult. Data on load-
shedding are often not reported consistently and are always difficult to acquire.
Household surveys based on a Multi-Tier Framework developed by the World Bank
offer an alternative way to monitor quality of power supply. But household surveys
are costly to implement, representative at a highly-aggregated level, and only reflect
a snapshot in time due to limited frequency.

In this paper, we introduce a new method of using high-frequency satellite imagery
of nightly lights data to detect near real-time power outages at a highly
disaggregated level. This measure identifies outage-prone areas by detecting excess
fluctuations in light outputs. To develop this measure, we process the complete
historical archive of sub-orbital DMSP-OLS nighttime imagery captured over South
Asia on every night since 1993, including 5 terabytes of data encompassing some
30,000 visible band images. Our approach is a departure from prior research. Most
earlier analysis of nighttime lights data uses annual composite images which
describe the average brightness of a locality over a calendar year. While annual
composites provide a useful estimate of average brightness, they cannot be used to
assess volatility of brightness which indicates disruptions to power supply. To the




                                          2
best of our knowledge, our study is the first to explore nightly variation in light
output to detect the stability of electricity provision.

To illustrate the approach, we compute annual estimates of the Power Supply
Irregularity (PSI) index for all 600,000 villages in India from 1993 to 2013. We test
the validity of the computed PSI using ground-based measures of power supply
reliability from Indian Human Development Survey and feeder-level outage data
from Maharashtra’s largest utility. We find that PSI measures are significantly
positively correlated with the duration and frequency of outages reported in the
ground-truth data.

Our methods open new opportunities to study the determinants of power outages
as well as their impact on welfare. A key strength of our method is that it can be
applied to any specific location of interest using the same autonomously collected
data. Moreover, since the coefficient of variation is a normalized measure of
variability, values on the PSI index can be directly compared across regions. The
method also demonstrates the possibility of using near real-time satellite data to
monitor power outages and identify problem areas.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section II describes the significance of
power outages in the developing world. Section III presents the new approach to
measuring power supply reliability based upon an analysis of a time series of
nighttime satellite imagery. Section IV discusses ground-truth validation of our new
power supply irregularity index. Section V presents power outage estimates across
India using the new measure. Section VI concludes the paper.



 II.   Power Outages in the Developing World

For many in the developing world, access to electricity is uneven and inconsistent,
characterized by frequent and long hours of power outages. Many countries now
engage in planned load shedding because of a systemic shortage of supply relative
to rapidly increasing demand for electrical power. For example, the World Bank
reports that the average Nigerian firm suffers 25 power outages in a typical month,
with more than one outage a day reported in many other countries like Albania,
Kosovo, Nepal, and the Republic of Yemen. In Bangladesh, firms reported over 100
power outages a month (World Bank Enterprise Surveys).

In India, firms report almost one outage every other day, with an average duration
of 2 hours. The situation is almost certainly worse for Indian households. According
to the Indian Human Development Survey, 57% of electrified households reported


                                           3
at least 4 hours of power cuts per day. Moreover, in 2012 fewer homes benefited
from uninterrupted power supply than in 2005 (12% compared to 17%), suggesting
that outages are becoming more common, not less.

Blackouts can occur for many reasons. Electricity is sent from power generating
plants to a country’s users through the grid, an intricate network of wires inter-
connected by transformers and substations. Sometimes the faults are due to
downed wires or short circuits, as from a fallen tree during a storm. More commonly
in the developing world, when demand exceeds supply or the capacity of a portion
of the grid, outages are intentionally imposed to reduce loads and protect the
sensitive infrastructure of the grid.

Unlike many other services, electricity is a dynamic system that must be balanced in
real time. Every unit of electricity generated must be used at the very same moment.
There are no cost effective ways to store electricity, and if too much electricity is
generated without an accompanying load, the excess energy can lead to system
failure. Not only do wires heat up when placed under extreme loads, but
transformers, whose job it is to convert the very high voltages used in transmission
into a level more safely used by consumers, are placed under enormous stress.
When too much power is drawn, transformers and other critical equipment can
blow, with costly consequences.

As a result, utility officials must constantly monitor and predict changing demand as
it fluctuates throughout the day and across seasons, and manage supply to ensure
the right number of power plants are in operation. When demand exceeds the
supply capacity, power companies must preemptively disable the supply of
electricity to portions of the grid. These intentional blackouts — usually called load
shedding or rostering — often cut off electricity to users when they need power the
most.

Official estimates in India indicate that there has been a consistent deficit in
electricity supply relative to estimated demand, at least for the last three decades.
Figure 1 plots the total supply of electricity in India against estimated demand. In
1984, India experienced an overall shortage of 6.7%, peaking to 11.6% on the
highest demand days. By 2012, even after total electricity supply had increased
more than sixfold, the overall shortage had nevertheless increased to 8.7%, with a
peak shortfall of 9.0%.




                                           4
           Figure 1: Official electricity shortages in India, 1984–2015




Source: Central Electricity Authority, Growth of Electricity Sector in India from 1947–
2015.


There are significant regional differences in demand and supply of power across
India. Table 1 shows both the spatial and temporal variation in peak shortages.
While all regions experience shortages, the highest shortfalls are in the northeast
and in the western region, which includes Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and
Maharashtra. The lowest shortages are in the eastern region, which includes Bihar
and Orissa.




                                           5
While the overall shortage of power is well recognized, we know much less about
exactly whose power gets cut most frequently, and how the incidence of power
outages varies at lower levels like districts or villages. While many state utilities
publish rostering schedules, these do not capture the actual timing of outages, nor
their precise geographic coverage.

Some observers allege that load shedding affects urban areas and industries most
severely. Yet in recent years, anecdotal evidence suggests that load shedding is
substantially worse in rural areas than in urban areas. In 2008, official policy in
Uttar Pradesh’s main power utility dictated no more than four hours of daily power
cuts in the largest cities, but up to twelve hours of cuts for rural villages (Min 2015).
Harish and Tongia (2014) examine minute-by-minute data from hundreds of
feeders across 9 days in 2012–13 and find that feeders supplying electricity to rural
villages experienced higher load shedding than those that served urban areas.
Among urban areas, Bangalore had the lowest rates of load shedding. These
patterns are notable given that if the overall objective of load shedding is to remove
demand, it could be more efficient to do so in urban areas where the number of
consumers and the average per capita loads are higher.

To date, systematic evaluation of patterns of load shedding across all of India has
been impossible due to a lack of comprehensive and comparable data on outages.


III.   A New Measure of Power Supply Irregularity (PSI)

We propose a new method to detect power outages by relying upon a time series of
nighttime satellite imagery. Our premise is that areas prone to power outages are
more likely to have higher variability in light output, since electrified areas will be


                                            6
illuminated when the power is working but appear dark when there is no power.
Across a time series of imagery, areas prone to power outages should have higher
variability in light output than areas with no outages.

Most prior research on nighttime light has relied on analysis of annual composite
images. While annual composites provide a useful estimate of average brightness
across the globe, they depict overly prolonged timespans, smooth away substantial
variation in light output over the calendar year, and do not enable precise
evaluation of discrete interventions like new village electrification projects,
extensions of the power grid into new areas, nor short-term disruptions to the
supply of electricity as a result of load shedding or maintenance failures.
In this analysis, we return to the original raw nightly data to better study changes in
the level of light output, as well as information on the variability of light output,
which is a useful indicator of power supply irregularity.

The primary assumption of the approach, building upon a growing body of research
(Elvidge et al. 1997b; De Souza Filho 2004; Doll et al. 2006; Sutton et al. 2007; Kiran
Chand et al. 2009; Ghosh et al. 2010; Henderson et al. 2012; Min 2015), is that
villages that benefit from electrical power appear brighter at night than
unelectrified villages because of the use of outdoor lighting and leakage from indoor
lighting sources. This relationship has been documented via ground-truthing
studies comparing survey-based measures of electricity use to nighttime output in
villages in Senegal, Mali, and Vietnam (Min et al. 2013; Min and Gaba 2014).

In partnership with NOAA’s National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI),
we acquired the complete archive of raw DMSP-OLS visual band imagery captured
over India from 1993 to 2013. The archive comprises more than 30,000 high-
resolution image strips captured over nearly 8,000 nights. Each image strip
represents a single pass on DMSP’s sun-synchronous, near-polar orbit with a swath
width of about 3,000 km. Because India has an east-west width of about 3,000 km,
image strips from two or three overpasses were often required to capture all
locations on the Indian subcontinent.

The primary data of interest is the visible (VIS) band data, which records light
output in a bandpass covering wavelengths from about 0.4 to 1.0 μm, which
overlaps the wavelengths most commonly detectable to the human eye. Brightness
on the visible band is recorded on a 6-bit scale, with relative brightness (digital
number) values from 0 to 63.

Once the data were acquired and organized, the next step was to extract relevant
brightness values from the image products. Since energy access and quality



                                           7
problems are most severe in rural areas, we focused on extracting brightness values
only for villages in India, excluding urban areas and large towns from the analysis.2
We extracted the brightness observed at the center of each of India’s 600,000
villages from every nighttime image provided by NOAA.

Figure 2 illustrates the process by which we extracted the brightness level for
individual village points from all 8,000 nights of imagery. This process was run on
Flux, the University of Michigan’s high performance computing cluster, which
allowed us to conduct the extraction in parallel for each village. The final output is a
data set of brightness levels for all villages on every night from 1993 to 2013,
comprising several billion observations.3


                  Figure 2: Data extraction from satellite imagery




2 Another reason to exclude urban areas is that the DMSP-OLS satellite sensor is not well
calibrated, and lacks the dynamic range to accurately measure changes in light in the very
bright areas common in urban cores.
3 An online visualization of this data set is available at <http://india.nightlights.io>.




                                             8
The raw nightly data are not directly comparable over time because the satellite
sensors use dynamic gain settings to maximize contrast and image clarity. Since the
gain settings are not recorded in the data stream, the 0–63 relative brightness
values cannot be converted to an absolute measure of brightness. To overcome this
limitation, we use statistical and image processing procedures to create what we
refer to as statistically recalibrated visible (SR-VIS) band data. The SR-VIS data
transforms the raw light output measures onto a more comparable scale, enabling
more reliable statistical comparisons of cross-sectional and within-unit variation
(see Appendix for details).

    Figure 3: Variability in light output over time can indicate power supply
                                    irregularities




Note: Points represent SR-VIS brightness on all nights with good quality data. Bars indicate
plus and minus one standard deviation from the mean brightness of the village calculated
for each calendar year.




                                             9
Examining the time series data of SR-VIS brightness values reveals both how villages
vary in their average brightness level, as well as the variability of the brightness
values over time. Figure 3 plots the brightness of the village of Sheorajpur in
Allahabad district on every night from 1993 to 2013. Electrification of Sheorajpur as
part of India’s national electrification program, that is Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) program, was completed on 30 June 2007. Light
output in the village did not increase much until about 2010, suggesting a lengthy
period before electrical power was widely available and in use by residents of the
village. The bars indicate one standard deviation above and below the mean of all
statistically recalibrated visible band brightness observations in each year. The
increase in the size of the bars in recent years shows that variability in light output
has increased. Power outages are an obvious reason why a village would appear
brightly lit on one night but far dimmer on another. We use this information on the
variability of light output over a village to construct a new Power Supply
Irregularity (PSI) index.

We define PSI as the unexplained variability in light output relative to the predicted
variability of light output for a village, calculated using data over a time period of
interest. The excess variability is calculated as the residual of a regression using
data from all villages that predicts the standard deviation of light output given the
brightness of each village. To fit the curvilinear relationship between standard
deviation and brightness in the DMSP data, we estimate a regression model
including several polynomial terms. More details can be found in the Appendix.




                                          10
          Figure 4: Calculating the Power Supply Irregularity (PSI) index




Note: Points represent all rural villages in India. PSI of a village is the excess variability of
light output relative to the predicted variability, calculated over the relevant time period
using all good quality nightly (SR-VIS) observations.




                                                11
               Figure 5: Power Supply Irregularity (PSI) of villages




Note: Village center point locations are from MLInfomap.



Figure 4 is a scatterplot of predicted values from the polynomial regression for all
villages in India. Each point represents a village’s mean brightness and standard
deviation of nightly brightness calculated over a specified time period (in this case, a
year). PSI for that village is the difference between the actual standard deviation and
the predicted standard deviation. To enable clearer visualization, we transform and
normalize the PSI values (see Appendix). Figure 5 plots PSI values in 2013 for
individual villages. The map shows how PSI values can be regionally clustered, like
the ring of high values in villages surrounding Lucknow, the capital of Uttar Pradesh.
Zooming out to the whole country, there is significant variation in PSI values across
the country. We discuss these patterns in greater detail in section V.




                                            12
IV.      Validation of PSI against Ground-Based Data on Outages

      A. Validation in Maharashtra

To evaluate the reliability and consistency of our new measure, we also compare PSI
against officially reported power system reliability data from Maharashtra’s largest
power utility, Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd, or MahaDiscom.
The company provides information on its website on the reliability of its feeder
network. The most widely used measure of reliability is SAIFI, or System Average
Interruption Frequency Index, which describes the average number of interruptions
experienced by a customer over a prescribed period. MahaDiscom reports SAIFI for
“circles,” which overlap closely with districts in each year over time. However,
MahaDiscom’s SAIFI reports are not a perfect measure of outages because
MahaDiscom does not include planned load shedding in their measure, only
unplanned outages. Nevertheless, we would expect districts with higher SAIFI levels
to be associated with higher PSI.

MahaDiscom provides power reliability indices at the circle level by month from
2009 to 2013. Circles are the largest geographic unit MahaDiscom uses, which
roughly correspond to districts. Because PSI is calculated annually, annual averages
of the reliability indices were calculated. In the few cases where multiple circles are
contained in a district, their values were averaged. Because PSI is calculated for
rural villages only, urban circles were omitted from the analysis. There are 33
district-circle matches, and five years of data. There are no data from MahaDiscom
for two districts in 2010. The total N for the regressions is thus 163.

We focus on the System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI), which is the
average number of sustained interruptions a customer would experience in a given
period of time. It is (total number of customer interruptions)/(total number of
customers). It does not include planned outages (e.g., load shedding), or outages due
to natural disasters.

While we expect SAIFI to correlate positively with PSI despite the fact that it does
not encompass all outages, there are other factors associated with light output
patterns. For example, agricultural electricity usage is less likely to result in light
output than residential or industrial use. To control for these confounders, we
gather district estimates from the 2011 Indian Census on: logged population; logged
area; % illiterate; % work in agriculture; % forested; % population rural; and %
area rural. We use these because they might impact actual electricity use (e.g.,
poverty, as approximated by the literacy rate and proportion of people working in




                                          13
agricultural jobs) and/or the observed light output (e.g., population density and
forests).

Due to the highly skewed nature of SAIFI, a natural logarithmic transformation is
applied. For ease of interpretation, both log-SAIFI and PSI are rescaled from 0 to 1.
Four OLS regressions are run, with PSI as the outcome variable, and log-SAIFI as the
primary predictor of interest. Because the data are panel and observations are likely
not independent, all models are run with robust delta method standard errors
clustered on district. The controls in models (2) and (4) are: logged population,
logged area, % illiterate, % work in agriculture, and % forested. Models (3) and (4)
also include year fixed effects.

As can be seen from the regression results in Table 2, the estimated relationship
between SAIFI and PSI is consistently positive. This holds across models that add
additional controls as well as with the inclusion of year fixed effects.


     Figure 6: Correlations of annual ln(SAIFI) (scaled) and PSI (scaled) by
                      Maharashtra district for 2009-2013,




                                         14
         Table 2: PSI and power supply reliability in Maharashtra districts

DV is PSI measured in each district-year, 2009–13
                                       (1)               (2)      (3)        (4)
  ln(SAIFI)                          0.348**           0.224'   0.369**    0.239'
                                     (0.114)          (0.125)   (0.125)   (0.139)
  ln(population)                                       -0.124              -0.122
                                                      (0.199)             (0.202)
  ln(area)                                             0.189                0.187
                                                      (0.190)             (0.193)
  % population illiterate                              0.009'              0.009'
                                                      (0.005)             (0.005)
  % workers in agriculture                             -0.004              -0.004
                                                      (0.005)             (0.005)
  % area forest                                        -0.001              -0.001
                                                      (0.003)             (0.003)

  Year FE                               No              No       Yes       Yes

  intercept                           0.133*           0.340     0.082     0.271
                                      (0.061)         (1.706)   (0.066)   (1.735)
  N                                     163             163       163       163
Robust standard errors clustered on district in parentheses.
' p < .1; * p < .05; ** p < .01.


      B. Validation against IHDS Survey Data

The second source of ground-truth data is the Indian Human Development Survey
(IHDS), which was jointly carried out by University of Maryland and the National
Council of Applied Economic Research (NCAER) in New Delhi. The survey covers all
of India’s key states and union territories except Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
Lakshadweep. The first round of the survey was carried out mostly in 2005 and
collected information on 41,554 households. The second one, conducted mostly in
2012, interviewed a total of 42,152 households, including 83 percent of the original
households. The survey asks a wide range of questions related to households’
energy consumption patterns including electrification status and daily average
duration of electricity outages. While the survey includes both urban and rural
households, we focus on the rural sample for reasons described in the previous
section.

We calculate district-level average PSI and district-level average duration of power
outages reported by rural households. We also obtain data on total population, total
area, % of agriculture employment and forest area all at the district level from the
2011 Indian Census because these variables could also affect PSI values extracted
from satellite images. Table 3 summarizes regression results using district-level PSI


                                                 15
as the dependent variable. The results show that average duration of power outages
reported in IHDS are significantly and positively correlated with PSI.

 Table 3 Correlation between PSI and duration of power outages reported by
                                   IHDS
                                      (1)                (2)
                   outage_IHDS        0.0358**           0.0503***
                                      (0.0140)           (0.0143)

                   Forest                                0.00266
                                                         (0.00535)

                   Area                                  0.0000160
                                                         (0.0000102)

                   Population                            -0.0000920**
                                                         (0.0000364)

                   Emp_Agriculture                      0.00304
                                                        (0.00360)
                  N                  217                206
                  adj. R-sq          0.025              0.077
Note: The dependent variable is PSI. Standard errors clustered at the district level are
reported in parentheses.

Figure 7 depicts the probability density distribution of PSI and the outage variable
based on kernel density estimation. It shows that both variables generally follow a
normal distribution.




                                              16
    Figure 7: Probability density distribution of PSI and power outages reported
                                       by IHDS

                                   Kernel density estimate                                        Kernel density estimate




                                                                                    .2
                       1
                       .8




                                                                                    .15
                       .6
             Density




                                                                                 Density
                                                                                   .1
                       .4




                                                                                    .05
                       .2
                       0




                                                                                    0
                            -2               0                2         4                  5           10          15           20     25
                                                     psi                                                         outage
                            kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.1009                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.7083




    V.   Variations in Power Outages across India

Table 4 ranks all states by the mean level of PSI in 2013. In this section, we describe
anecdotal evidence which comports with these rankings. Power supply reliability as
measured by PSI was highest in West Bengal, a state that has been recognized for its
progress in reforming its power sector.4 In 2013, it recorded a power surplus for the
first time (though much of it was driven by a drop in industrial demand). Speaking
to a reporter, the principal secretary for West Bengal’s department of power, Malay
Kumar De, said, “Political interference at the local level is totally absent here. We
don’t have a power rationing or shortage situation.”5

Areas with severe power reliability problems have also received media attention.
For example, a news article on the ongoing load shedding situation in Madhya
Pradesh identified particularly poor service in Harda and Hoshangabad districts
which had been receiving only 10 and 13 hours of power a day, respectively.6 These

4 World Bank. 2009. West Bengal Power Sector Reforms: Lessons Learnt and Unfinished
Agenda. Washington, DC. <https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/12375>
5 “Power thieves prosper in India’s patronage-based democracy.” Washington Post. 4

October 2012.
6 “No end to state’s power woes.” Times of India. 27 August 2014.




                                                                            17
districts had the second and third highest PSI levels in 2013 among all districts in
the country.

While the table of state level averages is informative, the map in Figure 9 reveals
that in many parts of the country, there is even more local and regional variation
within states than across-state variation.

              Table 4: Power Supply Irregularity (PSI) index, 2013
           state-wise rankings (higher values indicate more outages)
                                                                        Village
        Rank   State                  Mean PSI13    Std. dev PSI13   observations
           1   Mizoram                    1.955              1.989             729
           2   Manipur                    1.124              1.595           2,199
           3   Meghalaya                  0.835              1.569           5,782
           4   Jammu And Kashmir          0.411              0.538           6,417
           5   Uttrakhand                 0.257              0.626          15,761
           6   Maharashtra                0.257              1.200          41,095
           7   Karnataka                  0.248              1.179          27,481
           8   Nagaland                   0.234              1.032           1,278
           9   Himachal Pradesh           0.214              0.674          17,495
          10   Arunachal Pradesh          0.209              0.708           3,863
          11   Madhya Pradesh             0.175              1.354          52,117
          12   Tamil Nadu                 0.132              0.866          15,215
          13   Tripura                    0.129              1.108             858
          14   Uttar Pradesh              0.128              0.887          97,942
          15   Orissa                     0.048              1.143          47,529
          16   Bihar                      0.023              1.149          39,031
          17   Jharkhand                 -0.039              0.891          29,354
          18   Gujarat                   -0.198              0.846          18,066
          19   Andhra Pradesh            -0.231              0.906          28,108
          20   Kerala                    -0.261              0.728           1,364
          21   Punjab                    -0.271              0.720          12,278
          22   Chhattisgarh              -0.273              1.046          20,286
          23   Assam                     -0.336              0.834          25,121
          24   Rajasthan                 -0.369              0.659          39,753
          25   Haryana                   -0.439              0.771           6,764
          26   West Bengal               -0.472              0.716          37,954
               ALL INDIA                  0.000              1.029        594,818




                                          18
Figure 8: Distribution of PSI across villages in India’s 16 largest states, 2013




                                      19
                     Figure 9: PSI index in northern India, 2013




Figure 9 presents a closer look at power supply irregularities in northern India. One
striking pattern is the notable difference across state borders, where state-level
distribution companies’ responsibilities end. The power supply is far more stable in
Haryana and Rajasthan than in neighboring Uttar Pradesh.7 In Uttar Pradesh, India’s
largest state, reliability varies widely, with the worst conditions in a few northern
districts, and better conditions around Lucknow, Etawah, and Varanasi.

In 2013, power supply was especially irregular in a concentrated area of western
Bihar, spanning Buxar, Kaimur, Rohtas, and Bhojpur districts. Media reports also
describe unrest in these areas due to the irregular supply.8


7 The Delhi region is largely unrepresented in our data since we track only rural villages,
and exclude cities and large towns.
8 “Protests continue in Bihar against power crisis.” Indo-Asian News Service. 28 March

2011. <https://www.yahoo.com/news/protests-continue-bihar-against-power-crisis-
20110328-012651-751.html>



                                              20
VI.    Conclusion

In this paper, we develop a new method to monitor the quality of power supply
using high-frequency satellite imagery of nightly lights data. We define PSI as the
excessive variability in light output relative to the predicted variability in light
output. Variability is measured as the deviation from the mean brightness of a
locality observed from a lengthy time series of nighttime satellite imagery. To test
the validity of the method, we compute the PSI index for all 600,000 villages in India
each year from 1993 to 2013. We find that power outages predicted by the PSI index
are consistent with those reported by alternative ground-based measures of power
supply reliability in India.

Our method of monitoring PSI opens new opportunities for policy research, power
system planning, and citizen engagement. First, previous analyses of the impact of
power outages have often relied on shortage data at the district or state level. Our
research shows that PSI varies significantly across villages. Using the PSI index,
researchers can capture the spatial granularity in supply disruption to better
estimate the effects of power outages on welfare and growth. Second, the method
developed in this study can potentially be used to facilitate near real-time
monitoring of power supply disruption by utilities and government agencies. Power
system planners can rely on this information to identify outage-prone areas in a
cost-effective way. Finally, when information on PSI is made available to consumers,
it could help consumers to better engage with utilities to improve the quality of
power supply.

In the future, we plan to expand the approach to other parts of the world and to
develop a global database of the PSI index for other countries across time.




                                         21
References

Alby, P., J.-J. Dethier, S. Straub, et al. 2011. Let There be Light! Firms Operating under
   Electricity Constraints in Developing Countries. Technical report, Toulouse
   School of Economics (TSE).

Allcott, H., A. Collard-Wexler, and S.D. O’Connell. 2016. How do Electricity Shortages
    Affect Industry? Evidence from India. American Economic Review 106(3): 587–
    624.

Andersen, T. B. and C.-J. Dalgaard. 2013. Power Outages and Economic Growth in
   Africa. Energy Economics 38: 19–23.

De Souza Filho, C.R., J. Zullo Jr., and C.D. Elvidge. 2004. Brazil’s 2001 energy crisis
   monitored from space. International Journal of Remote Sensing 25(12): 2475–
   2482.

Doll, C.N.H., J.-P. Muller, and J.G. Morley. 2006. Mapping regional economic activity
   from night-time light satellite imagery. Ecological Economics 57: 75–92.

Elvidge, C.D., K.E. Baugh, E.A. Kihn., H.W. Kroehl, E.R. Davis, and C. Davis. 1997.
    Relation between satellite observed visible-near infrared emissions, population,
    economic activity, and power consumption. International Journal of Remote
    Sensing 18(6): 1373–1379.

Ghosh, T., R. Powell, C. Elvidge, K.E. Baugh, P.C. Sutton, and S. Anderson. 2010.
   Shedding light on the global distribution of economic activity. The Open
   Geography Journal 3: 148–161.

Grainger, C. and F. Zhang 2017a. The Impact of Electricity Shortages on Firm
   Productivity: Evidence from Pakistan. World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper.

Grainger, C. and F. Zhang 2017b. The Impact of Electricity Shortages on Micro- and
   Small-Enterprises: Evidence from India. World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper.

Harish, S.M. and R. Tongia. 2014. Do rural residential electricity consumers cross-
   subside their urban counterparts? Exploring the inequity in supply in the Indian
   power sector. Brookings India working paper 04.

Henderson, J.V., A. Storeygard, and D.N. Weil. 2012. Measuring Economic Growth
   from Outer Space. American Economic Review 102(2): 994–1028.




                                            22
Kiran Chand, T.R., K.V.S. Badarinath, C.D. Elvidge, and B.T. Tuttle. 2009. Spatial
   characterization of electrical power consumption patterns over India using
   temporal DMSP-OLS night-time satellite data. International Journal of Remote
   Sensing 30(3): 647–661.

Min, B. and K.M. Gaba. 2014. Tracking Electrification in Vietnam Using Nighttime
   Lights. Remote Sensing 6(10): 9511–9529.

Min, B. and M. Golden. 2014. Electoral cycles in electricity losses in India.
   Energy Policy 65: 619–625.

Min, B., K.M. Gaba, O.F. Sarr, and A. Agalassou. 2013. Detection of Rural
   Electrification in Africa using DMSP-OLS Night Lights Imagery. International
   Journal of Remote Sensing 34(22): 8118–8141.

Min, B. 2015. Power and the Vote: Elections and Electricity in the Developing World.
   New York: Cambridge University Press.

Reinikka, R. and J. Svensson. 2002. Coping with poor public capital. Journal of
   Development Economics 69: 51–69.

Samad, H. and F. Zhang. 2016. Benefits of Electrification and the Role of Reliability:
   Evidence from India. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

Samad, H. and F. Zhang. 2017. Heterogeneous Effects of Rural Electrification:
   Evidence from Bangladesh. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

Sutton, P.C., C.D. Elvidge and T. Ghosh. 2007. Estimation of gross domestic product
   at sub-national scales using nighttime satellite imagery. International Journal of
   Ecological Economics and Statistics 8(SO7): 5–21.




                                           23
Appendix: Calculation of the Power Supply Irregularity (PSI) Index

In partnership with the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information
(NCEI), we extracted and processed the complete historical archive of sub-orbital
DMSP-OLS nighttime imagery captured over South Asia. The archive comprises
imagery from every night since 1993–2013 spread across 30,000 visible band
images and hundreds of thousands of auxiliary data files. In total, the archive
contains over 5 terabytes of data. The nightly satellite images from NOAA are
georeferenced, such that pixel values correspond to latitude-longitude coordinates.
We use the coordinates of the center of each village to determine which light values
it should be assigned.

Looking across a sequence of raw nightly images, it is evident that the brightness
levels across images varies widely in ways that are unlikely to be due to changes in
ground luminosity. There are several well-documented reasons for this (Elvidge et
al. 2007). First, the sensor uses dynamic gain calibration to maintain constant cloud
reference values under varying conditions of solar and lunar illumination, and thus
some images have higher gain settings applied than others. Unfortunately, gain
levels are not recorded in the data stream. Second, environmental and atmospheric
conditions can significantly distort the brightness of a ground-based points of light
through refraction, diffusion, and enshrouding. Finally, digital noise is an
unavoidable feature of charge-coupled device (CCD) sensor technology and is more
pronounced in high-gain, low-light photography.

To account for these issues, we employ several strategies. First, we filter the data to
drop the worst quality observations, including those with cloud cover and those
corrupted by stray light. Stray light results from the specific geometry of the DMSP-
OLS sensor relative to the sun, and results in rays of sunlight bleeding onto the
image strip during certain periods of the year over certain portions of the globe.
Removal of these corrupted areas can often result in several weeks of missing data
during the summer months at some northern latitudes.

We then apply background noise reduction procedures to construct statistically
recalibrated visible band (SR-VIS) values, which corrects for sources of “data stream
noise” that can reasonably be attributed to non-ground based factors. This measure
of noise is calculated as the average brightness recorded in a sample of unpopulated
and unelectrified areas in India that should not be emitting any light at night from
the ground. The assumption is that any brightness recorded in these “dark” areas
must be due to exogenous factors such as sensor noise or atmospheric conditions.
We select “dark” points by identifying land points within the country in the
LandScan Population 2013 raster with a zero population count. Within this set, we



                                          24
keep points that have zero brightness in both the 1992 and 2013 DMSP Nighttime
Lights Time Stable Annual Composites. Finally, we take a random sample of 10,000
of these points.

Data Selection and Extraction

Having determined the x-y coordinate pairs of villages and dark points, we move to
the data extraction stage. Each of the tens of thousands of GeoTIFFs are successively
read into the R software environment. For each satellite observation, the SAM, SLM,
TIR, LI, and VIS values for each of the coordinates are extracted. Unreliable and
missing data points are filtered out. Specifically, observations are dropped if 1) the
SAM (sample) value is one of the six codes of bad data according to NOAA; 2) the CM
(cloud mask) is not 0 (which indicates the absence of clouds); 3 the SLM (stray light
mask) is not 0 (which indicates the absence of stray light); or 4) the date and
latitude are in a set we have determined to be unreliable.

Next, the coordinates, VIS values, satellite ID, date, and timestamp are loaded into
Hadoop. For each date, the observation from the newest satellite is kept if more than
one observation exists. If more than one observation still remains, the observation
from the latest timestamp is kept.

Calculation of Statistically Recalibrated Visible Band (SR-VIS) Data

Villages are matched to dark points in R. For each village coordinate, all dark point
coordinates within a 300km radius are considered matches.

For each date, the VIS values of dark point combinations corresponding to villages
are averaged (after dropping outliers). If there are fewer than 5 dark VIS
observations, the village-date observation is dropped. The remaining mean dark VIS
values are then subtracted from their corresponding village VIS values to generate
new normalized values that we refer to as statistically recalibrated visible band
data, or SR-VIS.

Figure A.1 compares the raw, uncorrected visible band values with the improved
SR-VIS values in two villages in Uttar Pradesh. The top panel A.1(a) shows Dherhi, a
village in Mirzapur district, and the bottom panel A.1(b), shows Sheorajpur village
from Allahabad district. The statistically recalibrated visible band (SR-VIS) data
demonstrates less noise and more clearly reveals long-term changes in brightness
over time than the raw values.




                                          25
  Figure A.1: Transforming raw VIS data to Statistically Recalibrated Visible
                             Band (SR-VIS) data




Power Supply Irregularity Index

To calculate the Power Supply Irregularity index for a location, we measure the
variability of SR-VIS values across a period of interest. We do so by loading the
complete set of all SR-VIS values for all village-days into a Hadoop distributed file
system. Using Hive, the mean and standard deviation of SR-VIS is calculated by
village for each year. Next, for each year, the standard deviation of village SR-VIS is
regressed on mean SR-VIS and additional polynomial terms of SR-VIS. The residuals


                                          26
of these regressions form the village-year Power Supply Irregularity (PSI) indices.
Positive values indicate higher variability in light output than expected given the
average light output, while negative values represent more stability in light output.

Because the distribution is highly skewed and there are many outliers, both negative
and positive, the PSI values are transformed, primarily for purposes of visualization.
First, a log-modulus transformation is applied to PSI. This is done by taking the
natural logarithm of 1 plus the absolute value of PSI. This is then multiplied by the
sign of the PSI value, such that positive values continue to indicate excess variability,
and negative ones represent stability. Finally, this transformed log-modulus PSI is
standardized by subtracting the yearly mean from each observation, and dividing
the result by the standard deviation, such that the transformed mean is 0 and
standard deviation 1.

     Figure A.2: Std. dev. vs. mean SR-VIS of Indian villages, various years




                                           27
                  Figure A.3: PSI vs. mean SR-VIS in India, 2013




Figure A.3 displays a scatterplot of PSI values versus mean brightness values for
villages in India (20% random sample). The data reveal some notable patterns. First,
most villages are relatively dim, indicated by the large concentration of data at mean
SR-VIS levels below 10. Among these dimly lit villages, it appears that the majority
have high PSI values, indicating a high frequency of power outages. As we move to
villages with higher levels of brightness (typically due to higher development, more
intensive electricity use, larger populations, and proximity to cities), the distribution
of PSI is much more evenly distributed across positive and negative values.




                                           28
