                                                    WPS8125


Policy Research Working Paper                      8125




                     Willing but Unable?
         Short-Term Experimental Evidence on Parent
              Empowerment and School Quality

                               Elizabeth Beasley
                                Elise Huillery




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8125


  Abstract
  Giving power over school management and spending                                  increased, and there was no measured impact on test
  decisions to communities has been a favored strategy to                           scores. An analysis of heterogeneous impacts and spending
  increase school quality, but its effectiveness may depend                         decisions provides additional insight into these dynam-
  on local capacity. Grants are one form of such a transfer                         ics. Overall, the findings suggest that programs based
  of power. Short-term responses of a grant to school com-                          on parent participation should take levels of community
  mittees in Niger show that parents increased participation                        capacity into account: even when communities are will-
  and responsibility, but these efforts did not improve qual-                       ing to work to improve their schools, they may not be
  ity on average. Enrollment at the lowest grades increased                         able to do so. The short-term nature of the experiment
  and school resources improved, but teacher absenteeism                            reduces the extent to which the results can be generalized.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at elise.huillery@sciencespo.fr.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Willing but Unable? Short-Term Experimental Evidence on

            Parent Empowerment and School Quality


                        Elizabeth Beasley and Elise Huillery




JEL codes: 015, C93, I21
Keywords: Community participation, education, parental involvement, randomized
trial, school-based management.


Elizabeth Beasley is the coordinator of the CEPREMAP Well-Being Observatory; her email address is
elizabeth.beasley@cepremap.com. Elise Huillery (corresponding author) is a professor in the Sciences
Po Department of Economics and J-PAL; her email address is elise.huillery@sciencespo.fr. Cornelia
Jesse led the implementation of this project and contributed substantially to its design, and we are
deeply indebted to her for her leadership. We thank Yann Algan, Bruno Crépon, Esther Duflo,
Pascaline Dupas, Pierre de Galbert, Emeric Henry, Cornelia Jesse, Florian Maynéris, Miguel Urquiola,
and the seminar participants at J-PAL Europe, Sciences Po, Columbia University, Oxford University,
UCL, Paris I, and the Journées d'Economie Publique Louis-André Gérard-Varet for helpful
comments and discussions. We also thank several anonymous referees for thoughtful and detailed
suggestions. We thank Adama Ouedraogo for his support throughout the project and are grateful to
Pierre de Galbert for excellent project management and Gabriel Lawin for data collection and
management and also Elizabeth Linos, Andrea Lepine, and Hadrien Lanvin for research assistance.
We thank the Government of Niger and the staff of the Ministry of Education for their collaboration,
in particular Amadou Tchambou, Yacouba Djibo Abdou, Salou Moussa, and Damana Issaka. Mathieu
Brossard was central in the initial conception and design of the project. Much of the project was
carried out when Elizabeth Beasley was at J-PAL Europe and she thanks J-PAL for their support.
Finally, and most importantly, we gratefully acknowledge the parents, staff, and pupils of the schools
for the time and information they shared with us. This work was supported by the World Bank and
the donor partners of the Education for All Fast Track Initiative through the Education Program
Development Fund. All errors remain our own, and the opinions expressed in this paper are ours
alone and should not be attributed to the institutions with which we are affiliated, the World Bank, or
the Government of Niger.
       The dramatic expansion of access to schools in the last two decades is the result of an

unprecedented effort to increase education in poor countries. However, the quality of education

is often low. One common strategy to improve quality is through improved management and

oversight and in particular by increasing involvement of parents and the community (World Bank

2003). Community-based management policies have been widely adopted throughout the world

over the past decade (see Barrera-Osorio et al. 2009 for an overview).1 Grants to school

committees, that is, putting money under the control of parents, are one potential way to increase

school quality directly, by increasing school resources, and indirectly, by spurring parent

participation. For this to work, parents must have the time, energy, and capacity to participate in

school management effectively. Given the heavy investment in such programs, it is important to

understand whether, and under which circumstances, they can actually work.


       This paper provides evidence from a field experiment on the short-term impact of a

program to encourage parent participation in school management through grants to school

committees in a context of low parent authority and capacity. In Niger, levels of education

among adults are extremely low: 70% of Nigeriens aged 15–44 in 2010 had no education,2 and

the system for education is very hierarchical and centralized. In a pilot program to improve

school quality, the Ministry of Education of Niger, in partnership with the World Bank, gave

grants to school committees that had been trained in school management with the aim of

increasing parent involvement. A randomized evaluation was incorporated into the pilot project

to provide information for scale-up. Detailed data from one thousand schools (split into five

hundred treatment and five hundred control schools) were collected to assess the impact of the

grant on parent empowerment, school management, and school quality. An important limitation

of the study is that it provides only short-term evidence on behavioral responses: the first grant

arrived in late 2007 and was meant to continue several years, but the evaluation ended in 2009.
                                                                                             2
The survey was administered during April and May of 2008, and administrative data were

collected at the beginning of the 2008–2009 school year. This paper thus documents the short-

term dynamics of an anticipated long-term program.


       On average, parents were willing to increase their participation in school management,

but educational quality did not improve in a meaningful way as a result of this participation.

There is an overall positive impact of the grant program on parents’ involvement and

responsibility: communities with the grant participated more and took on more responsibilities

than those without the grant, although the average community did not engage in supervising

teacher presence. Parents did not reduce their own contributions in response to the grant.


       The impact on school management is mixed: cooperation between school stakeholders

improved, but overall accountability did not change, and spending shows both expected and

unexpected changes: there was more spending in infrastructure but also school festivals,

playground equipment, and, most unexpectedly, investment in agricultural projects, which were

probably noneducational but intended to make a profit.


       Finally, school quality did not improve with these changes, at least in the short term.

There were subsequent improvements in infrastructure and health resources, as well as an

increase in participation at the lowest grades: fewer dropouts in 2007/2008 and increased

enrollment in grade two in 2008/2009, but there is no evidence of a change in test scores (note

that we cannot exclude the possibility of a downward bias in the estimate of test score impact due

to differential dropouts, but the lack of change in test scores at levels that had no participation

changes supports the finding of no impact on test scores). Teachers decreased their effort in

response to the grant, which can be attributed to the fact that some teachers have a preference




                                                                                                 3
for a centralized government and might be reluctant to collaborate with parents, especially when

parents do not spend the money on projects that make the teacher’s life easier.


           The paper then examines heterogeneous effects along several different dimensions and

highlights three interesting patterns. First, in situations where the school committee is educated

or has experience in another community organization—both of which we take as proxies for real

authority—parents increased monitoring of teacher attendance in response to the grant (though

this did not mitigate the negative effect of the grants on teacher attendance). Second, in small

(one-teacher) schools, school committees spent on items that benefited the teacher, and teacher

attendance increased in response to the grant in these schools. These results together suggest that

teachers’ responses to parent participation depend on whether parents are acting in opposition

to, or alliance with, the teachers. Third, rural schools used some of the grant to invest in

agricultural opportunities, while urban schools did not but invested in school infrastructure

instead.


           This study is related to two strains of the economics literature: parent participation and

school resources. Previous evidence on the effectiveness of programs to increase quality via

increased parent participation is mixed. Banerjee et al. (2010) report that providing information to

parents about the school committee and training the community to measure educational

performance in India had no impact on the activity of school committees and, therefore, no

impact on education outcomes. Duflo et al. (2015) find that a training to empower parents helped

mitigate the negative response of regular teachers to the addition of a contract teacher. In

Madagascar, Lassibille et al. (2010) found that facilitating community/school interactions,

combined with streamlining management practices had positive impacts on attendance and

learning. Other studies have supplied evidence that empowering the community to manage

schools improves school quality, though these papers generally do not include random variation
                                                                                                   4
in treatment assignment, and so the identification is weaker. Bryk et al. (1998) and Hess (1999)

have argued that student achievement improved in Chicago after the implementation of reform

involving the community in school management and Di Gropello (2006) overviews four school-

based management programs in Latin America and concludes that school-based management

models have led generally to greater community empowerment and teacher effort. Participation

in school management may also be linked to social capital more generally: Sawada and Ishii

(2012) employ matching and instrumental variable approaches to measure the impact of the

COGES program itself in neighboring Burkina Faso and find increases in social capital measured

using several different tools, including field experiments.


       Another group of studies point to heterogeneity in the performance of participatory

programs, and in the effect of decentralization more generally. Blimpo et al. (2015) find that

training school committees had no impact on learning except in schools where school committee

members were educated. Pradhan et al. (2014) find that an intervention to empower parents was

effective only when combined with an intervention fostering the ties between the school

committee and a local governing body. Decentralization of secondary school management in

Argentina led to higher test scores in provinces with higher managerial capacity and lower test

scores in provinces with lower managerial capacity (Galiani and Schargrodsky 2002). Galiani and

Perez-Truglia (2013) review the empirical literature on school decentralization on educational

outcomes and find that the better-off communities tend to profit more from decentralization

than poor communities. Using panel estimation on PISA data, Hanushek et al. (2013) estimate

that increasing school autonomy is associated with lower student performance in countries with

generally lower performance and higher student performance in countries with generally higher

performance. While the context of rural Niger is likely to be substantially different from these



                                                                                              5
contexts, there is good reason to anticipate that there may be heterogeneous impacts of parent

participation.


        Previous studies on increasing school resources have found that it may crowd out the

contributions of other actors. For example, parents in Romania decreased time spent on

homework when their child was admitted to a better school (Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2013). In

Zambia and India, households decreased spending for education when they anticipated an

increase in school funding (Das et al. 2013). In Kenya, civil-servant teachers decreased presence

at school when school committee hired an extra teacher (Duflo et al. 2015).


        This paper contributes specifically to the literature on heterogeneity by showing that

authority and capacity are important prerequisites for parents to undertake the more difficult

aspects of management and that cooperation between parents and teachers (rather than

confrontation) may be key. An overall message is that parents will not always or even generally

make optimal spending and management decisions to increase quality. It may be costly and time-

consuming, parents may not have good information about how schools work and thus may not

make optimal decisions, and it may be very difficult to put pressure on teachers to improve

service quality. It may be particularly difficult since capacity depends on parent power vis-à-vis

teachers, or “real authority” in the terms of Aghion and Tirole (1997), who underscore the fact

that formal authority (the right to make decisions) need not imply real authority (effective control

over decisions).3

        A major limitation of the paper is the short-term nature of the findings. Long-term

follow-up was impossible, so it is possible that different results would have emerged after one or

two more years. However, the results presented here are still useful: first, they give evidence

about the barriers that communities may face at the beginning of participatory programs, and

second, the richness of the data on spending decisions, contributions, involvement and
                                                                                                  6
responsibility, and link to community characteristics gives some insight into the mechanisms at

work within communities when making school management decisions.


       The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents some background

information on education in Niger and describes the school grant experiment. Section 3 presents

the data and estimation strategy and section 4 the empirical results. Section 5 concludes.


                          I. BACKGROUND AND EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

       The grant program sought to empower parent school committees in a context where

parents traditionally had very little control over their children’s schooling and where overall levels

of learning were quite low. The experimental design was incorporated to give information on

program effectiveness prior to an intended scale-up.



                                   Background on Education in Niger

       Niger made remarkable progress in access to education in the decade prior to this

evaluation: the number of children enrolled in primary school had more than doubled from

656,000 in 2000 to 1,554,102 in 2008, and net enrollment had risen from 27% to 49% in the same

period. However, only 44% of children who begin primary school finished all grades, and only

43% of the sixth graders who took the national exam at the end of primary school passed it.4

       The education system in Niger has traditionally been fairly hierarchical and rigid.

Inherited from French colonization, the system replicates the French education system: highly

centralized, with little, if any, room for local community participation. Unlike other systems,

where the school might be supervised by a local governmental body, at the time of the evaluation

there was generally no way for the local community to determine school policy or practice.

Schools depended entirely on the hierarchical chain that originated in the Ministry of Education


                                                                                                    7
(except for some local fundraising, but these efforts were undertaken only when needs were not

provided for by the Ministry).


       In 2006 the Ministry of Education in Niger introduced school committees in all primary

public schools in order to improve quality. These school committees (called the COGES) were

designed to involve parents and community members in the school, improve accountability,

improve management, and thus enhance access to and quality of education.5

       As discussed in the introduction, the establishment of local community groups for the

purpose of improving public service provision via community participation is a strategy that

many country governments and civil society organizations advocate. In many respects, the

circumstances of Niger make a strong case for school-based management: low population

density, vast distances and limited transportation, information, and communications

infrastructure make supervision of primary schools by the central government (or its regional

structures) very costly, and the timely transmission of information to and from the central

authorities for planning purposes is challenging.


       In the districts where this program was carried out, the COGES were trained by several

different organizations in financial management, governance (elections), and project planning. In

2006, many of the newly created and trained school committees were not actively engaged in

school matters, nor did they develop a school improvement plan for the year. To spur school

committee involvement and activity, the Ministry of Education introduced school grants to give

the committees an incentive to meet, plan, and undertake activities. The grants were expected to

improve school management through increased parental participation and accountability, to

improve school infrastructure and the quality of education, and to potentially increase enrollment

rates and learning. The pilot project was carried out as a randomized evaluation in order to

provide reliable information on impact prior to national scale-up.
                                                                                                8
       The Ministry selected the regions of Zinder and Tahoua because the COGES there were

already functional and had received basic training on planning and financial management,

whereas COGES in the other six regions of Niger had not been trained yet. However, the

context of these two regions is specific, even relative to the rest of Niger. The Zinder region is

culturally similar to Northern Nigeria, with a relatively conservative Muslim population that has

lower rates of formal schooling. On the other hand, the Tahoua region is a nomadic region where

formal education poses a challenge because the nomadic population (the Tuareg and the Fulani)

may often rely on children for herding. In both cases, one may expect parents to adhere less to

formal schooling than in other regions in Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                        Experimental Design

       The evaluation design included 1,000 schools in Tahoua and Zinder, randomly selected

out of the 2,609 total public primary schools in those districts. Once these 1,000 schools were

determined to be representative of the total pool of schools in those districts, half were randomly

assigned to receive the grants and became the treatment group. The other 500 schools served as a

control group. Both randomizations were stratified on inspection (a geographical administrative

unit), existing support for the school committee (e.g., existing programs or sponsorship by

NGOs), and whether the school was indicated as being in a rural or urban area in administrative

data. Strata were constructed by grouping the schools into inspections, then within each

inspection into whether or not the school had existing support, and then within each of those

groups, whether the school was in a rural or urban area. This gave fifty strata. Schools were

assigned a random number between zero and one, and within each stratum they were sorted by

this random number, with the first half being assigned to treatment and the second to control.

Data from the Administrative School Census in 2005–2006 (the school census is described
                                                                                                 9
below) were used to confirm balance between control and treatment schools along various

observable characteristics (data from 2006–2007 were not yet available at the time of sampling in

August 2007). The balance checks for the randomization and p-values for the test of equality of

means across control and treatment are presented in table 1, and show no statistically significant

differences.


       The original project plan called for recurrent grants to schools for three consecutive

school years, to be distributed at the beginning of each school year to support COGES activities.

The Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Finance jointly worked out the grant transfer

mechanism, consisting of a direct release of funds from the national treasury into the accounts of

the two regional education authorities (i.e., one hierarchical level down from the national

government). The funds were then transferred to the inspection level and then to the COGES.

The transfers from the regional authorities and below took place as transfers of cash, which were

recorded using signed receipts, which were submitted to the Ministry of Finance.


       In the first year, rather than receiving the grants at the beginning of the year as planned,

the five hundred COGES received the grants during December 2007 and January 2008, with the

school year already in full swing, due to logistical difficulties with the transfer. The grants were

not immediately distributed during the 2008–2009 school year, due to problems with the transfer

mechanism.6 Due to these issues and political disruptions in 2009, the evaluation had ended after

only one year. As a consequence, this evaluation evaluates only one year of the grant (the

2008/2009 grant was eventually distributed to some schools, after the evaluation was terminated).


       The size of the grant was based on the size of the school (the number of classrooms), and

the average was 209 USD per school, or 1.83 USD per student. The grant was a relatively modest

amount that was determined by considerations of financial sustainability in view of a potential


                                                                                                 10
extension of the program by the government. For the purposes of comparison, the control

schools raised a little over 0.60 USD per year per student from the parents on average and had an

overall budget of around 199 USD including donations from private NGOs, and so the grant is

relatively large compared to the usual fundraising and about equivalent to the annual amount of

money available for school projects (note that in principle most school inputs such as teachers

and books were provided in kind by the central government and so not included in this 199 USD

—if they were, the grant would be smaller than the overall operating budget of the schools). For

an idea of the practical scale, the amount of the grant was not, except in the very largest schools,

sufficient to build an additional classroom. This grant amount is smaller than grants provided to

school committees in most other evaluations: Blimpo and Evans (2014) use a grant of 500 USD

per school in Gambia. Gertler, Patrinos, and Rodríguez-Oreggia (2010) use grants of 500 USD to

700 USD per school in Mexico, and Pradhan et al. (2014) evaluate a grant of 326 USD (to be

followed with another grand of 544 USD) per school in Indonesia.


       About a month before the grant arrived, all five hundred treatment schools (and school

committees) received a letter informing them of the grant program and its objectives, and the

grant amount allocated to their school. It also included general guidelines on the use of the

grants, but the specific activity to be supported by the grants was to be decided on by the school

committee.7 One copy of this letter was distributed to the school director and a second copy to

the president of the school committee before the arrival of the grants. Compliance in this respect

was satisfactory: the grants arrived in 498 schools of the 500 program schools, 492 in the exact

amount allocated to them and six in a different amount (see appendix S2, for further details on

compliance).




                                                                                                 11
                                   II. DATA AND EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

        Multiple sources contain rich information on potential treatment outcomes and

community characteristics that can be used to generate estimates of treatment impact and

heterogeneous impact using a simple ITT framework.


                                                Data


        Data come from three sources: (i) administrative data on primary schools (the Ministry of

Education’s annual school census, also called administrative data), (ii) an evaluation survey

administered to school staff and two members of the school committee at treatment and control

schools (the 2008 School Survey), and (iii) a financial control survey administered to one member

of the school committee on a subset of treatment schools.


        The Ministry of Education in Niger administers an annual census of all primary schools,

including community schools and madrassas (Koranic schools), which provides data on

enrollment, teacher characteristics, school facilities and resources, and community characteristics.

This paper uses the 2006/2007, 2007/2008, and 2008/2009 censuses. Each census is collected in

the fall of the school year (for example, the 2008/2009 census contains the information reported

by the schools in fall of 2008).


        In addition to the administrative data, the Ministry and the World Bank worked with a

local NGO to prepare a detailed school survey (the 2008 School Survey) to be administered to

the one thousand schools included in the experiment in April/May 2008, five to six months after

grant distribution, to understand the immediate effects of the grant. This questionnaire included

information on school infrastructure and resources, pupil enrollment and attendance, school

improvement plan, school committee functioning and membership, and school activities. It also

asked detailed questions about the level of education and personal wealth of the school
                                                                                                 12
committee members. Three tests were also administered at this time: a math test, a French test,

and an oral exam. The oral exam was administered to the youngest (grades one and two) pupils.

Teacher’s physical presence at that visit was also recorded. The visit was on a day when the

school was supposed to be open but was not announced in advance.


       Finally, a financial survey was administered to eighty-five randomly selected treatment

schools in January/February 2009, asking detailed questions about the receipt and spending of

the grants, any problems with the administration of the grant, and use of the grants (including the

existence of a receipt for each expense).




                                            Use of the Grants

       The school committees used the grants in a variety of ways. Eighty-five schools were

randomly selected for a detailed questionnaire on grant arrival and spending. The most common

use was for material inputs such as construction and office supplies, and other uses included

investment projects, health and sanitation projects, and transportation. Overall, the largest share

of spending of the grant was in construction, representing about a third of the total amount spent

(figure 1). Construction activities included building classrooms, but communities also constructed

lodging for teachers, latrines, school enclosures, and other buildings. Other projects included

electrification or producing copies of exams. About fifteen percent of schools surveyed used at

least part of the grant on some sort of agricultural investment project. It is unclear whether the

loans or small business projects were profitable.




                                               Outcomes


                                                                                                13
       The analysis uses many different indicators of parent participation to draw general

conclusions about the experiment’s impact. In order to simplify interpretation and to guard

against cherry-picking of results, it presents results for indices that aggregate information over

multiple outcome variables (following Kling et al. 2007). The aggregation also improves statistical

power to detect effects that go in the same direction within a domain. The summary index Y is

deﬁned to be the equally weighted average of z-scores of its components, with the sign of each

measure oriented so that more beneﬁcial outcomes have higher scores. The z-scores are

calculated by subtracting the control group mean and dividing by the control group standard

deviation. Thus, each component of the index has mean 0 and standard deviation 1 for the

control group. The index is the average of the nonmissing components, as long as the school has

a valid response to at least two components. If only one component is available (or if no

components are available), the school is dropped. Different types of outcomes are calculated in

this way: parent participation, school management, and school quality. For each outcome, several

indices are constructed. The details and full list of component variables for each index are given

in appendix S3.


       For parent participation in school, the paper uses indices of parent contributions (e.g.,

school fees), involvement (e.g., going to meetings), responsibility (e.g., in charge of supplies), and

teacher oversight (e.g., monitoring teacher attendance). School management is measured by two

indices, accountability (e.g., keeping records) and cooperation (e.g., reported conflicts), and also

by total spending across eight possible spending categories (infrastructure, supplies and

textbooks, pupil educational support (e.g., remedial courses), pupil health, teacher support (e.g.,

housing), COGES expenses (e.g., travel to regional meetings), school festivals and playground,

and investments in agriculture). Finally, the effect of the grant on school quality is measured by

four indices: infrastructure (e.g., number of desks), materials (e.g., textbooks), health resources

                                                                                                   14
(e.g., first aid kit), and teacher effort (e.g., teacher attendance). Data for infrastructure, materials,

and health resources come from the 2008/2009 annual administrative database, collected in the

fall of 2008, and so reflect changes between eight and ten months after receipt of the grants.


        The paper also uses data on dropouts, enrollment, and test scores in order to examine the

ultimate objective of increasing pupil participation and learning. Participation in education is

measured by the number of dropouts reported by the school to surveyors at the April/May 2008

questionnaire and the change in enrollment from fall 2007 to fall 2008 reported to the Ministry of

Education in the annual administrative censuses.


        The paper uses two limited measures of actual learning. First, test scores are obtained

from a test administered to pupils during the April/May 2008 questionnaire. The test was

administered to three grades, ten pupils per grade. The pupils were supposed to be sampled from

those who were enrolled at the beginning of the year, but in practice the ten pupils appear to

have been selected from the pupils present on that day. There are further quality problems with

the test scores—including identical copies submitted by some grades in some schools—that raise

concerns about the quality of the test score data. There is no evidence that the problems are

correlated with treatment and appear instead to be related to insufficient oversight of the

examiners, so it is possible that the quality problems only add noise. However, as discussed

below, the fact that participation is higher in the treatment schools and test takers were sampled

from those present on that day leads to concerns of attrition bias in the test scores (if more

children stayed in school in the treatment group, then the impact on test scores may be biased

downwards). The results are therefore considered as second-order evidence. The overall results

are nonetheless informative about the general level of education in rural Niger, and some

examples are provided here to help give the reader a better idea of the context. In general, after


                                                                                                      15
discarding duplicate and suspect observations, pupils got about one third of questions correct.

For example, the following questions were asked:


   Grade one: The interviewer asked the pupils to pick up a red crayon and a blue crayon out of

    a pile containing pieces of chalk of different colors: three white, one red, one blue, one

    yellow, and one green. 45% of pupils were able to do this.

   Grade four: Pupils were asked to place the following numbers in order, from smallest to

    largest: 807; 708; 788; 800. 24% of pupils were able to do this.

   Grade six: Pupils were asked to change an adjective from the masculine to the feminine form

    (Un nouveau maitre ==> Une ____________ maitresse). 29% of pupils were able to do

    this.


        The second measure of learning comes from the annual administrative censuses which

report the number of candidates for the national end-of-primary school exam and the number

who passed. Results for the end of the 2007/08 school year were reported on the 2008/09

census.8 On average, slightly over half of the schools presented at least one student for the end of

sixth grade test (recall that most schools do not have all grades).




                                         Interaction Variables

        The sample size was chosen to be large enough to allow testing for heterogeneous

treatment effects by community characteristics, and this was one of the initial objectives of this

the study.9 The dimensions chosen for measurement of heterogeneous effects are those that are

likely to affect parent response to the grant or that have policy relevance: education, experience in

other organizations, wealth of the COGES, whether the school is in an urban or rural area, and



                                                                                                  16
whether it is a one-teacher school. Descriptive statistics and balance information for the

interaction variables are given in table 2.

        Our intuition is that COGES with higher levels of education and experience in other

organizations are likely to have higher capacity to manage schools. To make sure that these

dimensions are not merely proxying for wealth, wealth is also included as an interaction term (and

it is not impossible that wealthy communities might react differently, either because they have

more real authority or because they can leverage a larger supplemental contribution from the

community). The distinction between urban and rural schools is important for education planners

in general, and it is also important to ensure that the other interaction terms are not just proxies

for the urban rural divide. Finally, one-teacher schools present a unique situation in terms of the

power dynamics between the teachers and the parents, and these very small schools are also of

relevance to education planners. Further details on the construction of these interaction terms are

given in appendix S3.




                                              Attrition

        There is some attrition in the datasets. Each year, a handful of schools do not return the

administrative data questionnaire, or the questionnaires are improperly filled out, leading to

missing data for 3% of the schools for the infrastructure index and 1.4% of the schools for

2008/09 enrollment. The April/May 2008 survey was conducted on the basis of unannounced

visits, which meant that many schools were closed. In addition, some schools were not visited

due to security concerns, and still others closed early that year because the summer rainy season

began early and many children went to the fields with their parents to work. As a result, data

from the evaluation questionnaire are available for only 814 of the 1000 schools.


                                                                                                 17
        Differences in the proportion of schools with missing outcome variables are tested by

treatment group as a whole and subdivided by district, urban and rural, and whether the school

had external support (for example, NGO sponsorship) prior to the project. Results are reported

in appendix S2, table A1. Eighty-four tests on treatment and interaction between treatment and

subgroups yield one statistically significant difference (at the 10% level or higher), which is well

within the amount that would be expected with random attrition. The comparability between

treatment and control groups is thus intact. As to external validity, there are more schools

missing in the region where security was a concern (Tahoua, in the north).




                                          Empirical Strategy

        The estimations present intent-to-treat effects as measured by the differences in the

means of school outcomes between schools initially assigned to the treatment group and schools

initially assigned to the control group. Let T be an indicator for treatment group assignment and

let X be a vector of covariates. Estimation of the intent-to-treat effect β is from the following

equation:


                                       Y j = βT j + X j γ + ε j                      (1)

where Yj is the outcome of school j. The covariates Xj are included to improve estimation

precision and include whether the school is urban, the total proportion of girls in 2007/08, the

total enrollment in 2007/08, whether the school was supported by an outside NGO in 2006/07,

and the inspection (a geographic/administrative unit). All regressions use robust standard

errors.10

        The absolute magnitudes are in units of the outcome’s standard deviation (based on the

control group), so the estimate shows the treatment effect in terms of standard deviations.

                                                                                                 18
                    Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Along Community Characteristics


       In the second step, intent-to-treat effects are estimated with an interaction term to

determine whether the average treatment effect on parent and teacher behavior varies with

community characteristics, using the following regression specification:


                       Y j = βT j + θ(C j T j)+ σ C j + X j γ + ε j              (2)


       where C j denotes a given community characteristic. In this case θ is the additional (or

reduction of) impact for schools with characteristic C j . We include an indicator for urban schools

and the interaction of this indicator with the treatment assignment for each characteristic whose

correlation with being located in an urban area is above 0.1, to disentangle the effect of this

characteristic from the effect of being located in an urban area.




                                              III. RESULTS

       On average, parents did not reduce their own contributions in response to the grant and

increased their involvement in and responsibility over school management, although they did not

go so far as to enforce rules on teacher attendance. At the same time, school committees

increased investment in infrastructure (buildings and the school enclosure) and school festivals

and invested in agricultural projects. Accountability did not change, but reported cooperation

with a number of school stakeholders improved as a result of the grant. All these effects did not

create a path to school quality improvement. While infrastructure and health resources improved

and pupil participation increased a bit among the youngest, teacher attendance declined on

average, perhaps because of resentment over parent empowerment, and no impact is found on

                                                                                                 19
test scores. Particular impacts on the detailed components of each index are given in appendix

S4. Appendix S5 provides a model that explains the results of this paper and the existing results

in the literature.




                                        Parent Participation

         The grants did not change parent contributions to schools (table 3, column 1). The

contribution index mean of the treatment group is statistically and economically similar to the

mean of the control group. The analysis of the component variables (funds collected per pupil, in

kind donations, and official fees charged) shows that neither financial nor in-kind contributions

were affected by the grant (table A2). This result contrasts with previous studies showing that

parents decreased their contributions in response to an increase in school resources (Das et al.

2013; Pop-Eleches and Urquiola 2013).11

         Note that in general the amount of cash income available to schools is obtained through

parental contributions. An important consequence of this is that, due to the increase in cash from

the grant, cash on hand for schools increased and thus so did the possibility for investment.


         The parent involvement index increased (table 3, column 2), as did all of the individual

components, although no change in any individual component is significant: the number of

meetings was higher, time elapsed since the last meeting was smaller, the number of topics

addressed in the meetings is larger, and the presence at the last meeting is larger (table A3).

Overall, the mean of the parent involvement index in the treatment group is 0.06 standard

deviations larger than the mean of the control group, and this effect is significant at the 10%

level.




                                                                                                20
       The impact of grants on parent responsibility in school management is reported in table

3, column 3. The overall effect of the grants is positive: the mean of the index of the treatment

group is almost 0.06 standard deviations above the mean of the control group. The analysis of

detailed variables composing the index shows some small increases in the proportion of school

committees in charge of infrastructure, collecting financial contribution and spending financial

contributions, although none of these increases are statistically significant (although some of p-

values are close to conventional significance), while the effect on the index itself is significant at

the 10% level (Appendix S4, table A4).


       There is no overall impact on parent supervision of teachers (table 3, column 4). Changes

in the proportion of school committees which discuss teacher behavior in school committee

meetings, declare that they are active in increasing teacher attendance and improving education

quality, declare that they monitor teacher attendance, and take remedial actions against teachers

are small and insignificant (Appendix S4, table A5). No trend emerges from these variables, and

so there is no change in the teacher oversight index.




                                          School Management

       While there is no impact of the grant on school accountability overall (table 3, column 5),

the analysis of the detailed components shows a 13% increase in the proportion of schools that

could present a register for fund collection for examination and a 21% increase in the proportion

of schools that could present a register for fund expenses for examination, which might be

simply the direct consequence of the fact that schools in the treatment group received money

from the government and had something to record, rather than an overall change in

accountability (Appendix S4, table A6). However, the grant did not change the use of other


                                                                                                   21
registers nor the frequency of minutes, which suggests that the increased involvement and

responsibility of parents did not lead to a higher demand for transparency and record keeping.


        Overall, the cooperation between the school committee and different actors improved

(table 3, column 6): school committees are significantly more likely to report support from the

community (+5 percentage points), from the teachers (+3 percentage points), and from the

parent committee (+5 percentage points) (Appendix S4, table A7). The proportions of school

committees reporting support from local authorities, school administration, educational advisors,

and inspection are also consistently larger, although these differences are not significant. As a

result, mean of the cooperation index for the treatment group is almost 0.07 standard deviations

above the mean of the control group, significant at the 5% level. One explanation for the positive

effect of grants on cooperation between school stakeholders and school committees is that giving

resources under the control of the school committee increased respect for its activities. The

positive effect of the grant on the cooperation between the school committee and the different

actors may be important when considering the short term nature of the experiment. It echoes the

short term effect of a similar program on social capital observed in Burkina Faso (Sawada and

Ichii 2012).


        Treatment schools increased spending on infrastructure, festivals and playground, and

investments in agriculture. The absolute and percent differences in amounts budgeted for a given

type of project in treatment schools compared to comparison schools are presented in figure 2

(significant differences in dark grey, nonsignificant in light grey). The amount budgeted for a

given type of project was significantly larger for infrastructure, festivals and playgrounds, and

investments in agriculture (table 4): the amount budgeted for infrastructure was 20% larger in the

treatment group (107,705 FCFA (215 USD) versus 86,119 (172 USD) significant at the 5% level),

the amount budgeted for festivals and playgrounds was sixfold greater than in the control group
                                                                                                 22
(1031 FCFA (about 2 USD) versus 166 FCFA (0.33 USD), significant at the 1% level), and the

amount budgeted for investments in agriculture was fourfold greater (2,416 FCFA (5 USD)

versus 583 FCFA (about 1 USD), significant at the 1% level). Note that the difference, while

large relative to the amount spent in control schools on these activities, is small compared to the

entire amount of the grant, so the bulk of the grant was not used on school festivals, playground

and agricultural investments. The size of the increase in infrastructure spending in absolute terms

(19,659 FCFA, or 40 USD) is much larger than the increases in agriculture and festival and

playground expenses (1,833 FCFA (a bit less than 4 USD) and 865 FCFA (almost 2 USD),

respectively).


        The investments in agriculture do not seem to have been done in the interest of one

person, which might be considered a theft of resources, but rather as an investment on the part

of the school (since they were recorded in the school ledger). One interpretation of the

investment in agricultural projects is that credit in many areas of Niger is severely constrained.

There may be profit opportunities from investment in agriculture (either in terms of raising crops

or arbitraging prices for inputs or food products), but since isolated areas suffer from low levels

of credit, these profitable opportunities are unexploited. If the COGES is aware of these

opportunities, and they are patient, it may be most optimal for the long-term interest of the

school to invest the windfall cash grant rather than spend it on educational inputs immediately.

However, one cannot be sure that these investments were made for the profit of the school and

they may not have benefited the pupils in any way.12

        Finally, school committees had spent just above a quarter of the grant at the time of the

April/May 2008 questionnaire: the average increase in the total spending amount is 28,512 FCFA

(57 USD), while the average grant is 104,500 FCFA (209 USD). This finding indicates that about

five months after the grants arrived in treatment schools, the school committees had not yet used

                                                                                                23
the remaining three-quarter grant. Together with the types of spending induced by the grant,

these results suggest that the school budget constraint is not immediately binding: a large part of

the grant is still unused, and some money is spent on leisure and agricultural spending, which

seem nonessential for pure educational purposes. Also, the amount budgeted for teacher support

is unchanged (the average amount in the treatment schools is even lower than in the control

schools, although the difference is not significant), which is striking in a context where teachers

suffer from long delays in the payment of their salary. Similarly, it seems surprising that the grant

did not change the amount of money spent on supplies and textbooks, pupil educational support

like remedial courses, or pupil health expenses, in a context where school equipment is very poor

and pupils do not perform well at the primary school final exam. Overall, the impact of the grant

on school expenses suggest that in the context of Niger, parents might not have sufficient

information to make investments that are likely to improve school quality. Other explanations,

which may simultaneously be true, are that parents were saving the grant in the face of uncertain

future cash flows (see Sabarwal et al. 2014), that they were saving money in order to offset fees in

the following year, or that they were saving money for lumpy investments




                                           School Quality

       Improvements are observed only for infrastructure and health resources, alongside small

increases in participation at the lowest grades. There is no improvement on materials nor on

teacher effort. On the contrary, there is a small decrease in teacher attendance. There is no

evidence that test scores increased in response to the program.


       In the slightly longer term (one year after the treatment) there is a small improvement in

the infrastructure index of schools: a 0.04 standard deviation increase in the index for


                                                                                                  24
infrastructure quality (table 3, column 7), significant at the 10% level. This is largely driven by

increases in the number of classrooms and the construction of walls around the compound

(Appendix S4, table A8).13

       The increase in the number of new classrooms amounts to 0.12 of a standard deviation,

representing an additional 0.08 new classrooms per school in the treatment group over 0.28 new

classrooms per school in the control group (a 29% increase). The increase in the proportion of

schools with walls around the compound (enclosure) amounts to 0.18 of a standard deviation,

with 9 percentage points more in the treatment group over 34% in the control group (a 26%

increase). There is no overall impact on the materials available at the schools (books and

classroom materials such as rulers, protractors, and maps) (table 3, Appendix S4, table A9). There

is a small (0.05 standard deviations) increase in the index of health resources (table 3, column 9),

significant at the 10% level. This increase is driven by increases in health information sessions

(34% versus 30% of schools), first aid kits (12% versus 9% of schools), micronutrient

supplementation (25% versus 22% of schools), and deworming (64% versus 62% of schools),

though none of the individual components of the health index are significant alone (Appendix

S4, table A10).


       There is no effect of the grant on the number of days when class was cancelled because

teachers were on strike, nor on the opinion of the school committee on teacher assiduousness

and punctuality, but a decrease in teacher presence is observed in the treatment group: around 4

percentage points less than the average of 76% presence in the control group, significant at the

10% level (table 5). Teachers thus responded to increased resources under the control of parents

with a reduction in their own inputs. Informal feedback from the field suggested that those

teachers who felt the central government should make education decisions disliked that the

communities were in charge of the grant, and they may have felt resentful that the grants

                                                                                                 25
undermined their authority (as representatives of the central government). In addition, the

decreased teacher presence might also be related to the fact that the average school committee

did not spend the grant on expenses supporting the teachers (teacher housing, furniture, supplies,

guide books, and salary), even though school committees had not spent the entire grant at the

time of the survey. As a consequence, teachers might have had the impression that parents were

not capable of wisely investing the money allocated to them and might have been resentful. Any

such resentfulness might have been exacerbated by the ongoing pay disputes between the

teachers and the government at that time (in many cases, teachers’ salaries had been substantially

delayed or teachers had not been paid).


        There is no change in enrollment or dropout overall (table 6), but there is a positive

impact at the lowest grade levels. The grant program reduced dropouts from grade one at the end

of the 2007/2008 school year (2% versus 3% in the control schools) (column 4 of table 6b), a

finding that is matched by an increase in enrollment in grade two at the beginning of the

2008/2009 school year (thirty-three versus thirty pupils in the controls schools) (column 5 of

table 6A).


        The fact that participation increases only for the youngest pupils suggests that

participation is more elastic when the child is young. This might be because the opportunity cost

of time is higher for older children.14

        The number of candidates presented for the end of primary school exam at the end of the

2007/2008 school year, the pass rate for the end of primary school exam, and the math, French,

or oral tests administered during the April/May 2008 questionnaire visit were not affected (table

7). Since participation increased (or fewer children dropped out) in the lowest grades, one cannot

rule out a downward bias due to attrition. However, the fact that test scores remained unchanged


                                                                                               26
in the higher grades where there was no change in participation supports the finding that there

was no improvement in learning.




                                    Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

       The paper now examines the different dimensions identified above to identify

heterogeneous effects. Due to space limitations, we do not present the detailed regression tables

in the paper, but they are available from the authors upon request. There are two overall

messages from this analysis. The first is that the most difficult management task—monitoring

teachers—was undertaken only by educated COGES or those with experience in other

organizations, that is, those with higher capacity. The second is that, in one-teacher schools, there

was a greater threat of teacher strikes, more of the grant was spent on items that benefited the

teachers in some way, and, perhaps as a consequence of spending on items that benefited

teachers, teacher presence increased slightly.


                                      Education of the COGES

       Communities where the school committees were educated increased their supervision of

teacher attendance in response to the grant. Educated school committees are 9 percentage points

more likely to supervise teacher presence if the school was treated, significant at the 10% level.

However, the increased monitoring did not reduce teacher absenteeism, suggesting that parents

were not able to effectively confront teachers.


       In terms of spending, educated COGES who received grants focused investments on

infrastructure, perhaps to the detriment of other types of spending.15 COGES without educated

members, on the other hand, increased spending on Health Resources and Pupil Educational

Support.16
                                                                                                  27
         The negative impact of the grant on money for Pupil Educational Support and the health

resources index might reflect that educated COGES increased expenses in infrastructure, which

are generally lumpy investments, and might have required the school to spend less on other

items.


         There is also a negative impact of the grant on math and French test scores in schools

with educated COGES (about one-third of a standard deviation, significant at the 5% level for

math and 10% level for French). This negative impact of the grant on learning in schools with

educated COGES, who focused spending on infrastructure, echoes the findings in the literature

that providing more-of-the-same educational inputs typically has no impact on learning, whereas

interventions such as remedial education and rewards are more effective at increasing learning

(Kremer et al. 2013). Educated COGES may not have made the optimal choice because they

decreased spending on pupil educational support, perhaps to finance the lumpy infrastructure

investments.




                                       Experienced COGES

         Schools where the COGES has at least one member who is also a member of another

community organization increased monitoring of teacher attendance in response to the grant.

These schools are also those that enjoyed the increases in the cooperation index, whereas schools

with no member that is also a member of another community organization had no increases.17




                                      Wealth of the COGES




                                                                                              28
        Parent responsibility increased more in wealthy communities.18 We note that the results

for wealth are different from the results for educated and experienced COGES, showing that the

effects we find for education and experience are not merely proxies for wealth.




                                            One-Teacher Schools

        One-teacher schools seem to have made a different choice than larger schools, with

important effects: they budgeted more money for expenses related to Teacher Support.19 This

may be because there was more threat of striking from the teachers: one-teacher schools in the

treatment group lost 1.3 days more to teacher strikes than one-teacher schools in the control

schools (significant at the 10% level).

        Perhaps as a result, one-teacher schools are the only schools to not suffer from the

negative impact of the grants on teacher attendance on the day of the visit.20 In fact, the size of

the coefficient on the interaction term suggests that teacher attendance actually increased in one-

teacher schools. This suggests that by transferring some of the grant to teachers—or at least to

investments that benefit teachers—the one teacher schools limited the reduced teacher

attendance associated with the grant in other schools. However, infrastructure in one-teacher

schools did not improve, in contrast to other schools.21




                                          Urban and Rural Schools

        Increases in in-kind contributions are driven by parents in urban schools.22 The increase

in the parent responsibility index is also driven by increases in urban rather than rural schools.23

        Only schools located in rural areas increased their spending on agricultural investments.24




                                                                                                       29
This may be because credit constraints may be less severe in urban areas, but no data are available

to confirm this.




                                         IV. CONCLUSION

        The short run impact of grants to school committees in Niger was to increase

cooperation and participation along several dimensions without crowding out parent financial

contributions. The implication of this finding is that one way to potentially avoid the crowding

out due to increased inputs found in other experiments is to involve parents in the management

of the funds. Increased parent participation also came with a small increase in young pupil

participation.


        However, more pessimistically, while the parents were willing to try to improve quality by

participating, they were not able to do so, at least in the short run. One possible reason for this is

that, in this context, parents (the majority of whom did not go to school) do not have sufficient

information to make investments that are likely to improve quality. In particular, most

investments focused on buildings, rather than extra lessons or materials, and these investments

did not translate into improved learning. On average, teachers decreased their effort in response

to the grant to the COGES. This finding reinforces other evidence in the literature of negative

teacher reactions to participatory programs and highlights the importance of taking this potential

reaction into account in policy planning.


        The heterogeneous impact analysis, while second-order, yields potentially helpful insights

for understanding the impact of the program and considering future programs. The most difficult

type of participation—monitoring teachers—was attempted only by educated or experienced

school committees. This suggests that participation initiatives need to take the capacity and
                                                                                                   30
authority of the intended participators into account. In addition, one-teacher schools that

invested in the teacher’s working conditions and/or made some type of transfer to the teacher,

actually increased teacher attendance. This finding suggests that teachers’ negative reaction to

parent participation might be reversed when parents are “on the side” of the teachers. Finally,

rural school committees as well as noneducated school committees invested a small part of the

grant in agriculture, perhaps because they did not prioritize education or because they invested

the money in order to get more funds for the school in the future. We highlight this finding so

that future programs might be aware of it and collect more data to understand what schools

might do with grants and the role that education preferences and credit constraints play in those

decisions.


       These findings are from an evaluation that ended prematurely. As such, their

generalizability is limited even as they do give us some insight into what may be the immediate

barriers to a community’s ability to effectively leverage grant programs.


       There are four key policy implications of the findings in this paper. First, on some

measures, participatory programs can be successful: parents increased their participation in

school management in response to the grant without immediately reducing their contributions.

Second, on the other hand, there is no reason to assume that parents will make wise spending

and management decisions. Third, capacity matters for difficult tasks, as in this case the parents

with education or experience were those able to supervise teacher attendance. Finally, teachers

may respond to parent empowerment by reducing effort, and avoiding this may require ensuring

that teachers also benefit in some way.




                                                                                               31
                                          REFERENCES


Aghion, P., and J. Tirole. 1997. “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations.” Journal of Political
      Economy 105 (1): 1–29.
Banerjee, A., R. Banerji, E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and S. Khemani. 2010. “Pitfalls of
       Participatory Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India.”
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1): 1–30.
Barrera-Osorio, F., T. Fasih, H. Patrinos, and L. Santibanez. 2009. “Decentralized Decision-
       Making in Schools, The Theory and Evidence on School-Based Management.”
       Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Blimpo, M., D. Evans, and N. Lahire. 2015. “Parental Human Capital and Effective School
      Management: Evidence from the Gambia.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
      N° 7238.
Bryk, A., Y. M. Thum, J. Easton, and S. Luppescu. 1998. “Academic Productivity of Chicago
       Public Elementary Schools: A Technical Report Sponsored by the Consortium on
       Chicago School Research,” Mimeo. University of Chicago.
Das, J., S. Dercon, J. Habyarimana, P. Krishnan, K. Muralidharan, and V. Sundararaman. 2013.
        “School Inputs, Household Substitution, and Test Scores.” American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 5 (2): 29–57.
Di Gropello E. 2006. “A Comparative Analysis of School-based Management in Central
     America.” World Bank Working Paper, 72.
Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer. 2015. “School Governance, Teacher Incentives, and Pupil-
       Teacher Ratios: Experimental Evidence from Kenyan Primary Schools.” Journal of Public
       Economics 123: 92–110.
Galiani, S., P. Gertler, and E. Schargrodsky. 2008. “School Decentralization: Helping the Good
        Get Better, but Leaving the Poor Behind.” Journal of Public Economics 92 (10): 2106–20.
Galiani, S., E. Schargrodsky. 2002. “Evaluating the Impact of School Decentralization on
        Educational Quality.” Economia 2 (2): 275–314.
Galiani, S., and R. Perez-Truglia. 2013. “School Management in Developing Countries,”
        CEDLAS, Working Papers 0147, Universidad Nacional de La Plata.
Hanushek, E. A., S. Link, and L. Woessmann. 2013. “Does school autonomy make sense
      everywhere? Panel estimates from PISA.” Journal of Development Economics 104: 212–32.
Hess, A. 1999. “Expectations, Opportunities, Capacity and Will: The Four Essential Components
       of Chicago School Reform.” Educational Policy 13 (4): 494–517.
King, E., and B. Ozler. 2005. “What’s Decentralization Got to Do With Learning? School
      Autonomy and Student Performance.” Discussion Paper No. 054, Interfaces for
      Advanced Economic Analysis, Kyoto University.
Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz, 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
       Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1): 83–119.
                                                                                                32
Kremer, M., C. Brannen, and R. Glennerster. 2013. “The Challenge of Education and Learning in
      the Developing World.” Science 340 (6130): 297–300.
Lassibille, G., J. Tan, C. Jesse, and T. Van Nguyen. 2010. “Managing for Results in Primary
        Education in Madagascar: Evaluating the Impact of Selected Workflow Interventions,”
        World Bank Economic Review 24 (2): 303–29.
Pop-Eleches, C., and M. Urquiola. 2013. “Going to a Better School: Effects and Behavioral
      Responses.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1289–324.
Pradhan, M., D. Suryadarma, A. Beatty, M. Wong, A. Alishjabana, A. Gaduh, and R. P. Artha.
      2014. “Improving Educational Quality through Enhancing Community Participation:
      Results from a Randomized Field Experiment in Indonesia.” American Economic Journal:
      Applied Economics 6 (2): 105–26.
Sabarwal, S., D. Evans, and A. Marshak. 2014. “The Permanent Input Hypothesis: The Case of
      Textbooks and (No) Student Learning in Sierra Leone.” World Bank Policy Research
      Working Paper 7021.
Sawada, Y., and T. Ishii. 2012. “Do Community-Managed Schools Facilitate Social Capital
      Accumulation? Evidence from the COGES Project in Burkina Faso.” JICA-RI Working
      Paper 42.
World Bank. 2003. World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People.
      New York, NY: Oxford University Press.




                                                                                          33
Figure 1: Reported Use of Grant Money, by Total Amount Spent




Source: Financial Control Questionnaire in eighty-five randomly selected treatment schools.




                                                                                              34
Figure 2: Conditional Differences in Spending between Treatment and Control Groups




Source: 2008 School Survey. Conditional differences show the size of the coefficient on treatment from a regression
including controls for whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in
07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant, and inspection fixed effects. Light bars indicate that
the difference is not significant.




                                                                                                                     35
Table 1: Balance Check of Pre-program School Characteristics


                                  (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)          (5)       (6)
                                     Control          Treatment                   p-value
                                                                      Difference    of
                                                                      in means difference
                                  N       mean       N       mean       (C-T)    in means

 Pupil characteristics
 Enrollment 07/08                500      149.6      500     141.72      -7.88       0.28
 % Girls in 07/08                500      0.38       500      0.38       -0.01       0.26
 % Passed exam in 07/08          262      0.45       224      0.42       -0.03       0.28

 Teacher characteristics
 Number of teachers              490       3.87      494      3.55       -0.32       0.13
 % of teachers civil servants    490        0.2      494       0.2         0         0.91

 Physical infrastructure
 Number of buildings in
 07/08                           490       3.91      494      3.68      -0.23        0.17
 Number of latrines in 07/06     500       0.89      500      0.82      -0.08        0.55
 Water Access in 06/07           500       0.09      500      0.11       0.01        0.53
 Electricity in 06/07            500       0.01      500      0.02       0.01        0.22

 COGES characteristics
 COGES sponsored in 07/08        500       0.57      500      0.55       -0.01       0.70
 COGES exists in 06/07           500       0.88      500       0.9       0.02        0.32

 Location
 Tahoua                          500       0.52     500       0.51       -0.01       0.85
 Distance to inspection          500       41.1     500      38.59        -2.5       0.17
 Distance to health center       476       8.24     461      8.95          0.7       0.61

 Source: Ministry of Education Administrative Data. The data from 07/08 are reported in
 November (prior to the intervention) and are used when available; otherwise data from 06/07
 are used. “Sponsored” COGES are those that have some sort of official sponsor or support
 group (such as an NGO).




                                                                                               36
         Table 2. Community Characteristics used for Heterogeneous Treatment Effect Analysis


                                               p-value of                           Difference    p-value of
                       Control Treatment       difference     Control   Treatment   in means      difference
                        obs.      obs.         in attrition    mean       mean        (C-T)       in means

Educated COGES
member                      369        370         0.94         0.317        0.305        0.012         0.73
Experienced COGES
member                      369        370         0.94         0.209        0.227       -0.018         0.55
Average wealth of
COGES (PCA)                 360        358         0.89        -0.586       -0.674        0.088         0.42
One-teacher school          499        497         0.32         0.122        0.145       -0.023         0.29
Urban school                500        500                      0.108        0.110       -0.002         0.92
Source: Ministry of Education Administrative Data and 2008 School Survey. Observations at school level.
Educated COGES member = 1 if at least one member of the COGES completed primary school.
Experienced COGES member = 1 if at least one member is also the member of another community
organization. Average wealth is negative because the PCA was carried out with the sample including teachers,
who tend to be richer than the parents. The p-value of the difference in means is calculated by creating a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the data are missing for a particular school and then calculating the p-value of
the difference in this variable between groups.




                                                                                                         37
   Table 3. Grant Impact on Participation, Management, and Quality Indices


                        (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
                     Parent             Parent           Parent           Teacher
                   contribution      involvement      responsibility      oversight      Accountability
                      index             index             index            index            index

Treatment            -0.0117            0.0600*          0.0586*           0.0266            0.0127
                     (0.0490)          (0.0321)          (0.0353)         (0.0389)          (0.0351)
Constant              -0.141           -0.00756          -0.0889          0.335**            -0.219*
                      (0.167)           (0.117)           (0.129)          (0.159)           (0.124)

Observations            782              922               780               778               806
R-squared              0.056            0.059             0.051             0.110             0.124
Control group
mean                 -0.00709          -0.0355           -0.0191           0.00229          0.00325



                        (6)               (7)               (8)              (9)              (10)
                   Cooperation      Infrastructure      Materials                           Teacher
                     Index              Index            Index          Health Index      Effort Index

Treatment            0.0661**          0.0414*           -0.0439           0.0469*           -0.0237
                     (0.0306)          (0.0236)         (0.0350)           (0.0270)         (0.0435)
Constant             -0.220**         -0.454***         -0.402**          -0.396***         0.484***
                      (0.103)          (0.0936)          (0.171)            (0.114)          (0.158)

Observations            777              978               826               933               784
R-squared              0.078            0.164             0.174             0.238             0.213
Control group
mean                   -0.00756          -2.98e-09           -0.00411        1.26e-08          -0.00712
Source: Ministry of Education Administrative Data and 2008 School Survey. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or
urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support
prior to the grant, and inspection fixed effects. Details on the component variables and the impact of
treatment on each component variable for each index are given in the appendix S3.




                                                                                                           38
 Table 4. Impact on Spending Decisions


                                                                      Dependent Variable: Amount of money Spent on….
                                   (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)                   (8)              (9)
                             Infrastructure                        Pupil                                          School
                                  and         Supplies and      educational    Pupil       Teacher    COGES festivals and             Investments
                               equipment       textbooks          support     health       support    expenses playground            in agriculture   Total amount

Treatment                       21,586**          3,222            1,435          1,253       -1,086        32.14      864.8***        1,833***        28,512***
                                 (9,121)         (1,981)          (1,369)        (2,154)      (1,331)      (300.6)      (285.5)         (658.5)          (9,993)
Constant                         -24,197          836.7           -763.1        -13,404*       1,489        524.5      -1,599**         -861.4          -34,994
                                (38,103)         (8,622)          (4,031)        (8,062)      (4,576)      (1,046)      (765.0)         (1,098)         (41,928)

Observations                        726               733               734            734           734          738           736      731               698
R-squared                          0.127             0.156             0.087          0.051         0.019        0.039         0.039    0.047             0.157
Control group mean                86,119            11,631             6,058          8,711         4,352        782.7         165.8    582.9           115,898
Source: 2008 School Survey. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban
area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant, and inspection fixed effects. Dependent
variable is the amount in FCFA spent by COGES in the corresponding category of activities, as declared by the president of COGES in the April/May 2008 survey.
Infrastructure and Equipment includes expenses related to classrooms, desks, chairs, blackboards, school enclosure and security, and cleaning. Supplies and
textbooks include expenses for notebooks, pens, and textbooks. Pupil Educational Support includes expenses like additional courses, awareness campaigns to
increase enrollment, and academic rewards. Pupil health includes expenses related to nutrition and health like drinkable water, meals, latrines and drugs. Teacher
support includes expenses benefitting to teachers like teacher housing, furniture, supplies, guide books, and salary. COGES Expenses includes expenses related to
COGES meetings, contributions to “COGES communal” and inspector visits. Schools festivals and Playground includes expenses like graduation ceremonies,
parties, and soccer balls. Investments in Agriculture includes fields, crops and livestock, unrelated to education activities.




                                                                                                                                                                       39
Table 5. Impact on Teacher Effort


                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)

                                                                   COGES
                                   Days on        Teacher is      opinion of       Teacher
                                    strike         present      teacher effort   effort index

   Treatment                       -0.541         -0.0382*         -0.0220         -0.0237
                                   (0.490)        (0.0227)        (0.0253)        (0.0435)
   Constant                        -2.071         0.937***        3.656***        0.484***
                                   (2.292)        (0.0738)        (0.0932)         (0.158)

   Observations                      706             799             734             784
   R-squared                        0.127           0.248           0.134           0.213
   Control group mean               4.592           0.760           3.617         -0.00712
   Source: 2008 School Survey. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
   p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area,
   total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO
   support prior to the grant, and inspection fixed effects. Days on strike is the number of
   days that the school was closed due to teachers striking in 2007/2008. Teacher is present
   is the school average of the dummy variable indicating 1 if a teacher is physically present
   at the day of visit (on a day when the school was supposed to be open). If the school
   was closed, all teachers were counted as absent. The Teacher effort index is the average
   of the z-scores of the variables in columns (1) to (3), oriented so that more beneficial
   outcomes have higher values.




                                                                                                 40
Table 6. Impact on Dropout and Enrollment

                                                        A: Dependent Variable: Dropout as reported at school visit in Spring 2008
                                (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)              (9)
                               Total        Total girls   Total boys   Grade 1       Grade 2        Grade 3         Grade 4       Grade 5          Grade 6

 Treatment                    -0.00559       -0.206         -0.00469     -0.0136*       -0.00646      -0.00791       -0.00778       0.00264         0.00139
                             (0.00520)       (0.212)       (0.00609)     (0.00758)      (0.0107)     (0.00582)       (0.0100)      (0.00849)       (0.00987)
 Constant                    0.0723***        0.775        0.0908***     0.0366**       0.0613**     0.0678***        0.143**       0.115**        0.0891**
                              (0.0165)       (0.662)        (0.0224)      (0.0183)      (0.0291)      (0.0240)       (0.0570)       (0.0455)        (0.0384)
 Observations                    748           754             753           531           434           525            454            381             466
 R-squared                      0.059         0.036           0.055         0.038         0.042         0.046          0.090          0.068           0.104
 Control group mean            0.0359         0.366          0.0379        0.0296        0.0328        0.0295         0.0364         0.0313          0.0508
                                                      B: Dependent Variable: Enrollment as reported in 2008/09 Administrative Data
                                (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)            (8)               (9)
                               Total        Total girls    Total boys    Grade 1      Grade 2         Grade 3    Grade 4         Grade 5           Grade 6

 Treatment                     1.366          0.505          0.862        -0.604        3.256**        -0.471        -0.541          0.366          -0.639
                              (2.445)        (1.254)        (1.654)       (1.502)       (1.376)        (1.174)       (1.190)        (1.019)         (0.962)
 Constant                     37.56**       -21.01***      58.57***      34.47***        -1.052         5.214         1.546         -1.388          -1.225
                              (15.14)        (7.562)        (9.652)       (6.267)       (6.441)        (4.881)       (4.534)        (3.911)         (3.925)
 Observations                   988            988            988           988           988            988           988            988             988
 R-squared                     0.901          0.880          0.866         0.470         0.545          0.546         0.484          0.520           0.540
 Control group mean            160.3          65.70          94.63         40.09         29.95          23.87         26.22          20.98           19.22

 Source: Ministry of Education Administrative Data and 2008 School Survey. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10.
 Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO
 support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. Table 7A gives the impact of the treatment on dropout rates in the spring of 2008. Schools without a
 particular grade level are missing. Some schools did not provide breakdowns by sex. Table 7B gives the impact of treatment on enrollment in the fall of 2008
 (the academic year following the treatment). Schools that have zero pupils at a given grade level (because they are missing a particular level) are counted as
 zeros.


                                                                                                                                                                  41
         Table 7. Impact on Test Scores


                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)
                                                                                           End Primary
                                                Oral           Math           French        Pass Rate

              Treatment                         -0.101        -0.0351         -0.0338         -0.0244
                                                0.0749        0.0588           0.0586          0.0227
              Constant                         -0.0252         -0.159         0.0648         0.525***
                                                 0.261          0.209          0.221           0.0706

              Observations                       499            763             739          557
              R-squared                         0.200          0.200           0.251        0.177
              Control Group Mean               0.00828       0.00545          0.0145        0.614
              Source: 2008 School Survey. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
              p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area,
              total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO
              support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. Oral, Math and French test
              scores come from normalized test scores from the World Bank administered exam in
              the spring of 2008. Oral test scores were given only to pupils in grades 1 and 2. The
              End Primary Pass Rate is the percent of students from the school who passed the exam
              at the end of grade 6 at the end of 2008 (administrative data).




          1. School-based management programs have been implemented in Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh,
Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, Hong-Kong, India, Lebanon, Lesotho, Macedonia, Madagascar, Mexico, Nicaragua,
the Philippines, Senegal, Serbia, Sri Lanka, the Gambia, the United Kingdom, and the United States (Duflo et al.
2015).
          2. World Development Indicators, World Bank, source: International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA)
          3. Policies of de jure autonomy do not always lead to de facto autonomy (King and Ozler 2004), and so
participation may not be meaningful if communities have no actual power and even increase inequality by “leaving
the poor behind” (Galiani et al. 2008).
          4. The situation has continued to improve in terms of access to education: in 2011, net enrollment in
primary school was 62%, and primary completion rates had risen to 46%.
          5. These school committees consist of six representatives, including the school director, who serves as
secretary, and parent representatives. The parents are supposed to elect the representatives, who may also be the
leaders of the Parent Association (APE), which includes all parents, and the Mother’s Association (AME), which
includes all mothers. In practice, the composition of the COGES varies by school. School committees are supposed
to be responsible for the management of people working at the school (e.g., monitoring of teacher attendance and
performance), financial resources (e.g., school meal funds) and material resources (e.g., purchase and management of
textbooks, supplies and supplies). One of the school committee’s central tasks is to draft an annual school
improvement plan that includes its projects, activities, budget, and timelines to guide its work for the school year.
The school committee works parallel to the APE and AME. Additional details and background are given in appendix
S1).
          6. The regional authorities were unable to obtain the actual funds from the local treasury due to a liquidity
issue at the local treasury level.
          7. One randomly selected group of schools received a slightly more restrictive list of potential expenditures,
and another group received a warning that their projects might be audited. Analysis of spending patterns did not
show any difference between these groups.


                                                                                                                    42
           8. Schools choose which of their sixth grade students would sit for the exam. There is no evidence that
schools were punished in any way for a low pass rate.
           9. The analysis plan was not registered in a secure independent register in 2007 when the experiment was
designed, as is best practice today.
           10. An alternative specification uses dummy variables for the strata used in random selection, which were
defined using a dummy variable for urban, the total enrollment in 2005/06, and support by an outside NGO in
2005/06. This specification does not substantially change the results, but increases precision of some coefficient
estimates and decreases precision of others.
           11. An alternative interpretation would be that this result derives from the fact that we measure only the
first year of the grant, and so parents did not have time to change their own contribution of inputs (see Das et al.
2013, where crowding out was greater when a school grant was anticipated than when it was unanticipated). We
think this is unlikely since the parents were notified in advance of the grants arrival.
           12. We would urge that future researchers examining local school management and activities collect data on
school festivals, as well as school business investments, as potential targets of school spending. These expenditures
were not foreseen and so detailed questions on these expenditures (for example, the number and type of school
festivals, or the anticipated return of investment projects) were not included in the questionnaire, nor were questions
about the local credit market.
           13. These items were also projects that were frequently reported by the schools as projects undertaken using
the grant money.
           14. We also take the fact that only younger grades were impacted as evidence that the change in enrollment
is not due to intentional misreporting by grant schools. In addition, the finding is replicated across two different
types of data collections and at two different periods.
           15. Note that while educated COGES budgeted more money for infrastructure (58,755 FCFA (117 USD),
significant at the 5% level), the increases in infrastructure in the following year were felt primarily in schools with
noneducated COGES: the coefficient on the interaction term of treatment and education is negative (-0.08 SD) and
significant at the 5% level. One possible reason, if the data on spending are accurate, is that the projects undertaken
by educated COGES in response to the grant might have been larger and taken more time, so that they were not yet
completed at the time that data on infrastructure was collected.
           16. For Health Resources, the treatment coefficient for the noneducated COGES is 0.06 SD, significant at
the 10% level, while the coefficient for the interaction term is -0.12, significant at the 10% level, suggesting zero or
negative impact of the grants on health resources in the educated COGES. For Pupil Educational Support, schools
with noneducated COGES increased spending (3,639 FCFA (7 USD), significant at the 5% level), but no impact (or
a possibly negative impact) for schools with educated COGES (the coefficient on the interaction term is -8,215
FCFA (16 USD), significant at the 5% level).
           17. For monitoring teacher attendance, the coefficient on the interaction term is 0.11, significant at the 5%
level, and for cooperation, the coefficient is 0.07, significant at the 10% level.
           18. Each standard deviation increase in wealth is associated with an additional 0.05 standard deviation
increase in the parent responsibility index in response to the grant, significant at the 5% level
           19. The coefficient on the interaction term is 8,985 FCFA (18 USD), significant at the 5% level.
           20. The coefficient on the interaction term is 0.17, significant at the 5% level, and the coefficient on the
treatment term is -0.06, significant at the 5% level.
           21. Infrastructure may have even degraded—the coefficient on the interaction term is -0.17, significant at
the 1% level, while coefficient on the treatment variable is 0.06, significant at the 5% level. Note that since the grant
was based on the size of the school, one-teacher schools received smaller grants. They may then have been pushed
away from investment in infrastructure since the lump sum was not enough to start a project.
           22. Urban schools were 17% more likely to have made in kind contributions, significant at the 10% level.
           23. The coefficient on the interaction term is almost 0.3 standard deviations, significant at the 1% level,
whereas the coefficient on treatment alone in the interaction specification is near zero.
           24. Rural areas increased spending on agricultural investments by 2,046 FCFA (4 USD), significant at the
1% level, and the interaction term for urban schools is -1,755 FCFA (3.5 USD), significant at the 5% level.




                                                                                                                     43
Willing but Unable: Short-Term Experimental Evidence on
                Parent Empowerment and School Quality
                              Elizabeth Beasley and Elise Huillery∗

                                         November 19, 2015




S1 Supplementary Information on the COGES

As part of a 10-year education sector plan, the Programme Décennal de Développement de l’Education

(PDDE) 2003-2013, the government of Niger established school-based management committees, the

COGES. These committees consist of representatives from the parents’ associations, the school di-

rectors, representatives of the teachers and other community leaders. The COGES was intended

to engage parents in their children’s education, improve school management and accountability,

generate community support for the school, and, through these, improve access to and quality of

education. However, at the beginning of this project, the COGES were not initially very active,

and many had not fulﬁlled their primary task (planning the school’s activities for the year).


S1.1 Members of the COGES

The COGES typically include six members, of which four are the school principal, a teacher repre-

sentative and parents’ representatives from the AME (mother’s associate) and APE (parent asso-

ciation). Other members would be made up of community representatives (generally leaders in the

community) and schools also report having student representatives. The structure of the COGES

includes a president, treasurer, and secretary (the school principal is generally the secretary).

   These rules are not always followed to the letter: in our sample, schools report an average 6.5

COGES members. Two-thirds of COGES members are male, and overall they have low levels of
  ∗ Elizabeth Beasley: CEPREMAP (elizabeth.beasley@cepremap.org), Elise Huillery: Sciences Po, Department of

Economics and J-PAL (elise.huillery@sciencespo.fr)




                                                     1
education: only about 21% of COGES members report completing primary school (in urban areas

this is higher, and for the smaller schools it is much lower).


S1.2 Responsibilities of the COGES

One of the principal purposes of the COGES is to get parents involved in the educational process.

Concretely, the COGES are supposed to manage the people working at the school (more speciﬁcally,

the teachers), which can include monitoring attendance and evaluating performance, the material

conditions of the school (such as repairs of buildings, purchasing and managing supplies), and the

school budget (for example, there might be a school meal fund to be managed). Some schools

have community-hired teachers, and the COGES could in principle exercise more control over these

teachers. A primary task for each COGES is to write a school action plan each year, that details

the expected activities and projects of the COGES, as well as a budget, timeline, and allocation of

responsibilities. It is thought that through these concrete tasks, the COGES will accomplish not

only improved management but also parent’s investment and implication in the school and their

children’s education.


S1.3 COGES Training

All of the COGES in the Tahoua and Zinder regions were supposed to have received training in

2006. The training included how the COGES should be set up and run (that is, how to run an

election, hold meetings, the responsibilities of the COGES and so on), and how to write a school

action plan. In 2007, the COGES were also supposed to be trained on ﬁnancial management and

accounting. Not all COGES members were trained, but at least two per school were supposed to

have been trained. In addition, turnover would result in some members being untrained. About

73% of schools report that they have received training.


S2 Supplementary Information on Internal Validity
S2.1 Compliance

Two representatives from the COGES signed a document conﬁrming eﬀective receipt of the grant

in the intended amount. These receipts were ﬁrst collected at the regional level and the information

was then entered into a database at the Ministry of Education as a way to verify the actual receipt of


                                                  2
the grants at the school level. An additional survey was conducted in 85 randomly selected schools

asking detailed questions about the receipt and spending of the grants, and ﬁnancial management.

This questionnaire also included information about any problems with the administration of the

grant and qualitative feedback and suggestions from the COGES. The use of the grants was recorded

in detail, including the existence of a receipt for each expenditure.

    Grants were distributed as follows: the Ministry of Education issued an order to the District

level, which allowed the district to withdraw cash from the Treasury to distribute to the schools.

The grants were distributed ﬁrst to the inspectors, and then either directly to the COGES or to

other oﬃcials who brought the grants to the schools. The vast majority of schools do not have bank

accounts, and other mechanisms of distribution were infeasible.

    The collection of grant receipts, ﬁnancial questionnaires, and information from the Ministry

indicated that of the 498 of the 500 treatment schools received the grant. Of the two that did not

receive their grant, one school had closed, and so their grant was allocated to a school outside of the

1,000 school sample, and the other’s grant was mistakenly given to a control school. Of the schools

receiving the grant, our information indicates that four schools received less money than had been

allocated to them (in 3 cases the schools received 500 FCFA (1 USD) less than the assigned grant

amount of 73,500 FCFA (147 USD), and in one case 10,500 FCFA (21 USD) less than the assigned

grant amount of 120,500 FCFA (241 USD)), while two schools reported receiving more than had

been allocated (one school received 2,000 FCFA (4 USD) more than the assigned amount of 122,500

FCFA (245 USD), and the other received 27,000 FCFA (54 USD) more than the assigned amount

of 167,500 FCFA (335 USD)). All in all, the data indicate that 492 out of 500 schools received the

exact amount allocated to them, and six others received the grant but not in the correct amount.

This is a reasonably high compliance rate.1

    Data from the qualitative questionnaire administered to the 85 randomly selected schools indi-

cate that the majority of those schools received the intended grant amount. Among the 85 schools,

one school that had been selected for the grant had been closed at the time that the grant arrived.

In another case, the grant was accidentally given to another school. In a third case, a school re-

ported receiving 500 FCFA (1 USD) less than the intended amount. Two schools reported paying
   1 Note that this program was publicized within the administration and careful records were required at each step

of transfer of the money. In addition, the government of Niger had recently prosecuted several corrupt oﬃcials, so
there was a heightened awareness of corruption. It is possible that this transfer mechanisms to other contexts might
not be so eﬀective.


                                                         3
some money to cover transport costs to the person who delivered the grant.


S2.2 Attrition

There is some attrition in the datasets. Each year, a handful of schools do not return the adminis-

trative data questionnaire or the questionnaires are improperly ﬁlled out, leading to missing data for

3% of the schools for the infrastructure index and 1.4% of the schools for 2008/09 enrollment. The

April/May 2008 survey was conducted on the basis of unannounced visits, which meant that many

schools were closed. In addition, some schools were not visited due to security concerns, and still

others closed early that year because the summer rainy season began early and so many children

went to the ﬁelds with their parents to plant. As a result, data from the evaluation questionnaire

is available for only 814 schools (81.4%).

   We test for diﬀerences by treatment group in the proportion of schools with missing outcome

variables as a whole and sub-divided by district, urban and rural, and whether the school had

external support (for example, NGO sponsorship) prior to the project. Results are reported in the

Appendix, Table A1. Eighty-four tests on treatment and interaction between treatment and sub-

groups yield one statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences (at the 10% level or higher), which is well within

the amount that would be expected with random attrition. The comparability between treatment

and control groups is thus intact. As to external validity, there are more schools missing in the

region where security was a concern (Tahoua, in the north).




                                                  4
Table A1. Attrition, by Treatment Group and Pre-Program School Characteristics
                           (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)         (6)
                                                                                     Parent       Parent
                         COGES        COGES            COGES       Teacher effort    contrib    responsib
                        education     wealth          experience       index          index       index

 Treatment                -0.101        -0.128           -0.101        -0.104       -0.0225     -0.0984
                         (0.133)       (0.135)          (0.133)       (0.126)        (0.126)     (0.127)
 Treat*Enroll            0.0395        0.0524           0.0395        0.0591         0.0625      0.0522
                        (0.0519)      (0.0527)         (0.0519)      (0.0490)       (0.0481)    (0.0523)
 Treat*% girls           0.0334        0.0356           0.0334        0.0305         0.0107      0.0257
                        (0.0320)      (0.0324)         (0.0320)      (0.0308)       (0.0308)    (0.0306)
 Treat*Urban            0.00436         -0.109         0.00436        -0.0933        -0.107     -0.0604
                        (0.0956)       (0.105)         (0.0956)      (0.0812)       (0.0816)    (0.0815)
 Treat*Sponsor           -0.0121       -0.0180          -0.0121      -0.00630       -0.0227     -0.0266
                        (0.0258)      (0.0261)         (0.0258)      (0.0245)       (0.0244)    (0.0249)
 Treat*Num Teach         -0.0457       -0.0322          -0.0457       -0.0348       -0.0290     -0.0142
                        (0.0551)      (0.0573)         (0.0551)      (0.0523)       (0.0525)    (0.0542)
 Treat*Tahoua           -0.00777      0.00526          -0.00777       -0.0186       -0.0342     -0.0136
                        (0.0284)      (0.0286)         (0.0284)      (0.0274)       (0.0272)    (0.0280)

 Observations             1,000         1,000            1,000         1,000         1,000       1,000
 R-squared                0.163         0.183            0.163         0.140         0.168       0.130
 Control Group Mean       0,262          0,28            0,262         0,214         0,222       0,224

                           (7)            (8)             (9)           (10)          (11)        (12)
                                       Teacher
                      Parent involv   oversight       Cooperation Accountabilit
                          index         index           Index       y index     Enrollment Test scores

 Treatment              0.00109        -0.0978          -0.0810       -0.0360       -0.00933      -0.147
                        (0.0772)       (0.127)          (0.127)       (0.123)        (0.0312)    (0.124)
 Treat*Enroll           0.00542        0.0411           0.0429        0.0633         0.00882     0.00727
                        (0.0323)      (0.0500)         (0.0500)      (0.0447)        (0.0103)   (0.0461)
 Treat*% girls          0.000701       0.0272           0.0229       0.00859         0.00543      0.0318
                        (0.0193)      (0.0311)         (0.0311)      (0.0304)       (0.00689)   (0.0302)
 Treat*Urban            0.00163        -0.0714          -0.0695       -0.0674         0.0171      0.0675
                        (0.0590)      (0.0819)         (0.0820)      (0.0718)        (0.0274)   (0.0991)
 Treat*Sponsor          0.00475       -0.00133         -0.00339       -0.0152       -0.00213      0.0354
                        (0.0164)      (0.0248)         (0.0248)      (0.0234)       (0.00697)   (0.0272)
 Treat*Num Teach        0.00146        -0.0284          -0.0284       -0.0297        -0.0170     -0.0120
                        (0.0404)      (0.0528)         (0.0530)      (0.0452)        (0.0137)   (0.0478)
 Treat*Tahoua           -0.0317*      -0.00607         -0.00977       -0.0277       -0.00577    -0.00675
                        (0.0189)      (0.0276)         (0.0277)      (0.0263)       (0.00714)   (0.0283)

 Observations                 1,000         1,000        1,000     1,000         1,000        1,000
 R-squared                    0.062         0.132        0.134     0.149         0.009        0.133
 Control Group Mean           0,084          0,22        0,222     0,198         0,014        0,278
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable in each
 column is a dummy variable equal to one when the value is missing for a given school. All regressions
 include the level variables from the interaction terms.




                                                  5
S3 Supplementary Information on Data
S3.1 Outcome Indices

Parent Contributions Parent contributions reﬂect the material resources that parents provide

to the school: the amount of fees, in-kind contributions and additional ﬁnancial contributions

(fundraising).2 Fundraising is measured through the question “How much money has the school

raised since the beginning of the school year?”. The answer to this question was divided by the

number of pupils registered in 2007/2008. The variable we use is thus funds raised per pupil3 .

Finally, the amount of fees charged per pupil is declared by the school director.


Parent Involvement          Parent involvement measures the volume of parent participation in school

management. We use 11 variables to measure parent involvement, of which nine use information

from the April/May 2008 questionnaire: the number of school, communal, and parent committee

meetings, the time elapsed since the last school or parent committee meeting, the number of topics

which were discussed at the last school or parent committee meeting, and two measures of presence

at the last school or parent committee meeting. From the 2008/2009 administrative data, we

also use the number of school committee meetings and a dummy variable indicating whether the

mother’s association was active or not.


Parent Responsibility The parent responsibility index measures the extent to which parents

take some responsibility and exercise authority in making decisions. We use eight variables to mea-

sure parent responsibility, all dummy variables for whether the school committee is in charge of

monitoring pupil attendance, sanctioning pupils for poor attendance, collecting ﬁnancial contribu-

tions, spending ﬁnancial contributions, purchasing supplies, investing in infrastructure, and setting

up the action plan.


Teacher Oversight One possible consequence of more empowered parents would be that parents

engage in teacher oversight. We use six separate variables to measure teacher oversight: dummy

variables indicating whether the COGES is in charge of monitoring teacher attendance, whether the
    2 Since we do not have information on the local market price of the items contributed, we use a simple dummy

variable indicating whether the community provided some in-kind contributions to the school or not.
    3 In the context of Niger, the funds are essentially provided by parents since there are very few NGOs. But it

is important to note that our measure of ﬁnancial contributions encompasses parental contributions and any other
potential donors.


                                                        6
COGES has taken remedial action against a teacher for repeated absence (remedial actions include

talking to the teacher, giving a warning, or complaining to the teacher’s supervisor). We also use

dummy variables for whether the school or parent committee discusses teacher behavior in school

or parent committee meetings. Finally, we use dummy variables for whether the school committee

spontaneously mentions being active to reduce teacher absenteeism or improving education quality4 .


Accountability The accountability index reﬂects the capacity to keep track of facts, decisions

and expenses, as well keeping receipts, although having receipts for everything is generally diﬃcult

for the communities. While most schools claim to keep registers for fundraising and expenses, fewer

are usually able to produce registers to be seen by the interviewers. The same is true for the school

action plan, seen by many as the key activity of the school committees. The government encour-

ages schools to keep records on a number of subject matters: inspector visits, pupil attendance,

teacher attendance, weekly activities, supplies, fundraising, and expenses. School committees and

parent associations are also supposed to take minutes at each meeting. The accountability index is

composed of 10 dummy variables for the presentation to the interviewer of a written school action

plan, registers for pupil attendance, inspector visits, weekly activities, supplies, fund collection,

fund expenditure, and teacher attendance, and minutes for the last school or parent committee

meeting. The data for this index comes from the April/May 2008 survey.


Cooperation          We use information about cooperation among school stakeholders, in particular

between the school committee and the other actors, to assess whether the grant aﬀected the quality

of stakeholder relationships within schools. Our measures of cooperation are all self-reported by

school stakeholders (the school director or the school committee president), which implies that we

measure perceived cooperation which might diﬀer from actual cooperation. The cooperation index

is composed of 11 components. First, three variables indicate teachers’ attitudes as reported by

the school director and the school committee president: teachers’ cooperation with COGES, with

each other, and with the community - these variables are coded from 1 (not cooperative at all)

to 4 (very cooperative). Second, seven dummy variables indicate whether the school committee

president reports good support from the community, local authorities, the school administration,
   4 The school committee president was asked to list the domains in which the committee is active, without suggesting

any particular domain in order to avoid prompting responses. We thus elicit activities that come naturally to the
top of school committee president’s mind.



                                                          7
teachers, parent committee, and two diﬀerent levels of the Ministry of Education hierarchy, the

conseil pedagogique (education advisors) and inspectors. Finally, we also use a dummy variable

for whether the school committee president reports that disagreements among school committee

members are rare or inexistent (as opposed to occasional or frequent disagreements).


Expenses and Investments The April/May 2008 questionnaire asked the COGES to list projects

included on the school action plan, as well as the amount budgeted for them. These data are ana-

lyzed as total amount spent rather than indices. We coded these items into eight categories:

   • Infrastructure includes expenses related to classrooms, desks, chairs, blackboards, school en-

     closure and security, and cleaning.

   • Supplies and Textbooks includes expenses for notebooks, pens, and textbooks.

   • Pupil Educational Support includes expenses like remedial courses, awareness campaigns to

     increase enrollment, and academic rewards.

   • Pupil Health includes expenses related to nutrition and health like drinkable water, meals,

     latrines and drugs.

   • Teacher Support includes expenses beneﬁtting teachers such as teacher housing, furniture,

     supplies, guide books, and salary.

   • COGES Expenses includes expenses related to COGES meetings, contributions to and travel

     expenses for the "COGES communal" (a regional grouping of the COGES) and inspector

     visits.

   • Schools Festivals and Playground includes expenses such as graduation ceremonies, parties,

     and soccer balls.

   • Investments in Agriculture includes seeds, ﬁelds, crops and livestock, unrelated to education

     activities. For example, one school reported the purchase of a ﬁeld of peanut plants, and

     another purchased a herd of goats.




                                                8
Infrastructure We create an index of infrastructure quality using data on the number of buildings

and their condition, the number of blackboards, the number of desks for children, the number of

teacher’s desks, the number of teacher’s chairs, the number of shelves, and whether or not the

school has an enclosure (this is a fence or wall around the school grounds that separates the school

from other public space). For the infrastructure index, the classroom, desks, blackboard and books

ﬁgures are changes from year to year.


Materials Materials include textbooks, dictionaries, geography materials (such as maps and at-

lases) and math materials (such as rulers, protractors, and compasses). Since there is only one

variable for textbooks but multiple variables for geography and math materials, if all variables are

included in the index in the same way, we would weight the importance of each type of math mate-

rial the same as the importance of textbooks, which seems to give too much weight to each kind of

math or geography material. To avoid this, we ﬁrst construct an index of math materials and then

of geography materials and include those indices with the same weight as textbooks to construct

the overall material index. We use the change in the amount of material between 2007/2008 and

2008/2009.


Health Health resources include vitamin or micronutrient supplementation, school deworming,

health information sessions (for example, on preventing malaria), availability of a ﬁrst aid kit, trash

disposal, number of latrines and access to water.


Teacher Eﬀort We use three variables to assess teacher eﬀort. First, the unannounced school

visit in 2008 recorded how many teachers were present on the day of the visit, and the number of

teachers are employed at the school. We use a simple percentage of the number of teachers who

were physically present at the school. To accurately represent the loss of classroom time and avoid

reporting inconsistencies, this ﬁgure includes both excused and unexcused absences. If the school

was closed at the unannounced visit (which was on a day the schools were supposed to be open)

all teachers were counted as absent. Second, we use the number of days when class was cancelled

because teachers were on strike (this information was provided by the school director). Finally, we

use a variable reﬂecting the opinion of the school committee on teacher assiduity and punctuality,

coded from 1 (not satisfactory at all) to 4 (very satisfactory).


                                                  9
S3.2 Interaction terms

Education We deﬁne a community as “educated” if one or both of the two interviewed members

of the school committee completed primary school (excluding the director).5 Only 31% of school

committees from control schools contain at least one member who completed primary school, which

indicates an important heterogeneity across communities. These data come from the Spring 2008
                  6
Questionnaire.


Experience in other organizations Parents who have experience in other organizations may

be better able to engage in management of the school because they might have more experience

doing so. We use data from the April/May 2008 Questionnaire to construct a variable equal to 1 if

either of the COGES members interviewed belonged to another community organization that was

not engaged in the school (for example, religious communities, cooperatives, savings groups, and

so on). About one-ﬁfth (21%) of the control school COGES fall into this category. The correlation

between education and experience is 0.15.


Wealth We assume that the wealthier a community is, the more real authority parents will

have because they will have a higher social status relative to the teachers (note that teachers are

relatively homogenous in terms of wealth). These data come from the Spring 2008 Questionnaire.

The wealth of school committee members is the ﬁrst component of a principal component analysis of

durable goods possessed by the two interviewed school committee members and the school director.

Durable goods include means of transportation, animals and housing equipment. The wealth of

school committee is then the average of this wealth index for the two interviewed school committee

members. Note that the average wealth index does not have any material meaning in itself since the

scale is one that measures individual’s wealth relative to one another. The average wealth index is
    5 When information for one of the two interviewed members is missing, we impute the value of the member for

whom information is available, in order to avoid dropping observations. We thus assume that the observed member
is representative of the two sampled members. Results do not vary substantially when these schools are excluded
but the sample size and power is reduced.
    6 Wealth and education are measured in the April/May 2008 questionnaire, after the treatment was implemented.

We note that it would have been better to measure these characteristics before the treatment was implemented,
though this was not possible in the context of program implementation. However, these characteristics would be
changed by the treatment only if the grant induced a change in the composition of the school committee, with former
members replaced by new ones with diﬀerent characteristics. In the data, we observe a proportion of 20% of school
committee members who took their position in 2008 both in the intervention and in the control group (so no more
renewal due to the grant - result not shown), and school committee members exhibit the same characteristics in both
groups (Table 2). We are thus conﬁdent that the grant did not aﬀect the composition of the school committee and
that observed community characteristics are not endogenous to the grant.



                                                        10
negative since the two school committee members are poorer, on average, than the school directors,

whose data was included in the construction of the wealth index.


Urban or Rural      Urban schools are more connected to the central government, and the students

are likely to live somewhat closer to the school. Rural schools are schools where there is no village

or settlement around. Urban schools are a marked minority: just over 10% of schools are located in

urban areas. We do not hypothesize about the relationship of authority to urban or rural location,

but we maintain this variable as an interaction term to help understand spending patterns and

because we believe it is of more general interest to policymakers and planners.


One-Teacher Schools Schools with only one teacher present a unique situation. One way that

teachers have power in negotiations with communities is that they can leave if they are unhappy

with conditions. When there is only one teacher, this threat may be even stronger (because there

is no possibility of absorbing his or her students into another class). Seen from a diﬀerent point

of view, it may be easier for the parents to negotiate and work with a single teacher rather than a

group of teachers, especially because if there is only one teacher that teacher is de facto a member

of the COGES. In the fall of 2007, prior to the arrival of the grant, 12% of schools were one-teacher

schools.




                                                 11
S4 Supplementary Tables
S4.1 Impact estimates on all components of outcome indices

Table A2. Parent Contributions

                                               (1)                (2)           (3)            (4)

                                         Amount of User                     Parent Money   Parent
                                         Fees Charged by     Any Inkind      contributed Contribution
                                              school        contributions    (per pupil)   Index

            Treatment                         35.48              0.0223        -72.86        -0.0117
                                              235.3              0.0252         54.23         0.0490
            Constant                         1,856**            0.634***      486.5**         -0.141
                                              772.3               0.102         194.7          0.167

            Observations                        745               758             719           782
            R-squared                          0.038             0.077           0.066         0.056
            Control Group Mean                 631.6             0.836           500.2       -0.00709
            Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control
            for whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of
            girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed
            effects. Any in kind contributions includes food, building supplies, wood, and so on. The
            Parent Contribution Index is the average of the z-scores in columns (1) to (3).




                                                           12
     Table A3. Parent Involvement

                               (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)      (12)

                                         Time              Time     Number            Number
                            Number      elapsed           elapsed     of             of Topics        Number     Number of         Presence
                              of       since last Number since last COGES AME is         in          of Topics    COGES Presence      at          Parent
                            COGES       COGES of APE       APE      meetings Active, COGES            in APE     Communal at APE COGES            Involv
                            meetings    meeting meetings meeting     08/09   08/09    meeting         meeting     meetings meeting meeting         Index

      Treatment               0.151     -0.135     0.101     -0.182     0.256     0.0492    0.0614     0.0530     0.0709     0.0800    0.00652   0.0600*
                              0.182      0.124     0.147      0.200     0.176     0.0299     0.104     0.104       0.116     0.0830    0.0881     0.0321

      Constant              4.421*** 3.955*** 2.890*** 4.776*** 4.786***          0.113    2.838*** 2.035*** 2.519*** 1.607*** 1.643*** -0.00756
                              0.612    0.526    0.479    0.782    0.868           0.119      0.455    0.454    0.419    0.359    0.375    0.117

      Observations              747       549       727        465        803        888        739         649        714         743   746       922
      R-squared                0.043     0.137     0.029      0.051      0.056      0.066      0.085       0.074      0.071       0.074 0.066     0.059
13




      Control Group Mean       3.758     2.653     2.470      3.691      4.601      0.272      2.363       1.918      2.518       2.057 1.757    -0.0355
      Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total
      enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. APE is the
      Parent Association of the school. The Parent Action Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables in columns (1) to (11).
     Table A4. Parent Responsibility

                                   (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)                         (8)          (9)
                                             COGES has
                                  COGES         taken                                                                           Parents are
                                responsible   remedial                 COGES is            COGES is COGES is                    responsible
                              for monitoring action on   COGES is responsible Number of responsible responsible                 for drafting     Parent
                                   pupil        pupil   responsible        for      COGES   for fee    for fee                   the Action    Responsib.
                                attendance   attendance for supplies infrastructure  tasks collection expenses                      Plan         Index

       Treatment                 -0.0100       -0.00289       -0.0106       0.0451        0.0914       0.0767       0.0615        0.0308        0.0586*
                                  0.0222        0.0375         0.0353       0.0307         0.120       0.0476       0.0481        0.0204         0.0353
       Constant                 0.807***       0.643***      0.593***      0.571***      3.835***       0.213        0.131       0.873***       -0.0889
                                  0.0866         0.141         0.125         0.109         0.491        0.169        0.179        0.0868          0.129

       Observations                  754             581            752            749           735    401          401            732            780
       R-squared                    0.063           0.062          0.063          0.064         0.070  0.065        0.074          0.029          0.051
       Control Group Mean           0.769           0.713          0.603          0.739         3.441  0.301        0.335          0.900        -0.0191
14




       Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area,
       total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. Parent
       Responsibility Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables in columns (1) to (8).
     Table A5. Teacher Oversight

                                          (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
                                       COGES                           COGES        COGES takes COGES works COGES works
                                       discusses    APE discusses      monitors       remedial    to reduce  to improve               Teacher
                                        teacher        teacher          teacher      action on     teacher    education              Oversight
                                       behavior       behavior        attendance       teacher     absence     quality                 Index

        Treatment                       0.0371         -0.00646        -0.0126         -0.0120         0.0319          0.0166         0.0266
                                        0.0255          0.0276         0.0219          0.0337          0.0293          0.0303         0.0389
        Constant                       0.343***         0.259*        0.844***        0.378***        0.372***        0.814***        0.335**
                                         0.124           0.133         0.0820           0.128           0.117           0.111          0.159

        Observations                       649             573             758             758           720             731             778
        R-squared                         0.070           0.045           0.064           0.049         0.099          0.088            0.110
        Control Group Mean                0.103           0.121           0.766           0.329         0.271          0.621           0.00229
        Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or
15




        urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection
        fixed effects. APE is the Parent Association of the school. The Teacher Oversight Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables in
        columns (1) to (6).
     Table A6. Accountability Index

                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)      (10)       (11)
                                   Book for    Weekly       Supply       PV last     PV last      Teacher      Pupil        Funds     Expenses
                                    Visitor    Planning     Register     COGES        APE         Register    Register     Register   Register Action Plan Account.
                                    Exists       Seen        Seen        meeting     meeting       Seen        Seen         Seen        Seen      Seen      Index

        Treatment                   -0.0123     -0.0185      0.0413      -0.0278      -0.0493     -0.0151     -0.0221      0.0619*    0.101***     -0.00642      0.0127
                                    0.0356      0.0279       0.0341      0.0344       0.0354      0.0214      0.0222       0.0353      0.0355       0.0292      0.0351
        Constant                   0.380***     -0.0764     0.369***    0.351***     0.473***      0.126       0.111      0.506***    0.447***     0.490***     -0.219*
                                     0.136       0.103        0.122       0.126        0.131      0.0869      0.0791        0.128       0.130        0.121       0.124

        Observations                   784         784          777       743         735           705         692          651           648          937          806
        R-squared                     0.043       0.095        0.124     0.130       0.113         0.032       0.021        0.218         0.213        0.223        0.124
        Control Group Mean            0.519       0.224        0.509     0.594       0.520        0.0986       0.103        0.494         0.476        0.484      0.00325
        Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment
        in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. PV is proces verbal (minutes) taken in
        the meetings. The APE is the Parent Association of the School. The Accountability Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables in columns (1) to (10).
16
     Table A7. Cooperation Index

                                          (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)             (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)      (11)         (12)
                                                                          COGES COGES           has          COGES                              COGES
                                                                             has       has    support           has      COGES COGES               has   Rare or no
                                       Teachers' Teachers' Teachers'       support   support from the        support        has     has         support    fights
                                       coop with coop with coop with      from the from local school           from       support support         from    within         Coop
                                        COGES each other comm.             comm.      auth.   admin.         teachers   from APE from CP        Inspect. COGES           Index

            Treatment                   0.0234  -0,00037 0.00870 0.0482*    0.0312   0.0394   0.0315* 0.0509** 0.00846   0.0250   -0.0210 0.0661**
                                        0.0341   0.0329   0.0331   0.0271   0.0288   0.0240    0.0178  0.0203   0.0284   0.0297    0.0350  0.0306
            Constant                   3.517*** 3.596*** 3.400*** 0.586*** 0.656*** 0.739*** 0.842*** 0.786*** 0.652*** 0.610*** 0.473*** -0.220**
                                         0.130    0.121    0.127    0.113    0.114   0.0884    0.0665  0.0742   0.0965   0.0985     0.136   0.103

            Observations                    737        735        736         757         755        755       757         754         755        754         752         777
            R-squared                      0.048      0.109      0.112       0.084       0.070      0.077     0.084       0.057       0.113      0.071       0.065       0.078
            Control Group Mean             3.329      3.485      3.329       0.797       0.776      0.854     0.918       0.889       0.792      0.770       0.610     -0.00756
            Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in
            07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. APE is the Parent Association of the school.
            Columns (8) and (9) refer to support from representatives of the Ministry of Education: CP is Conseiller Pedagogique (Education Advisor) and is from the
17




            hierarchical level just above the school, the Inspection refers to the level above the CP. The Cooperation Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables in
            columns (1) to (11).
     Table A8. Infrastructure Index

                                       (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)         (10)
                                                             Change in Change in
                                   Change in Change in the number          the    Wall around Number of Number of
                                  the number the condition       of     number of   school     teacher's teacher's Number of Infrastructure
                                  of buildings of buildings blackboards   desks    grounds       desks     chairs  bookcases     Index

          Treatment                 0.0766*       -0.0155         0.138       0.187     0.0866***      0.0123     0.00454     -0.0106       0.0414*
                                     0.0452        0.0207         0.117       0.678       0.0316       0.0590     0.0332       0.0395        0.0236
          Constant                   0.187       0.480***        -0.352      -0.0640      -0.135      -0.0798      -0.104      -0.161      -0.454***
                                     0.183         0.0796         0.550       2.934        0.114        0.239       0.145       0.170        0.0936

          Observations                  947           988           905          597         847           896          891          894           978
          R-squared                    0.046         0.057         0.038        0.054       0.132         0.032        0.026        0.029         0.164
          Control Group Mean           0.274         0.670         0.654       -0.724       0.343        0.0316       0.0618       0.0461      -2.98e-09
          Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or urban
          area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed
18




          effects. Columns (1) to (4) use change in the variable between 2007/2008 and 2008/2009. Columns (5) to (8) use the variable from 2008/2009
          because of missing data in the earlier year. The Infrastructure Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables in columns (1) to (8).
     Table A9. Materials Index

                                                         (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                      Change in
                                                      number of                      Geography      Math Tool      Materials
                                                        books        Dictionary      Tool Index      Index          Index

                       Treatment                        1.267          -0.0162        -0.0422        -0.0705        -0.0439
                                                        3.266          0.0281         0.0486          0.0470        0.0350
                       Constant                         -0.438          -0.176         -0.365       -0.413**       -0.402**
                                                        13.52           0.121          0.249           0.192         0.171

                       Observations                         749            858           735           841            826
                       R-squared                           0.086          0.108         0.037         0.256          0.174
                       Control Group Mean                 -10.75         0.0472        -0.0165      -3.26e-05      -0.00411
                       Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for
                       whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08,
19




                       whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. Data are
                       administrative data from the 2008/2009 school questionnaire. Change in the number of books is in
                       comparison to the previous years administrative data. Dictionary is whether or not the school has a
                       dictionary. Geography tool index is composed of whether the school has an atlas, map, or globe. Math
                       tool index is whether the school has a protractor, ruler, or compass. Materials index is the average of
                       the z-scores of the variables in columns (1)-(4).
     Table A10. Health Index

                                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
                                 Vitamin /                      Health
                                 micronut                    Information                     Trash                                      Health
                                supplement     Deworming       Session   First Aid Kit     Collection      Latrines       Water         Index

         Treatment                 0.0252        0.0220         0.0406        0.0283        -0.00198        -0.116       0.0133        0.0469*
                                   0.0272        0.0285         0.0293        0.0196         0.0209         0.134        0.0199         0.0270
         Constant                   0.131       0.474***       0.378***       -0.0331       0.00380         0.298        -0.0846      -0.396***
                                    0.115         0.118          0.113        0.0909         0.0809         0.665        0.0987          0.114

         Observations                 933           933           933            933            933           933           898            933
         R-squared                  0.061          0.219         0.096          0.062          0.048         0.343         0.220          0.238
         Control Group Mean         0.223          0.615         0.305         0.0909          0.119         1.600         0.129        1.26e-08
         Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the school is in a rural or
         urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and
20




         inspection fixed effects. All data are administrative data from the 2008/09 school questionnaire. For columns (1), (2), and (3) the
         dependent variable is an indicator for whether the action happened at least once. First aid kit indicates whether the school had a first
         aid kit or not. Trash collection indicates whether a system is in place to dispose of trash. Latrines is the number of latrines. Water is
         a dummy variable for whether there is clean water available at the school or not (piped or well). The health index is the average of the
         z-scores of these variables.
S4.2 Selected Heterogeneous Impact Results

Table A11. Educated COGES

 Education

                                             (1)              (2)         (3)                 (4)             (5)
                                                                      Spending on
                                         COGES          Spending on      Pupil
                                      monitors teacher Infrastructure Educational        Normalized       Normalized
                                        attendance     and Equipment    Support          Math Scores     French Scores

 Treatment                                 -0.0313           4,783          3,639**          0.132          0.0758
                                           0.0263            9,689            1,538         0.0834          0.0803
 Treatment x Educated COGES               0.0857*         58,775***        -8,215**        -0.297**         -0.279*
                                           0.0508           22,737            3,452          0.146           0.146
 Constant                                 0.804***         -23,084           -615.4         -0.227          0.0571
                                           0.0847           38,431            4,052          0.235           0.242

 Observations                               720              693             700             601              581
 R-squared                                 0.073            0.150           0.097           0.183            0.247
 Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for whether the
 COGES is Educated or not, whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08, proportion of
 girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection fixed effects. Infrastructure and
 Equipement includes expenses related to classrooms, desks, chairs, blackboards, school enclosure and security, and
 cleaning. Pupil Educational Support includes expenses like additional courses, awareness campaigns to increase
 enrollment, and academic rewards. Math and French test scores come from the World Bank administered exam in
 the spring of 2008.


                                             (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)

                                         COGES                              Parent
                                      monitors teacher Cooperation        Responsib.    Investments in
                                         tt d
                                        attendance       Index
                                                         I d                I
                                                                            Index
                                                                              d           A i lt
                                                                                          Agriculture

 Treatment                                -0.0308           0.0134         0.0913**        2,046***
                                          0.0251            0.0389          0.0384           740.4
 Treatment x Experienced COGES            0.112**           0.141*
                                          0.0534            0.0805
 Treatment x Wealth                                                        0.0530**
                                                                            0.0264
 Treatment x Urban                                                                         -1,775**
                                                                                             805.2
 Constant                                 0.804***          -0.102         -0.0387          -733.5
                                           0.0847            0.119          0.130            1,106

 Observations                                720            739              707            731
 R-squared                                  0.077          0.087            0.063          0.048
 Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for
 whether the COGES is experienced or not and the wealth of the COGES when those are the
 interaction terms , whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08,
                                                   21
 proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection
 fixed effects. The Cooperation Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables on cooperation
 with the COGES. Parent Responsibility Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables on the
 responsibilities of the COGES. Investments in Agriculture includes fields, crops and livestock,
 Table A12. Experienced, Wealthy, and Urban COGES

                                           (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)

                                       COGES                             Parent
                                    monitors teacher Cooperation       Responsib.   Investments in
                                      attendance       Index             Index        Agriculture

Treatment                               -0.0308          0.0134        0.0913**        2,046***
                                        0.0251           0.0389         0.0384           740.4
Treatment x Experienced COGES           0.112**          0.141*
                                        0.0534           0.0805
Treatment x Wealth                                                     0.0530**
                                                                        0.0264
Treatment x Urban                                                                      -1,775**
                                                                                         805.2
Constant                                0.804***         -0.102         -0.0387         -733.5
                                         0.0847           0.119          0.130           1,106

Observations                                720            739              707            731
R-squared                                  0.077          0.087            0.063          0.048
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for
whether the COGES is experienced or not and the wealth of the COGES when those are the
interaction terms , whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total enrollment in 07/08,
proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the grant and inspection
fixed effects. The Cooperation Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables on cooperation
with the COGES. Parent Responsibility Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables on the
responsibilities of the COGES. Investments in Agriculture includes fields, crops and livestock,
unrelated to education activities.




                                                  22
 Table A13. One-teacher Schools

                                            (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)
                                                        Spending on   Teacher is
                                       Days teachers      Teacher   Present at Spot Infrastructure
                                         on strike        Support       Check           Index

Treatment                                 -0.673            -2,018        -0.0563**       0.0634**
                                          0.547              1,441          0.0238          0.0257
Treatment x One Teacher                   1.324*           8,985**         0.168**        -0.169***
                                          0.802              3,752          0.0742          0.0631
Constant                                  -1.150             1,771         0.914***       -0.473***
                                          2.267              4,655          0.0745          0.0936

Observations                                 705              733              797            978
R-squared                                   0.138            0.025            0.261          0.169
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.10. Regressions control for
whether the COGES is Educated or not, whether the school is in a rural or urban area, total
enrollment in 07/08, proportion of girls in 07/08, whether the school had NGO support prior to the
grant and inspection fixed effects. Days on strike is the number of days that the school was closed
due to teachers striking in 2007/2008. Teacher is present is the school average of the dummy
variable indicating 1 if a teacher is physically present at the day of visit (on a day when the school
was supposed to be open). If the school was closed, all teachers were counted as absent. Spending
on teacher support includes expenses benefitting to teachers like teacher housing, furniture, supplies,
guide books, and salary. The Infrastructure Index is the average of the z-scores of the variables
concerning school infrastructure.




                                                   23
S5. An Explanatory Model

Our results demonstrate, ﬁrst, that complete crowding out is not inevitable: parents responded to

grants to the COGES by increasing participation and did not immediately change their ﬁnancial

contribution (with some evidence that some schools increased in kind contributions). This contrasts

with the results in Das et al. (2013) and Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013) where additional resources

to the school (not under parent control) decreased parental eﬀort. We also ﬁnd that only schools

where parents are educated or are members in other community organizations respond to the grant

by increasing teacher monitoring - the type of parent participation that is arguably the most diﬃcult

to do. Note, however, that there was no positive impact on teacher presence due to this increased

monitoring. Pupil participation, at the lowest grades, increased. However, the ultimate impact

on education quality, at least in the short run, is unclear: teachers were absent more frequently

(which echoes the result in Duﬂo, Dupas and Kremer (2012) in Kenya where giving parents the

responsibility over an extra-teacher led to a reduction in eﬀort from civil-service teachers), except in

the smaller schools where the grant was at least partly spent in a way that beneﬁted them directly.

   Taking into account that Niger is, in general, an environment where parents have little authority,

our results contribute to the literature from many other countries, and supplement the existing

results with new data. There are several experiments showing that the eﬀectiveness of participatory

programs to improve school quality is related to the level of authority or empowerment of the

parents: as King and Ozler (2004) demonstrate, policies of de jure autonomy do not always lead to

de facto autonomy, and so participation may not be meaningful if communities have no actual power.

Empowerment might be through education (Blimpo and Evans, 2011), ties with local government

(Pradhan et al, 2014), training (Duﬂo, Dupas and Kremer, 2012), human capital (Gunnarsson et al,

2009), school-community relations and community organizational capacity (Gershberg and Shatkin,

2007), and pre-existing levels of poverty (Galiani et al, 2008).

   In this appendix section, we consider a model that formalizes the behavioral responses of parents

and teachers to a change in school resources and the resulting eﬀect on school quality. The moti-

vation for this model is two-fold. First, the model helps to clarify how the grant program studied

in this paper can aﬀect parent participation, teacher eﬀort and school quality. Second, we want to

show that reasonable assumptions on school dynamics are able to produce predictions consistent



                                                  24
with the evidence found in the literature on both participatory programs and school inputs.

   Albornoz et al (2011) model the interaction between student, parent and teacher investments and

school resources, to explain the ambiguous eﬀect of resources on parent involvement at home. This

model suggests that under some circumstances, an increase in school resources generate a decline

in parent investment in education at home. Das and al (2013) also provide a model to explain the

decrease in parental eﬀort at home in response to an increase in school resources. But none of these

theoretical frameworks take into account parental participation in school. The model proposed in

this section enriches our understanding of school dynamics by taking into account parents’ eﬀort

both at home and at school, and the diﬀerence between giving more resources to school staﬀ versus

parents. It enlarges the set of interventions of interest and adds to our understanding of the eﬀects

of educational policies. It is an ex post exercise designed to make sense of existing evidence with

the hope it can be tested in subsequent analyses.


S5.1 Set-Up

The model involves three participants: parents, teachers and the government. Teachers decide

how much time they put in teaching tt . Parents decide how much time they invest for education

at home th , as well as how much time they participate in school management tp . Finally, the

government chooses the level of governmental resources for the school, which decompose in two

parts, Gt + Gp , where Gt is resources in the hands of school staﬀ (principals and teachers), while

Gp is governmental resources for the school under the control of parents (typically, resources handled

by the school committee).

   Here, “participation” in school management refers to the many diﬀerent kinds of participation

that policy makers envision, where beneﬁciaries might be organized into committees, undertake

projects themselves, such as construction or sanitation, raise funds, provide personal contributions,

supervise, hire, and even ﬁre teachers, engage in awareness campaigns, provide advice to staﬀ, and

so on. Participation is expressed in time units (ﬁnancial participation is converted in time through

hourly wage).

Children’s Learning

Children’s learning E is the addition of learning produced at home and learning produced at school.



                                                 25
Learning produced at home Learning produced at home is assumed proportional to the num-

ber of hours parents devote to education at home, th (making sure kids get up on time and go

to school or investing in private lessons, for instance). How much each hour spent on education

translates into learning depends on parent’s productivity at producing learning, denoted e, reﬂect-

ing for instance parents’ level of education (more educated parents produce more learning for each

hour spent on helping with homework) or parents’ hourly wage (a higher wage can pay for a higher

amount of private lessons for each working hour invested in education). Learning produced at home

is thus eth .


Learning produced at school             Learning produced at school is proportional to the time teachers

spend at school, tt . How much each hour spent at school translates into learning depends on teach-

ers’ productivity, which results from school resources. Indeed, school resources encompass salaries

(which should reﬂect both class size and teachers’ quality) and school materials (infrastructure,

textbooks, ﬂip charts, blackboard, etc.) that allow teachers for producing more learning for the

same amount of time spent with the children. So we assume that the level of resources is a factor

of teachers’ productivity.

    Furthermore, we assume that parents’ participation in school management interfere with school

resources in the determination of teachers’ productivity. Indeed, parents’ participation is additional

resources: parents raise funds from the community, and do administrative tasks that allow teachers

for focusing on teaching and producing more learning for the same amount of time spent at school.

Moreover, parents’ participation should increase the allocative eﬃciency of school resources by

preventing rent capture and making expenses closer to educational needs and common interest

(Barrera-Osorio et al, 2009). We thus assume that parents’ time spent on school management, ts ,

is a factor that increase the eﬀect of resources on teachers’ productivity7 . This factor apply to

resources under parental control, Gp , but not on Gt in which parents do not have a say.

    We thus assume that learning produced at school is given by (Gt + tp Gp )tt and total learning

is given by E = eth + (Gt + tp Gp )tt .
   7 A richer model could take into account the idea that parents’ participation might not translate into greater

teachers’ productivity because “pushy” parents might be disruptive to teachers. For the simplicity of the model, we
make the assumption that parents are not aware of this fact and would not participate if they would know that their
participation would decrease teachers’ productivity. This assumption is equivalent to the idea that parents do not
get utility from participating per se (for example, due to reputation eﬀect or some sort of hedonic payoﬀ).




                                                        26
Parents’ Utility

Parents’ utility is the diﬀerence between the beneﬁt they derive from children’ learning E , and the

opportunity cost of the time they spend on producing learning, th + tp . The beneﬁt from children’

learning is assumed concave in E (for instance ln(1 + E )), so that learning produced at home

and learning produced at school are substitutes.8 The cost of time is assumed linear (for instance

th + tp ), so parents’ utility is given by:



                                 Up = ln(1 + eth + (Gt + tp Gp )tt ) − th − tp                                   (1)

Teachers’ Utility

Similarly, teachers’ utility is the diﬀerence between the beneﬁt they derive from children’ learning

and the opportunity cost of their time9 . We assume that teachers’ beneﬁt and cost take the

same form as parents’ ones, except that their welfare is also inﬂuenced by parents’ participation in

school management: teachers derive a beneﬁt from parents’ satisfaction towards their production of

learning when parents can observe this production. This beneﬁt takes the form of a social reward10

that is proportional to the time teachers devote to school, with a factor of parents’ participation:

the more parents participate, the more they observe and reward each unit of time teachers devote

to education.

    However, teachers who have a preference for a centralized government might resent being mon-

itored by parents because of the resulting loss of autonomy and leadership in school decisions. In

this case, the eﬀect of parents’ participation on teachers’ welfare can be negative, teachers’ loss

of welfare being also proportional to the time they devote to education, with a factor of parents’

participation (the more devoted they are and the more parents participate, the more teachers are

resentful). We denote δ teachers’ taste for community participation in school management. A

negative δ reﬂects a preference for a centralized government, whereas a positive δ reﬂects openness

to collaborate with parents (a δ close to zero would reﬂect teachers’ indiﬀerence).
   8 To the extent that parent participation is a contribution to a public good, free-riding may be a problem. For

simplicity we do not include this in the model, but a more complete model might address this issue.
   9 In this model, teachers are intrinsically motivated. A richer model could incorporate a broader view which would

incorporate both intrinsic and extrinsic motives. We do not incorporate extrinsic motives here since it would not
add to the ability of the model to explain what we seek to explain.
  10 An equivalent way to put it is that teachers incur a social sanction from the community if they shirk and if

parents can observe it.




                                                         27
   As a result, teachers’ utility is given by:



                            Ut = ln(1 + eth + (Gt + tp Gp )tt ) − tt + δtp tt                    (2)


S5.2 Parents’ and Teachers’ Choices

The ﬁrst-order condition for the teachers’ problem is suﬃcient (Ut is inﬁnitively diﬀerentiable and

Ut (tt ) < 0) and gives the optimal choice of teachers:


                                                1       eth + 1
                                tt = max             −            ,0                             (3)
                                             1 − δtp   Gt + tp Gp

   For the parents, the ﬁrst-order conditions are also suﬃcient and give the optimal choices:


                                                 1 + (Gt + tp Gp )tt
                                th = max 1 −                         ,0                          (4)
                                                         e


                                                   Gt   eth + 1
                                  tp = max 1 −        −         ,0                               (5)
                                                   Gp    tt Gp

   From the expression of tp , we see that parents invest more time in school management when

resources under their control increase and when teachers make more eﬀort. In contrast, parents

invest less time in school management when resources in the hands of teachers increase, when they

spend more time for education at home and when their eﬃciency with education at home increase.

   Symmetrically, parents devote more eﬀort for education at home when their eﬃciency at home

increases, whereas they reduce eﬀort at home when school resources increase, or when teachers’ or

their own eﬀort at school increase.

   Finally, teachers increase time they spend at school when school resources increase, whereas they

reduce it when parents’ eﬀort or eﬃciency at home increase. However, the response of teachers to an

increase in parents’ participation in school management is ambiguous: if δ is positive, the response

is clearly positive too: teachers spend more time at school. But in the region where δ is negative,

for large absolute value of δ , the response is negative, meaning that teachers who have a strong

preference for a centralized government reduce time at school when parents’ participation in school

management increases.




                                                   28
S5.3 Heterogenous Best-Responses

For the best clarity and simplicity, the model above just includes the main dynamics in the school

system. In this paper, we also explore the possibility that power imbalances are likely to induce

diﬀerent choices. This section explicit how parental real authority inﬂuences parents’ and teachers’

decision.

   In our model, real authority of parents over the school would be captured by a parameter θ

multiplying parents’ time spent in school management: learning produced at school is given by

(Gt + θtp Gp )tt , reﬂecting the fact that more powerful parents make better use of resources under

their control, therefore extracting more learning from teachers for each hour invested in school than

weak parents. Also, it should be noticed that real authority of parents θ is unlikely to be orthogonal

to teachers’ preference for a centralized government δ . On the one hand, teachers are more likely

to resent being monitored by parents when teachers enjoy a high social status relative to parents,

for instance when parents have a low if not no education, which is likely to coincide with parents’

lack of real authority. On the other hand, teachers’ preference for a centralized government largely

determines the extent to which parents entitled to participate in school (have formal authority) are

involved in decision making (have real authority). We thus posit that δ = δ (θ) with δ > 0. The
                                                                                            1+(Gt +θtp Gp )tt
best-responses with a parameter θ reﬂecting real authority are: th = max 1 −                       e          ,0   ,
                 Gt       eth +1                         1               eth +1
tp = max 1 −    θGp   −   θtt Gp , 0   and tt = max   1−δ (θ )tp   −   Gt +θtp Gp , 0   .


Eﬀect of real authority on parents’ and teachers’ decisions Since their participation at

school is more productive, parents with higher θ invest more time in school management and less

time at home than parents with low θ. Teachers also invest more time at school because their

productivity is fostered by parents’ real authority. Moreover, the likelihood of δ being negative is

lower when parents’ real authority is larger, which adds to the general positive eﬀect of parents’

real authority on teachers’ eﬀort.


Eﬀect of real authority on parents’ and teachers’ responses Parents’ response to an in-

crease in teachers’ eﬀort or in resources under their control is ampliﬁed by real authority, just as

teachers’ response to an increase in resources under parental control. Moreover, teachers’ response

to an increase in parent’s participation in school management is reduced in the negative region and



                                                      29
ampliﬁed in the positive region by real authority. These predictions are consistent with the evidence

presented in section 4.1 that the beneﬁts of community-based interventions are larger when parents

are more powerful.


S5.4 The Eﬀect of an Increase in School Resources

In the light of this model, what is the eﬀect of an increase in governmental resources to schools? In

the short run, parents won’t take into account the fact that teachers will also react to the changing

conditions (and reciprocally). We thus consider that parents take the teachers’ actions as given

(ﬁxed at their past value) and vice-versa, and we determine the comparative statics and discuss the

predicted behavioral trajectories. Our focus on short-term responses that do not take account of

others’ responses comes, ﬁrst, because most empirical framework in the literature addresses such

responses, and, second, because real-life behavioral adjustments to others’ responses seem slow.

Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013) show that responses after one year are diﬀerent from responses in

the longer run, reﬂecting the fact that it takes quite a long time for parents to adjust their behavior

to others’ responses. There are multiple reasons for slow adjustment to others’ response. For

instance, parents may not realize that teachers incur a loss of welfare from collaborating with them

(formally, they have a imperfect perception of teachers’ δ ) because teachers do not disclose their

reluctance to collaborate with parents in front of them. Even if teachers do give signals that they

do not want parents to participate, it is also possible that parents do not take what they observe in

the short run into account because they expect continuous collaboration to make δ become positive

in the future.

Eﬀect in the absence of parents’ participation in school

In the short run, an increase in school resources increase teachers’ time at school and decrease

parents’ time for education at home. The fact that parents devote less time for education at home

tends to reinforce teachers’ response, which comfort parents with investing less time at home, etc.

The long-term eﬀect of an increase in school resources is thus clear-cut: teachers respond positively

while parents respond negatively. The ﬁnal impact on school quality is a mixed bag: the increase in

school resources and teachers’ response tend to improve education outcomes, while parents’ response

tend to reduce this eﬀect. Pop-Eleches and Urquiola (2013) and Das et al. (2013) conﬁrm that



                                                  30
an increase in school resources reduced parents’ eﬀort (they do not observe teachers’ response). In

our framework, this policy is appropriate in contexts where (i) teachers actually use resources for

educational purpose, and (ii) the eﬀect of additional resources on teachers’ productivity is large.

The conditions of success of this policy are thus a sound institutional environment preventing rent

capture and an initial level of school resources at which marginal gains of productivity are steep11 .

Eﬀect in contexts where parents participate in school

Teachers’ and parents’ responses to an increase in school resources are the same as above, but now

parents’ re-optimize their level of participation in school management too.


Increase in Gt        If the additional resources fall in the hands of teachers, parents decrease their

participation at school. This in turn aﬀects teachers’ eﬀort in a way which depends on teachers’

preference for a centralized government: if teachers prefer a centralized government, the decrease in

parents’ participation in school management ampliﬁes teachers’ positive response to the increase in

school resources, so teachers make unambiguously more eﬀort. In contrast, if teachers are motivated

by the collaboration with parents, the decrease in parents’ participation reduces their incentive to

work hard and the policy brings a smaller beneﬁt. The conditions of success of this policy are thus

(i), (ii), plus the condition that (iii) teachers prefer a centralized government. France is an example

of countries where this policy is likely to work well.


Increase in Gp        If the additional resources fall in the hands of parents, parents increase their

participation at school, which leads to the opposite situation in which teachers invest unambiguously

more eﬀort when teachers are motivated by the collaboration with parents through three positive

eﬀects: the eﬀects of additional resources on their productivity, the eﬀect of parents’ participation

in the management of the resources on their productivity, and the incentive produced by the social

reward. When teachers prefer a centralized government, parents’ participation creates a burden

for teachers which reduces teachers’ eﬀort in a way that might be strong enough to oﬀset teachers’

positive response to school resources and to parents’ management of the resources. In the long-run,

this should eventually discourage parents to participate at school and encourage investment for
  11 This analysis would beneﬁt from evidence on the shape of teachers’ productivity as a function of school resources

to know which kind of regions would experience the larger gains in teachers’ productivity. If this function is concave
(resp. convex, S-shaped), gains in teachers’ productivity are larger at the bottom (resp. top, middle) part of school
resource distribution.


                                                         31
education at home back up, but in the short-run concurrent increase in parents’ participation in

school management and decrease in teachers’ eﬀort can be observed, as Duﬂo, Dupas and Kremer

(2012) ﬁnd in Kenya. Our empirical results are also consistent with the situation where teachers’

preference for a centralized government is strong and parents’ real authority is weak, resulting in

a negative short-term impact of parents’ participation in school on teachers’ eﬀort. The impact on

school quality can be at risk since the positive eﬀects of school resources and parents’ management

of the resources are mitigated by a double decrease in parents’ eﬀort at home and teachers’ eﬀort

at school.

   When parents have a large real authority θ, the positive eﬀect of parents’ management of the

resources is larger so parents’ response is larger too, which is consistent with our empirical ﬁndings

that parents contribute more and participate more in school management when they have more

authority. The larger eﬀect on parents’ participation combined with the smaller likelihood of a

preference for a centralized government leads to a more favorable teachers’ response. Our data

do not conﬁrm this prediction, but Duﬂo, Dupas and Kremer (2012) do since they observe that

parents’ empowerment through school committee training reduced the negative response of civil-

servant teachers.

   According to this framework, the conditions of success of this policy are thus (i), (ii), plus

the conditions that (iii) teachers are keen to collaborate with parents, and (iv) parents have real

authority on teachers. These conditions are more likely to hold in countries where the social gap

between parents and teachers is small and where the education system is decentralized. The USA

is an example of countries where this policy is likely to work well, whereas Niger and Kenya are not

the ideal contexts for encouraging parental control over school management since (iii) and (iv) do

not hold. However, one might argue that the short-term negative impact on teachers’ eﬀort is the

price to pay for potential longer-term positive eﬀect -which our results cannot exclude.

   The general picture supported by existing empirical evidence and explained by our model is

three-fold: ﬁrst, an increase in school resources out of parental control tends to decrease parental

eﬀort. Second, an increase in school resources under parental control tends to increase parental

eﬀort. Finally, the size of the increase in parental eﬀort and of the resulting eﬀect on teachers’

eﬀort depends on power imbalances in school: the higher parents’ real authority, the larger their

response and the resulting increase in teacher’s eﬀort, with a risk of adverse eﬀects in contexts


                                                 32
where parents are weak. This paper is a ﬁrst step that uses both formal tests and intuition to build

a narrative about community participation in resource management. Our hope is that future work

might build on this model to provide additional insights and rigorous empirical tests.




                                                33
