                                                       WPS8181


Policy Research Working Paper                         8181




       Bridging the Intention-Behavior Gap?
                 The Effect of Plan-Making Prompts
                  on Job Search and Employment

                                     Martin Abel
                                     Rulof Burger
                                   Eliana Carranza
                                   Patrizio Piraino




Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area
  &
Africa Region
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8181


  Abstract
 The paper tests the effects of plan-making on job search                           strategy and use more formal search channels. This greater
 and employment. In a field experiment with unemployed                              search efficiency and effectiveness translate into more
 youths, participants who complete a detailed job search                            job offers (30 percent) and employment (26 percent).
 plan increase the number of job applications submitted                             Weekly reminders and peer-support sub-treatments do not
 (by 15 percent) but not the time spent searching, consis-                          improve the impacts of plan-making, suggesting that lim-
 tent with intention-behavior gaps observed at baseline.                            ited attention and accountability are unlikely mechanisms.
 Job seekers in the plan-making group diversify their search




  This paper is a product of the Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area and the Africa Region. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
  contacted at ecarranza@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
       Bridging the Intention-Behavior Gap? The Eﬀect of
 Plan-Making Prompts on Job Search and Employment

   Martin Abel∗            Rulof Burger†            Eliana Carranza‡             Patrizio Piraino§¶




   ∗
     Middlebury College. Email: mabel@middlebury.edu
   †
     Stellenbosch University. Email: rulof@sun.ac.za
   ‡
     World Bank. Email: ecarranza@worldbank.org
   §
     University of Cape Town. Email: patrizio.piraino@uct.ac.za
   ¶
     Acknowledgement: This paper greatly beneﬁted from comments by Rema Hanna, Lawrence Katz, Asim
Khwaja, and Michael Kremer. Svetlana Pimkina provided superb research assistance. We also thank seminar
participants at the University of California-Berkeley, University of Cape Town, Catholic University of Milan,
and Harvard University. We thank the South African Department of Labour and J-PAL Africa, especially
Laura Poswell, for assistance in the implementation of this project. This paper is a product of the Job Group
and the Africa Region Gender Innovation Lab. It is part of a larger eﬀort by the World Bank to provide open
access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
contacted at ecarranza@worldbank.org. We thank EuropeAid for ﬁnancial support. All errors and omissions
are our own.
1     Introduction

Job search is a largely self-regulated undertaking. This requires job seekers to overcome
a variety of psychological and behavioral challenges. Existing studies show, for example,
that search intensity depends on job seekers’ biases in beliefs about returns to search eﬀorts
(Spinnewijn, 2015), on their level of impatience (DellaVigna and Paserman, 2005), on their
locus of control (Caliendo et al., 2015; McGee and McGee, 2016), as well as on their self-
conﬁdence and willpower (Falk et al., 2006).
    The focus of the present paper is on the so-called intention-behavior gap, deﬁned as
the disconnect between the intention to perform a particular behavior and the enactment of
such behavior. We draw on insights from the psychology literature regarding the use of plan-
making prompts to bridge the gap between intention and behavior. There is evidence that
planning and scheduling tasks help people follow through on a variety of behaviors, ranging
from voting (Nickerson and Rogers, 2010), to exercising (Prestwich et al., 2003), vaccinating
(Milkman et al., 2011), and getting medical screening (Milkman et al., 2013). Rogers et al.
(2015) and Hagger and Luszczynska (2014) provide recent reviews of this literature. We
extend this research to the domain of job search.
    We test the eﬀect of plan-making on job search behavior and employment in a ﬁeld
experiment with a sample of 1,100 unemployed South African youth. As part of the job
counseling workshops conducted by the South African Department of Labour, we prompt
job seekers to complete a plan template. In the template, we ﬁrst ask job seekers to ﬁll a
weekly chart with detailed day-by-day entries for whether, how and where they will search.
We then ask them to add up their entries to weekly goals for how many hours to search
and how many applications to submit. At baseline, treated job seekers report spending as
much time searching as they intend to, but submitting fewer applications than their stated
goal. Failure to follow through on applications may mean that they either fall short of their



                                               1
goals, or carry on low-eﬀort activities (like browsing a job website) rather than high-eﬀort
activities (like preparing application materials), which arguably require more planning.
      Five to twelve weeks after the intervention, we observe two main results. First, treated job
seekers change their job search intensity, but only for the behavior for which we document an
intention-behavior gap. Completing an action plan increases the number of job applications
submitted by about 15% compared to participants who only attended the workshop, but does
not aﬀect the number of hours spent searching.1 We take this result as suggesting that the
planning prompt increases the eﬃciency of search. That is, the plan induces a reallocation
of time towards job search activities that results in submitted applications. We corroborate
this result by informing participants about a vacancy and observing their actual behavior.
Job seekers who completed a plan are 11% and 27% more likely to submit an application
than the workshop-only group and pure control group, respectively.
      Second, job seekers in the plan-making group use a wider range of search channels. In
particular, they switch from predominantly using informal channels (e.g. talking to family
and friends) to more formal channels (e.g. responding to advertisements). We interpret such
diversiﬁcation behavior as being consistent with diminishing returns to using a given channel.
Indeed, diversiﬁcation from informal to formal channels increases search eﬀectiveness. These
gains in search eﬃciency and search eﬀectiveness translate into an increase in job oﬀers (30%)
and employment (26%) in the plan-making group.
      Rogers et al. (2015) review the most prominent reasons proposed in the literature as to
why plan-making prompts may work. First, action plans can help unpack complex tasks
into speciﬁc activities, providing a realistic understanding of the required steps to follow
through on intentions and the speciﬁc goals to focus on. Second, planning helps overcome
forgetfulness and promote recall of the intended behavior. This can increase follow-through,
as individuals are more likely to respond to environmental cues (Gollwitzer, 1999) and tasks
  1
      We argue below that this is unlikely to be simply a result of greater noise in reported search hours.



                                                       2
on their ‘top of mind’ (Karlan et al., 2016). Finally, action plans may serve as a commitment
device. To the extent that individuals try to avoid the discomfort of failing to achieve a goal
(Laibson, 1997), particularly in front of others (Prestwich et al., 2012), this will address
procrastination. Indeed, planning has been shown to be more eﬀective when individuals tell
someone of their commitment (Stone et al., 1994).
       In order to explore these mechanisms in the context of job search planning, our exper-
imental design randomizes participants into two sub-treatments. Half of the group that
completed the plan template was asked to nominate a person who could help them follow
through on their search plans. This peer subsequently received text messages about the
job seeker’s search intentions. Peers are willing to serve this role and participants are very
positive about how helpful this person was. However, this sub-treatment does not increase
follow-through. We also send weekly reminders with their speciﬁc search goals to a random
subset of job seekers. Although the reminder increases the likelihood that job seekers re-
member their search intentions by about 40%, we do not ﬁnd impacts of this sub-treatment
either. This evidence, while not conclusive, suggests that commitment (or accountability)
and limited attention are unlikely mechanisms in this context.
       The results in the paper point to plan-making playing the role of helping unpack the
diﬀerent tasks of a multifaceted activity. Some tasks may demand higher or lower eﬀort
than others, and tasks may diﬀer in their returns.2 In the absence of a plan that breaks up
job search into well-speciﬁed tasks, individuals may be more prone to focus on low-eﬀort/low-
return tasks for a given amount of time devoted to search, falling short of their goals. In
line with this explanation, we ﬁnd that the speciﬁc search goals participants set themselves,
after completing the detailed entries on the plan template, are a signiﬁcant predictor of their
subsequent change in search behavior.
   2
    For instance, preparing an application and submitting it to job vacancy advertisements may require
the same amount of time as contacting friends to inquire about jobs in their ﬁrms, but the probability of
receiving a response and ultimately an oﬀer as a result of these eﬀorts may diﬀer signiﬁcantly.



                                                   3
       Our study makes a number of contributions to the literature. First, it extends research on
intention-behavior gaps to the important domain of job search. While other studies evaluate
job counseling programs that include elements of action planning, these are typically part of
a package of interventions.3 We ﬁnd that even in a context of high structural unemployment -
where search eﬀorts are thought to make little diﬀerence to employment chances - addressing
this particular behavioral bias improves job search intensity, with a potential to translate
into real employment results.
       Our paper also relates to a large literature on active labor market policies (ALMPs),
particularly those aimed to boost job search intensity and eﬃcacy (Card et al., 2015). In
a recent review on the eﬀectiveness of ALMPs in developing countries, the vast majority of
studies ﬁnd modest employment gains of about 2 percentage points (McKenzie, 2017). Like-
wise, we ﬁnd that the government-run job counseling workshop increases employment by
1.9 percentage points. Our paper shows that simple design tweaks (i.e. adding a plan tem-
plate to a workshop) addressing behavioral biases may improve the eﬀectiveness of ALMPs
(Babcock et al., 2012). Plan-making prompts are promising as they are low-cost, easy to
implement, and preserve people’s freedom of choice (Sunstein and Thaler, 2008).
       Furthermore, our paper contributes to an established literature investigating the returns
to diﬀerent search channels (Holzer, 1988; Kuhn and Mansour, 2014; Kroft and Pope, 2014).
Observational studies in this literature are challenged by the endogenous choice of search
activities. Our experiment addresses this concern (at least partially) and indicates that
there are high returns to diversifying search strategy. This evidence complements recent
experimental results by Belot et al. (2016) who ﬁnd that expanding the breadth of search to
additional occupations has large returns in terms of job interviews.
   3
    For example, Belot et al. (2016) report that the UK government’s Behavioural Insight Team is testing
a job counseling program that combines planning, monitoring, and resilience through creative writing. We
could not conﬁrm the details of the intervention (either online, or by contacting one of the researchers), but
Belot et al. (2016) report that it is not possible to separate the eﬀects of the various elements in the program
(p.4).



                                                       4
        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the research design and
identiﬁcation strategy; Section 3 reports the main results; Section 4 explores potential mech-
anisms; and Section 5 concludes.



2         Study Design

2.1        Background and Study Sample

While unemployment in South Africa is considered largely a structural problem, recent
research has documented signiﬁcant frictions in the labor market.4 The Department of
Labour (DoL) is trying to address these market ineﬃciencies through a range of employment
services including job counseling and job referrals. In the context of sluggish economic
growth, however, public services are resource-constrained. In collaboration with the DoL,
this study is part of an agenda to test innovative programs that are inexpensive and scalable.
        Our sampling frame is the Employment Services of South Africa (ESSA) database, com-
prising of more than 550,000 job seekers collected by the DoL. We restricted this sampling
frame to unemployed job seekers between the ages of 18 and 35, who registered with ESSA
in the previous 18 months and lived within traveling distance from the three urban Labour
Centres that were part of the study.5 From this sample, we randomly selected work seekers
and contacted them using the phone number provided in ESSA. In the telephone call, sur-
veyors invited job seekers to participate in an employment service study at the local Labour
Center on a speciﬁed day. In return, they were oﬀered a small stipend of 30 rand (2.5 USD)
that covered their travel cost. Of the individuals successfully contacted, approximately 67%
agreed to participate, and of those who agreed, 63.5% came to the Labour Center on the
    4
     Abel et al. (2017) document that reducing information asymmetries between hiring ﬁrms and job seekers
through reference letters can improve match quality.
   5
     We worked with the Labour Centres in Krugersdorp, Sandton and Soweto, in the Gauteng province.




                                                    5
speciﬁed day.6
       Our ﬁnal study sample consists of 1,097 unemployed youths. Table 1 provides summary
statistics. The sample is relatively educated (12.1 years of education, on average), with 79%
having previously held a job. At baseline, participants are actively looking for work and
spend about 11 hours per week on job search, incurring a cost of 77 rand (about 6 USD).
Despite this, the number of submitted applications (4.4 per month) is relatively low.

                                Table 1: Sample Characteristics

                                              N   Mean               Median SD
                   Age                       1097 26.69                26   4.47
                   Female                    1097  .52                  1     .50
                   Years of schooling        1096 12.12                12   1.16
                   Household size            1097 2.36                  2    1.91
                   Moved to Johannesburg     1097  .30                  0    .46
                   Ever employed             1097  .79                  1     .40
                   Reservation wage          1091 3162                3000  1833
                   Fair wage                 1097 5800                5000  3209
                   Job search transport cost 1043 76.92                45   91.73
                   Number employed friends 1097 1.88                    1    2.08
                   Job search hours (week)   1058 11.35                 8   9.87
                   Job applications (month) 1087 4.36                   3    5.26
                      Note: Table reports summary statistics at baseline. Winsorized at
                      95%.




2.2       Intervention Design

We randomly assign participants to one of three treatment arms: Control (pure control),
Workshop (workshop only), and Workshop Plus (workshop + plan making). Appendix Table
A1 shows that there is balance across these experimental conditions on a number of variables
at baseline. From about 40 estimated p-values, we only see two signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
means at the 10% level.
   6
    Higher educated job seekers are slightly more likely to be part of our sample, while gender and age do
not predict whether people accepted the study invitation.


                                                    6
       The ﬁrst treatment intervention is the standard 90-minute career-counseling workshop
(Workshop) conducted by the Department of Labour. During the workshop, career coun-
selors cover topics such as job search strategies, CV creation, interview techniques, and access
to information and resources for job search. Thus, our design also allows us to evaluate one
of the existing government programs in support of the unemployed.
       Layered on top of the standard workshop is a job-search planning intervention (Workshop
Plus). The 402 job seekers assigned to this treatment were provided with a plan template
designed by the research team and were invited to create their personal job search plan.
Respondents are ﬁrst instructed to think about the time they have available in a typical
week and to ﬁll out a chart with the job search tasks they plan to perform on any given day
of the week. Since increased detail orientation has been shown to improve follow-through
on intentions (Rogers et al., 2015), respondents were encouraged to provide speciﬁc details
regarding the how, when, and where of their proposed tasks (e.g. which newspaper to read,
where to travel to search for work).7 After completing the chart, respondents are prompted
to reﬂect on their proposed tasks and to reckon weekly goals for (i) the number of hours
to spend searching, (ii) identiﬁed job opportunities, and (iii) submitted applications. At
the end of the session, participants could take their plan with them. The plan template is
provided in the Appendix.
       A random subset of 206 job seekers in the plan-making group received a variation of
the template in which they are additionally asked to identify a peer who can help them to
follow up on their plans. The respondents in this Peer sub-treatment (workshop plus +
peer) provide the contact information of the nominated peer, and their consent to contact
her/him with information about their personal job search goals.
       Finally, we randomized participants across the Workshop and Workshop Plus groups to
   7
    Participants listed tasks that ranged across a spectrum of job search eﬀorts (e.g. preparatory tasks such
as document creation and certiﬁcation, identiﬁcation of opportunities, networking, and delivering CVs).




                                                     7
receive text-message reminders about completing their job search goals before the end of the
week. This Reminder sub-treatment diﬀered for each group. The Workshop group received
a general reminder to use the lessons learned in the workshop to identify job opportunities
and apply for jobs. The Workshop Plus group received a speciﬁc reminder about the job
search and application goals, as speciﬁed in the job seeker’s plan (for the Peer sub-group, the
peer also received a reminder).8 Participants in the control group did not receive a reminder.
The study design is shown in Figure A1 in the Appendix.


2.3       Data

We collected data on study participants through in-person and phone interviews. Once
participants arrived to the Labour Centres, surveyors ﬁrst registered them and conﬁrmed
that their ID was among those scheduled for that day. Next, surveyors administered a
baseline survey through an in-person interview. The survey takes on average 20 minutes and
includes modules on demographic information, work history and current search activities.
Baseline data were collected between September and December 2015.
       Two rounds of follow-up data were collected, via phone, from all participants ﬁve and
twelve weeks after the intervention. The attrition rates in the ﬁrst and second follow-up
round was 5% and 15%, respectively, and did not diﬀer by treatment group (Appendix
Table A2).
       In order to address concerns about mis-reports on the outcomes, we supplement the
survey data with an observed measure of job search. This may be particularly relevant in
the context of an intervention designed to assist job seekers. Speciﬁcally, we sent participants
a text message (from a number they could not associate with the research study) in which we
   8
    The content of the text-message reminder for each group was the following. Workshop group: “Dear
XX. Labour Centre Reminder: Apply the steps you learned in the job search workshop about ﬁnding job
opportunities and applying for jobs.” Workshop Plus group: “Dear XX (Dear YY). Labour Centre Reminder:
Your (Your friend XX’s) plan-making is to search for X hours, ﬁnd X job opportunities and apply for X jobs
by Sunday.”


                                                    8
notiﬁed them of an actual vacancy and invited them to submit an application to a speciﬁc
email address. This allowed us to observe whether the participants sent an application in
response to the message, as well as the application material that was submitted.9
       Furthermore, we collected a copy of the completed job-search plans and transcribed their
content. Table 2 provides statistics of the plans in terms of completion rates, number of
days (per week) containing a planned activity, the weekly goal number of hours to spend on
job search activities, the weekly goal number of job opportunities to identify, and the weekly
goal number of applications to submit.



                                Table 2: Action Plan Descriptives

                                                                 N Mean         SD
                       Completed AP                             402  .89         .32
                       Activity-days                            357 3.75        2.38
                       Goal: Job search hours                   345 8.46        5.78
                       Goal: Opportunities to identify          339 10.35        6.5
                       Goal: Applications to submit             340 7.82        4.33
                          Note: Characteristics of transcribed action plans. Activity-
                          days refer to number of days on which an activity was listed.
                          Respondents listed goal hours, opportunities and applica-
                          tions following the weekly breakdown of activities.


       We construct a measure of the intention-behavior gap by comparing search intentions
listed in the plans with reported behavior at baseline. We ﬁnd that, on average, respondents
aim to submit 6.6 more job applications per week than they actually do (median diﬀerence
of 5.5 applications). This indicates the presence of an intention-behavior gap.10 On the
   9
     The message informed participants about a real vacancy in a speciﬁc sector; whenever possible in a
sector in which they worked before. For those with work experience in more than one sector, we randomly
picked one. Sectoral shares were balanced by treatment status. We submitted (forwarded) the applications
we received to the vacancies, on the participants’ behalf. This was done after the last follow-up survey to
avoid confounding employment estimates.
  10
     Baseline behavior is collected by asking “In a typical week, how many applications do you submit / hours
do you search ”. Ideally, we would have collected the intention and behavior measure for exactly the same
time period, but this was not feasible as the formation of the intention was part of the treatment.



                                                     9
other hand, respondents aim to spend on average 3.4 hours less time on job search activities
per week than what they indicate at baseline. However, the distribution is centered around
zero hours, and the median and modal diﬀerence between goal and actual hours searched at
baseline are exactly zero (Figure 1).
           .15




                                                                        .15
           .1




                                                                        .1
 Density




                                                              Density
           .05




                                                                        .05
           0




                                                                        0




                 −30    −20       −10      0        10   20                    0         5         10        15     20
                       Hours Difference: Goal−Baseline                             Apps Difference: Goal−Baseline

Notes : Distribution of the diﬀerence between search intentions (search hours and submitted applicaitions)
listed in the plans and reported behavior at baseline.

                             Figure 1: Intention-Behaviour Gap: Diﬀerence at Baseline


           The data thus suggests that there is an intention-behavior gap in terms of applications
submitted, but not in terms of time spent searching. This will be important for the empir-
ical analysis as it provides diﬀerential predictions about search outcomes. If the planning
intervention is addressing an intention-behavior gap, then we would expect to see an eﬀect
on the number of applications, but no eﬀect on the time spent searching.11
  11
     A possible concern is that individuals may ﬁnd it diﬃcult to track the time spent searching, whereas
applications are more tangible. We ﬁnd, however, that the ‘hours searched’ variable is informative. First,
it varies in the expected way with aspects of search behavior (e.g. use of more/less time-consuming search


                                                                              10
2.4     Empirical Strategy

Our primary objective is to assess the eﬀects of the treatments on job search behavior and
labor market outcomes. To increase statistical power, we pool the two rounds of follow-up
data and estimate the following equation:


              Yijt = α0 + β1 W orkshopi + β2 W orkshopP lusi + δXi0 + λj + γt + ei                          (1)

    where Yijt is the outcome indicator for individual i in location j at time t. Xi0 is a vector of
covariates, including age, gender, education, household size, and primary language. Location
ﬁxed eﬀects λj account for geographical diﬀerences in labor demand, and time dummies γt
indicate the follow-up round (a value of 1 signiﬁes the second). Errors are clustered at the
individual level to account for the panel structure of the data.
    Note that Workshop and Workshop Plus include, respectively, participants in the work-
shop only and the workshop plus plan-making treatment arms. Equation (1) thus estimates
our main treatment eﬀects. The peer support and reminder sub-treatment eﬀects will be
estimated and reported in Section 4. Note also that because completion of the action plan
was not perfect (around 90%), our results are intent-to-treat estimates.



3     Main Results

3.1     Search Intensity and Eﬃciency

We examine job search intensity in terms of the number of hours respondents spend searching
for a job and the number of completed applications. Table 3 indicates that there is no change
channels/activities) and individual attributes (e.g. women spend less time). Secondly, the estimated eﬀect
of the intervention on hours searched is a relatively precise zero, which suggests that the result is not driven
by noise in the dependent variable. Classical measurement error would instead reduce precision, without
inducing bias.




                                                      11
in the number of hours spent searching in either the Workshop or Workshop Plus groups.
This zero eﬀect is not driven by imprecise estimates. Instead, the estimated coeﬃcients
themselves are small and never exceed 3.5% of the control mean.



                         Table 3: Eﬀects on Job Search Intensity

                        (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)
                   Search Hours     Search Hours      Applications         Applications
 WS Basic               0.225            0.016            0.163                0.124
                       (0.897)          (0.897)          (0.274)              (0.273)

 WS Plus               −0.243           −0.480              0.749∗∗∗             0.681∗∗∗
                        (0.750)         (0.747)            (0.240)              (0.235)

 Covariates           No               Y es              No                   Y es
 Observations        1888             1886              1896                 1895
 R2                     0.083             0.092            0.308                 0.318
 Control Mean          14.095            14.095            3.835                 3.835
 P-value                0.595             0.573            0.054                 0.062
 Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors (reported in parentheses)
 are clustered at the individual level. P-value compares WS Plus to WS Basic.
 All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline value of the outcome variable.
 Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.


   In contrast, there is a signiﬁcant increase in the number of applications in the Workshop
Plus group, but not in the Workshop group, relative to the control mean. The number of
applications is also signiﬁcantly higher in the Workshop Plus group relative to the Workshop
group, indicating that plan-making is driving the eﬀect. At follow up, the Workshop Plus
group submits 0.7 additional applications, which is 15% more than the Workshop group and
18% more than the Control group. While this is a sizable increase relative to the low number
of applications at baseline, it only partially closes the intention-behavior gap.
   We corroborate the latter results by re-estimating Equation (1) with an observed measure
of application submission. We anonymously inform job seekers about an actual vacancy and

                                              12
invite them to submit an application to a speciﬁc email address. We observe whether they
apply for the job, as well as the material included with their application. Subjects who
completed the action plan were 5.3 percentage points (27% increase) and 2 percentage points
(11% increase) more likely to submit an application in response to our message regarding a
vacancy, compared to the Control and Workshop groups respectively. Although less precisely
estimated, these impacts are qualitatively similar to those we obtain using self-reported data.
   These ﬁndings provide evidence that intention-behavior gaps are of relevance in the con-
text of job search. In particular, our set of estimates implies that there is an increase in the
ratio of applications submitted to the number of hours searched. Indeed, the Workshop Plus
group submits 20% more applications per hour spent searching relative to the control mean.
We interpret this result as an increase in search eﬃciency.


3.2    Employment

We next investigate whether the increase in application submissions translates into better
employment-related outcomes. In Table 4, we show the treatment eﬀects on responses from
employers, job oﬀers, and employment likelihood.
   Compared to the Workshop group, job seekers in the Workshop Plus group receive a
higher number of responses from employers (24%) and job oﬀers (30%), and were more likely
to be employed (26%) at the time of follow-up. The estimated coeﬃcients on Workshop Plus
are generally signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from both the Control and Workshop groups, with the
exception of the employment eﬀect of Workshop Plus relative to Workshop (Columns 5 and
6). Nonetheless, the diﬀerence in the point estimates of the employment eﬀects between
Workshop Plus and Workshop is sizable and consistent with the eﬀects on the intermediate
outcomes.
   These results suggest that a simple design tweak such as adding a plan-making component
to a standard government-run counseling workshop can substantially boost its eﬀectiveness.

                                              13
The point estimate of the impact of the standard workshop on the likelihood of employment is
1.9 percentage points. This is very much in line with global evidence on the limited impact of
information provision, counseling programs, and a broader range of ALMPs (Altmann et al.,
2015; Card et al., 2015; McKenzie, 2017). On the other hand, the eﬀect of the Workshop
Plus intervention is 4.9 percentage points.



                               Table 4: Eﬀects on Employment Outcomes

                      (1)            (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)                 (6)
                   Responses      Responses        Oﬀers             Oﬀers         Employed            Employed
 WS Basic           −0.025         −0.027            0.023             0.022          0.021               0.019
                     (0.058)        (0.059)         (0.022)           (0.022)        (0.025)             (0.025)

 WS Plus               0.112∗∗        0.102∗         0.058∗∗∗          0.061∗∗∗        0.047∗∗             0.049∗∗
                      (0.053)        (0.053)        (0.020)           (0.020)         (0.020)             (0.021)

 Covariates          No            Y es            No               Y es            No                  Y es
 Observations       1895          1894            1882             1881            1971                1969
 R2                    0.101          0.109          0.012             0.021          0.017                0.024
 Control Mean          0.544          0.544          0.130             0.130          0.115                0.115
 P-value               0.027          0.036          0.126             0.099          0.321                0.249
 Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use panel data over two follow-up periods.
 Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. P-value compares WS Plus to WS Basic.
 All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline value of the outcome variable.
 Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.



    It is also worth noting that our data shows that the jobs found by participants in the
Workshop Plus group do not diﬀer with regard to salary or job satisfaction compared to both
the Control and Workshop groups (results not reported). This suggests that the positive
employment eﬀect of plan-making does not come at the cost of inducing individuals to apply
to (and accept) lower quality jobs.


3.3      Search Strategy

The results in the previous sections (Tables 3 and 4) indicate that job oﬀers increase by twice
the margin than applications (30% vs. 15%) in response to our plan-making treatment. This


                                                          14
suggests that the action plan not only led participants to submit more applications, but also
that each application was more eﬀective in obtaining job oﬀers. This greater eﬀectiveness
may stem from higher-quality applications, or from job seekers diverting to search strategies
with higher returns, or both.
       To shed light on the quality of applications, we analyze job seekers’ submissions in re-
sponse to the vacancy notiﬁcation sent by the research team. We examine whether the
applications followed the appropriate format, contained motivational statements and in-
cluded necessary documents. Appendix Table A3 shows that participants in the Workshop
Plus group submitted applications of slightly higher quality compared to the Control group
(though the diﬀerence is not signiﬁcant), but of very similar quality to the Workshop group.
Thus, the quality of applications is unlikely to explain the larger number of job oﬀers in the
plan-making group relative to the workshop group.
       To explore changes in search strategy, we estimate treatment eﬀects on job seekers’ use of
diﬀerent search channels. Table 5 shows that participants who completed the job-search plan
signiﬁcantly increased the frequency at which they visited employment agencies, dropped
CVs, answered advertisements, and searched online, with respect to both the control and
the workshop groups.12 In contrast, although the standard workshop includes counseling
on a variety of search strategies, no signiﬁcant eﬀect was observed on participants in the
standard workshop.
       Completing and submitting application materials is arguably a high-eﬀort task, in terms
of both complexity and psychological costs, typically preceded by lower-eﬀort tasks such
as networking and identifying job openings. This may explain why at baseline we observe
that job seekers more frequently turn to family and friends to ﬁnd a job, while relying less
on strategies such as approaching employment agencies, responding to jobs announcements,
  12
    The OLS results in Table 5 do not have a simple behavioral interpretation as the dependent variable is
an ordinal search frequency variable. Table A4 in the Appendix re-estimates the model using an interval
regression. The results are qualitatively very similar to those obtained in Table 5.



                                                   15
and dropping CVs directly to ﬁrms, which likely require preparing an application.



                        Table 5: Eﬀects on Frequency of Search Channel Use

                       (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)                 (5)                (6)
                   Empl Agency      Dropped CV       Placed Ad      Answered Ad      Searched Online       Fam/Friends
 WS Basic            −0.016            −0.140            0.060         −0.068               0.058             −0.048
                      (0.139)          (0.131)          (0.144)        (0.122)             (0.130)            (0.102)

 WS Plus                0.362∗∗∗         0.253∗∗         0.153           0.301∗∗∗           0.410∗∗∗          −0.021
                       (0.123)          (0.115)         (0.119)         (0.107)            (0.100)             (0.081)
 Observations        1937             1936            1934            1927               1931                1926
 R2                     0.093            0.069           0.028           0.088              0.364               0.045
 Control Mean           2.125            2.826           1.532           3.253              4.203               4.839
 P-value                0.010            0.004           0.537           0.003              0.006               0.786
 Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use panel data over two follow-up periods. Outcome variables are
 a categorical frequency scale from 0 (never) to 6 (daily). Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the
 individual level. P-value compares WS Plus to WS Basic. All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline
 value of the outcome variable. Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.



       However, to the extent that there are diminishing returns to the use of search channels,
a reallocation of emphasis to less utilized (and higher eﬀort) channels is expected to improve
job search eﬀectiveness. Consistently, we ﬁnd that contacting family and friends and placing
advertisements are unaﬀected by the plan-making intervention. Instead, job seekers in the
Workshop Plus group diversify their search strategy by intensifying the use of channels
that possibly enjoy steeper returns. This, in turn, can help explain the employment eﬀects
observed in Section 3.2.13
       In summary, plan-making helps job-seekers optimize their search strategy. This not only
increases search eﬃciency (as indicated by the greater number of applications submitted
for a given time eﬀort) but it may also improve search eﬀectiveness, in terms of greater
employment returns to each application submitted.
  13
    Indeed, we ﬁnd that the increase in hours spent searching is positively correlated with job responses
and oﬀers only for channels such as answering advertisements, visiting employment centers, or dropping
oﬀ CVs, which likely require preparing an application (results not reported). In addition, job seekers in
the plan-making group are signiﬁcantly more likely to report that they found employment by answering
advertisements.



                                                            16
4        Why Did Participants Fail to Optimize Job Search?

Our main ﬁndings suggest that plan-making led participants to spend their job search time
more eﬃciently, to adopt more eﬀective search strategies, and to obtain employment gains.
This raises the question of why people failed to intensify and optimize their job search at the
outset of the study. We investigate the role of the three most prominent behavioral barriers
that plan-making can help address: the complexity of multifaceted tasks, forgetfulnesses, and
lack of commitment (Rogers et al., 2015). Of course, there are other potential mechanisms,
which renders the analysis in this section suggestive rather than conclusive.


4.1       Unpacking

Plan-making can help unpack a complex multifaceted task into smaller subtasks, providing a
more realistic sense of the logistical steps and time required to complete an activity (Kruger
and Evans, 2004; Buehler et al., 1994). One way of unpacking a daunting task (ﬁnding a job)
is to set detailed plans regarding how, when and where to perform a subtask (e.g. looking
for ads in the newspaper every morning). Another is to set concrete goals with respect to
speciﬁc subtasks (e.g. identifying three vacancies) rather than the desired outcome (ﬁnding
work).
       Our plan-making treatment asks participants to unpack their search process in both of
these ways. First, participants ﬁll a detailed chart with speciﬁc subtasks for speciﬁc days
of the week. After completing this chart, they set weekly goals (in line with their detailed
plan) on the number of job opportunities to identify, applications to submit, and hours to
spend searching.
       We ﬁnd a strong positive association between the stated goals on participants’ plans
and subsequent behavior changes.14 In Table 6, we show that job seekers who set a higher
  14
    Due to the experimental design, we can only estimate this correlation for participants who completed
the action plan. In addition, we do not have information on the number of identiﬁed job opportunities at


                                                  17
goal in terms of search hours are more likely to have increased the time spent searching at
follow-up. An additional hour in their stated goal is associated with a 0.4 hour increase, from
baseline, in actual behavior (Columns 2 and 3). A positive correlation is also found between
goals and behavior change in terms of submitted applications. A unit addition in the stated
goal is associated to a 0.11 increase in applications (Columns 4 and 6). Notably, goals are
signiﬁcant predictors only of a change in the corresponding behavior, suggesting that the
observed pattern is not driven by motivation or other unobservable character traits.15



         Table 6: Action Plan Subgroup Analysis: Correlation with Search Intensity

                                          Search Hours                                 Submitted Applications
                             (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                        Search Hours     Search Hours      Search Hours     Applications     Applications    Applications
 Goal: Applications        −0.131                             −0.267∗∗          0.113∗∗                          0.106∗
                            (0.119)                            (0.119)         (0.055)                          (0.054)

 Goal: Hours                                   0.405∗∗∗         0.460∗∗∗                          0.048           0.035
                                              (0.105)          (0.107)                           (0.037)         (0.036)
 Observations              582               590              576              580              589             574
 R2                          0.177             0.207            0.218            0.352            0.341           0.358
 Baseline Mean              12.013            12.013           12.013            4.647            4.647           4.647
 Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use panel data over two follow-up periods.
 Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level.
 Subsample consists of those assigned to Workshop Plus. All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects
 and baseline values of goal applications and goal search hours. Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.



    The evidence of a positive correlation between goals and behavior change for participants
in the plan-making treatment group is consistent with studies in the psychology literature
showing that goal-directed actions (i.e. implementation intentions) can support goal achieve-
                 atter et al. (2001) for a review.16
ment. See Brandst¨
follow-up, which implies that we cannot check the correlation between goals and behavior for this variable.
   15
      Column 1 in Table 6 shows that the intended search hours are not correlated with subsequent changes in
submitting applications, while Column 5 shows that the intended applications are uncorrelated with changes
in hours searched.
   16
      van Hooft and Noordzij (2009) experimentally test the eﬀectiveness of a workshop focused on goal setting.
They ﬁnd suggestive evidence of a positive eﬀect on search intensity and employment. However, the study
is limited by a small sample size and selective attrition.



                                                             18
4.2        Forgetfulness

We explore next whether the eﬀect of our intervention may be related to bringing job search
at the ‘top of mind’ (Karlan et al., 2016). While the action plan may itself serve as a
reminder, we strengthen this channel by sending weekly SMS reminders about job search
goals to a subset of participants.17
       We ﬁnd that reminders do not have a signiﬁcant impact on search behavior or employ-
ment outcomes (Appendix Table A5). General SMS reminders about job search steps to
participants in the standard workshop did not increase the number of hours spent searching
or applications submitted. Similarly, sending speciﬁc reminders about job seekers’ weekly
goals to those who had completed the job search plan did not change their search intensity.
       A possible explanation for this result is that participants ignore the SMS reminders or
that they do not process the content of the message. We ﬁnd, however, that reminders
signiﬁcantly increase the likelihood that the plan-making group could correctly recall their
goals at follow-up (three months post-intervention) by approximately 22 percentage points–a
41% impact (Table 7, Column 1). Conditional on claiming that they remember, the recall
of actual goals is similarly accurate across groups (Table 7, Column 2).
       It is also possible that because the action plan itself already serves as a reminder, bringing
job search to top of mind, it limits the additional potential impact of the SMS. However,
the ﬁnding that reminders are also ineﬀective in the group that did not complete any plan
renders this explanation less plausible. Overall, we believe that these results suggest that
forgetfulness may not be the limiting factor for the job seekers in our sample.


  17
    SMS reminders have been eﬀective in diﬀerent domains, from savings (Karlan et al., 2016) to physical
activity (Schwerdtfeger et al., 2012). Alternative forms of reminder have also been used to strengthen
planning prompts. For instance, writing down the details of a medical appointment on a post-it note
addresses forgetfulness, increasing by 16% the probability of receiving a colonoscopy (Milkman et al., 2013).




                                                     19
                             Table 7: Second Follow Up: Goal Recall

                        (1)                                              (2)
                Recall Likelihood                                 Recall Accuracy
   Reminder             0.215∗∗∗                                         0.037
                       (0.059)                                          (0.616)
   Observations      253                                              140
   R2                   0.130                                            0.100
   Control Mean         0.527                                            3.491
   Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use data from the second follow-up.
   Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses). Outcomes are likelihood of remembering the goal
   number of applications, and the absolute diﬀerence between stated goal and recalled goal.
   All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects. Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.


4.3       Accountability

Plan-making could also serve as a commitment device, as failing to follow through on intended
behavior may cause discomfort (Cialdini, 2009). Reminders of the respondent’s intentions
could lead to increased accountability. However, as shown above, we ﬁnd no evidence that
reminders aﬀect behavior.
       Alternatively, we draw on the peer support intervention to directly test the importance
of accountability. Stone et al. (1994) ﬁnd that social pressure can eﬀectively induce com-
mittment to intended behavior. Rogers et al. (2015) argue that planning prompts are more
eﬀective when family or friends are informed of the plan, since this increases the discomfort
of failure to follow through.18 If our intervention operates mainly by helping individuals com-
mit to a plan of action, then we may expect to see stronger eﬀects when a peer commitment
mechanism is added.
       The data show that peer support does not lead to an increase in job search intensity
beyond the impacts of plan-making itself (Appendix Table A6). That is, participants who
completed a job search plan have similar outcomes whether or not they nominated a peer to
  18
     Our study participants mainly nominated friends (48%) and nuclear family members (42%) to receive
periodic notiﬁcations about the job seeker’s search goals. These close peers may be particularly instrumental
in creating a sense of accountability and social pressure.


                                                     20
help them follow through on their intentions.
       A possible reason may be that the nominated peers were not willing to serve that role.
Our design, however, allowed them to easily opt out if they wanted to, and we ﬁnd that
virtually none of the support peers refused.19 Furthermore, participants engaged with their
peers. In the follow-up survey, 85% reports that the peer helped them in their job search.
Participants list various ways, other than social pressure, through which peers facilitated
their job search, including information provision (60%), searching on the respondent’s behalf
(21%), and providing ﬁnancial help (14%). Nonetheless, the fact that the peer support does
not aﬀect any search or employment outcomes suggests that neither the commitment nor
any of the other support channels facilitates job search in our context.
       It is of course possible that participants may have been already utilizing their social net-
work in their job search. In fact, over 95% of respondents reported discussing job search with
family and friends at baseline. However, the peer support intervention is equally ineﬀective
regardless of how frequently they discussed job search before our intervention (results not
reported). Overall, we intepret these results as evidence that our action plan intervention is
unlikely to work through increased commitment and accountability.



5        Conclusion

A substantial body of work in the psychology literature demonstrates that planning prompts
can help individuals overcome the intention-behavior gap (i.e. the disconnect between the
intention to perform and the actual enactment of a behavior) in a number of contexts. We
draw on insights from this literature to add a novel element to one of the most studied areas
in labor economics and policy: job search. In particular, we test the eﬀects of planning
  19
    Initial message to peer: “Dear XX. YY identiﬁed you as a good person to help him/her follow his/her
job search plan. You will receive regular reminders about YY‘s search goals. If you do NOT want to receive
these messages, text: OUT. Thank you. Labour Centre.”



                                                   21
prompts on job search intensity and employment outcomes.
   Our main results indicate that completing a job search plan helps unemployed youths
to be more eﬃcient and eﬀective in their job search. We show that plan-making allows
individuals to increase the number of applications submitted and to diversify their portfolio
of search channels. These eﬀects can help explain the employment gains we observe in our
sample and provide ﬁrst evidence (to the best of our knowledge) on the promise of pure
plan-making interventions in the context of job search.
   The results presented in the paper are of obvious policy relevance, given the modest
impacts of active labor market policies documented in a variety of contexts (McKenzie,
2017). We suggest that a simple low-cost design tweak, such as adding a plan-making
activity to standard government-run job counseling workshops, can substantially boost the
eﬀectiveness of existing programs.
   Our ﬁnding of high returns to job search intensity for young seekers in South Africa
may appear puzzling if one considers the large number of unemployed youth in the country
who are unsuccessfully looking for work. However, it may be precisely in such contexts
that plan-making is most eﬀective. If negative feedback from failed search eﬀorts leads
to discouragement and ineﬃcient job search, behaviorally-informed interventions that help
individuals increase their search intensity can have signiﬁcant employment eﬀects.
   Although our results show the relevance of intention-behavior gaps in the domain of
job search and the impacts of plan-making prompts on search intensity, some questions
are left unanswered. First, our experimental design does not allow us to identify the general
equilibrium employment eﬀects of this intervention, which may of course be diﬀerent from the
partial eﬀects presented here. Moreover, while our evidence suggests that the value of plan-
making derives mainly from helping job-seekers unpack the complicated job search process
into smaller tasks and more concrete goals, further tests of this speciﬁc mechanism may
be needed. Finally, unlike other actions investigated in the literature on intention-behavior


                                             22
gaps (e.g. voting or vaccinating), job search is a continued activity. Future research could
explore interventions that can help sustain the observed (short-term) eﬀects, for instance by
allowing job seekers to update their job search plans in the face of failed eﬀorts.
   Overall, our results are consistent with research in social psychology suggesting that the
stronger the intentions to perform a certain behavior, the higher the likelihood of overlooking
tools that can help increase follow-through. This is due to the erroneous belief that strong
intentions will more easily translate into actions (Koehler et al., 2011). Plan-prompting in-
terventions can therefore be particularly eﬀective for increasing follow-through on intentions
of high importance, like searching for work.




                                               23
References

Abel, M., R. Burger, and P. Piraino (2017). The value of reference letters. Technical report,
  Working paper, Harvard University.

                           ager, and F. Zimmermann (2015). Learning about job search:
Altmann, S., F. Armin, S. J¨
  A ﬁeld experiment with job seekers in germany. Working Paper .

Babcock, L., W. J. Congdon, L. F. Katz, and S. Mullainathan (2012). Notes on behavioral
  economics and labor market policy. IZA Journal of Labor Policy 1 (1), 1–14.

Belot, M., P. Kircher, and P. Muller (2016). Providing advice to job seekers at low cost: An
  experimental study on online advice. IZA DP No. 10068 .

       atter, V., A. Lengfelder, and P. M. Gollwitzer (2001). Implementation intentions
Brandst¨
  and eﬃcient action initiation. Journal of personality and social psychology 81 (5), 946.

Buehler, R., D. Griﬃn, and M. Ross (1994). Exploring the” planning fallacy”: Why people
  underestimate their task completion times. Journal of personality and social psychol-
  ogy 67 (3), 366.

Caliendo, M., D. A. Cobb-Clark, and A. Uhlendorﬀ (2015). Locus of control and job search
  strategies. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (1), 88–103.

Card, D., J. Kluve, and A. Weber (2015). What works? a meta analysis of recent active labor
  market program evaluations. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cialdini, R. (2009). Inﬂuence: The power of persuasion. New York: William Morrow .

DellaVigna, S. and M. D. Paserman (2005). Job search and impatience. Journal of Labor
  Economics 23 (3), 527–588.

Falk, A., D. Huﬀman, and U. Sunde (2006). Self-conﬁdence and search. IZA DP No. 2525 .

                                             24
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1999). Implementation intentions: strong eﬀects of simple plans. American
  psychologist 54 (7), 493.

Hagger, M. S. and A. Luszczynska (2014). Implementation intention and action planning
  interventions in health contexts: State of the research and proposals for the way forward.
  Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being 6 (1), 1–47.

Holzer, H. J. (1988). Search method use by unemployed youth. Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 6 (1), 1–20.

Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, and J. Zinman (2016). Getting to the top of
  mind: How reminders increase saving. Management Science .

Koehler, D. J., R. J. White, and L. K. John (2011). Good intentions, optimistic self-
  predictions, and missed opportunities. Social Psychological and Personality Science 2 (1),
  90–96.

Kroft, K. and D. G. Pope (2014). Does online search crowd out traditional search and
  improve matching eﬃciency? evidence from craigslist. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (2),
  259–303.

Kruger, J. and M. Evans (2004). If you don’t want to be late, enumerate: Unpacking reduces
  the planning fallacy. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 40 (5), 586–598.

Kuhn, P. and H. Mansour (2014). Is internet job search still ineﬀective? The Economic
  Journal 124 (581), 1213–1233.

Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 112 (2), 443–478.

McGee, A. and P. McGee (2016). Search, eﬀort, and locus of control. Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization 126, 89–101.

                                            25
McKenzie, D. (2017). How Eﬀective Are Active Labor Market Policies in Developing Coun-
  tries? A Critical Review of Recent Evidence. The World Bank.

Milkman, K. L., J. Beshears, J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2011). Using
  implementation intentions prompts to enhance inﬂuenza vaccination rates. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences 108 (26), 10415–10420.

Milkman, K. L., J. Beshears, J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2013). Planning
  prompts as a means of increasing preventive screening rates. Prev Med 56 (1), 92–3.

Nickerson, D. W. and T. Rogers (2010). Do you have a voting plan? implementation
  intentions, voter turnout, and organic plan making. Psychological Science 21 (2), 194–199.

Prestwich, A., M. T. Conner, R. J. Lawton, J. K. Ward, K. Ayres, and R. R. McEachan
  (2012). Randomized controlled trial of collaborative implementation intentions targeting
  working adults’ physical activity. Health Psychology 31 (4), 486.

Prestwich, A., R. Lawton, and M. Conner (2003). The use of implementation intentions and
  the decision balance sheet in promoting exercise behaviour. Psychology and Health 18 (6),
  707–721.

Rogers, T., K. L. Milkman, L. K. John, and M. I. Norton (2015). Beyond good intentions:
  Prompting people to make plans improves follow-through on important tasks. Behavioral
  Science & Policy 1 (2), 33–41.

Schwerdtfeger, A. R., C. Schmitz, and M. Warken (2012). Using text messages to bridge the
  intention-behavior gap? a pilot study on the use of text message reminders to increase
  objectively assessed physical activity in daily life. Frontiers in psychology 3, 270.

Spinnewijn, J. (2015). Unemployed but optimistic: Optimal insurance design with biased
  beliefs. Journal of the European Economic Association 13 (1), 130–167.

                                              26
Stone, J., E. Aronson, A. L. Crain, M. P. Winslow, and C. B. Fried (1994). Inducing
  hypocrisy as a means of encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social
  Psychology Bulletin 20 (1), 116–128.

Sunstein, C. and R. Thaler (2008). Nudge. The politics of libertarian paternalism. New
  Haven .

van Hooft, E. A. and G. Noordzij (2009). The eﬀects of goal orientation on job search and
  reemployment: A ﬁeld experiment among unemployed job seekers. Journal of Applied
  Psychology 94 (6), 1581.




                                           27
6     Appendix




Study participants are randomly assigned to one of three treatment arms: Control (pure control), Workshop
(workshop only), and Workshop Plus (workshop + plan making). A random subset of job seekers in the
Workshop Plus group were additionally asked to identify a peer. Participants across the Workshop and
Workshop Plus groups were further randomized to receive text-message reminders.

                                     Figure A1: Study Design




                                                   28
                          Table A1: Baseline Characteristics: Test of Equal Means

                                  N  Control Workshop                 WS Pval      Workshop Plus      WSPlus Pval
     Age                        1097  26.4     26.7                    0.37            27.0              0.39
     Female                     1097   0.6      0.5                    0.17             0.5              0.76
     Years of schooling         1096  12.2     12.1                     .58            12.1              0.95
     Household size             1097   2.5      2.4                    0.72             2.2              0.33
     Employed HHMs              1097   1.0      1.0                    0.84             1.0              0.76
     Searching HHMs             1096   0.9      .08                    0.53             0.7              0.55
     Married                    1097   0.1      0.1                    0.86             0.1              0.81
     Moved to Johannesburg      1097   0.3      0.3                    0.36             0.3              0.54
     Currently receiving UIF    1097   0.1      0.1                    0.12             0.1              0.58
     Ever employed              1097   0.8      0.8                    0.63             0.8              0.29
29




     Ever self-employed         1097   0.1      0.1                    0.83             0.2              0.30
     Months of unemployment      870  13.9     13.0                    0.32            11.1              0.06
     Reservation wage           1091  3070    3166                     0.52            3268              0.51
     Fair wage                  1097  5626    5827                     0.44            5993              0.54
     Job search transport cost  1043  72.9     83.8                    0.15            78.0              0.46
     Number employed friends    1097   1.8      2.1                    0.09             1.8              0.16
     Job search hours (week)    1058  10.8     11.4                    0.47            12.0              0.47
     Job applications (month)   1087   4.1      4.4                    0.50             4.6              0.57
     Employer responses (month) 1088   0.4      0.5                    0.29             0.5              0.42
      Note: Table reports balance of baseline characteristics across treatment assignment. Means reported for Control,
      Workshop, and WorkshopPlus groups. WS Pval reports p-values of test of equal means with the control group; WSPlus
      Pval report test of equal means with Workshop group. Months of unemployment is measured for subsample who have
      ever been employed. Winsorized at 95% where necessary for outliers.
                          Table A2: Attrition by Treatment

                     Sample     Control WS Basic         WS Plus      Pval Basic    Pval Plus
Attrition Wave 1      0.05       0.05    0.04             0.06           0.52         0.31
Attrition Wave 2      0.15       0.15    0.15             0.15           0.91         0.89
  Note: Table reports attrition as a percentage of the sample in the Control group, Workshop
  only group, and workshop Plus group. Pval Basic reports the Pvalue of test of attrition in the
  Workshop Basic group to the Control: Pval Plus reports p-value of test of attrition in Workshop
  Plus to Workshop Basic.




                                              30
                           Table A3: Eﬀects on Search Intensity and Quality, Objective Search Measures

                            (1)              (2)              (3)        (4)               (5)        (6)                         (7)
                        Cover Letter      Motivation         CV      Ref Letter            ID     Certiﬁcate                 Quality Index
     WS Basic               0.081            0.005            0.016   −0.022               0.040      0.017                       0.137
                           (0.096)          (0.052)          (0.038)    (0.020)           (0.095)    (0.093)                     (0.241)

     WS Plus                 0.075            0.005          0.023          0.014          0.026          0.016                    0.159
                            (0.078)          (0.034)        (0.029)        (0.027)        (0.079)        (0.078)                  (0.174)
     Observations          205              205            205            205            205            205                      205
     R2                      0.128            0.044          0.876          0.088          0.166          0.195                    0.426
     Control Mean            0.366            0.070          0.887          0.014          0.394          0.408                    2.141
     P-value                 0.944            0.996          0.814          0.102          0.878          0.990                    0.923
     Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors (reported in parentheses). P-value compares WS Plus to WS Basic.
     Regressions use cross-sectional individual-level data controlling for demographics and location-ﬁxed eﬀects.
     Measures of quality are binary indicators conditional on applying. Quality Index is calculated as the sum across six binary indicators of quality.
31
       Table A4: Eﬀects on Frequency of Search Channel Use: Interval Regression

                 (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)                (6)
             Empl Agency        Drop CVs        Place Ad      Answer Ad      Search Online        Fam/Friends
WS Basic         0.003           −0.176            0.244        −0.096             0.250              0.014
                (0.258)           (0.183)         (0.388)        (0.200)          (0.398)            (0.362)

WS Plus            0.770∗∗∗         0.430∗∗∗       0.320          0.570∗∗∗         1.226∗∗∗           −0.081
                  (0.232)          (0.164)        (0.303)        (0.180)          (0.329)              (0.305)

Covariates       Y es             Y es           Y es           Y es             Y es                Y es
N               1937             1936           1934           1927             1931                1926
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use panel data over two follow-up periods.
Interval regressions are ordered probit estimators in which the thresholds are speciﬁed rather than estimated.
We specify the thresholds for the ordinal search frequency variable using the number of weekly search days
that separate the speciﬁed survey response categories. The estimated coeﬃcients are directly comparable
to those that would have been obtained from an OLS regression on a continuous weakly search days dependent variable.
Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level.
All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline value of the outcome variable.




                                                         32
          Table A5: Eﬀects of Reminders on Search and Employment Outcomes

                                      Search                                Employment
                               (1)             (2)               (3)                 (4)            (5)
                          Search Hours     Applications    Empl Responses        Job Oﬀers       Employed
WS Basic                     −0.344            0.093             0.049               0.025          0.015
                              (1.065)         (0.316)           (0.071)             (0.027)        (0.030)

WS Plus                       −0.724              0.496∗          0.089              0.077∗∗∗       0.043∗
                              (0.890)            (0.282)         (0.061)            (0.026)        (0.025)

WS Basic X Reminder             0.939             0.076          −0.200∗∗          −0.007           0.011
                               (1.520)           (0.523)         (0.099)           (0.038)         (0.046)

WS Plus X Reminder             0.438              0.354           0.032           −0.031            0.012
                              (0.977)            (0.366)         (0.073)           (0.030)         (0.031)
Observations                1886               1895            1894              1881            1969
R2                             0.092              0.319           0.111             0.022           0.024
Control Mean                  14.095              3.835           0.544             0.130           0.115
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use panel data over two follow-up periods.
Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level.
Coeﬃcients on Reminder interaction terms express the additional value of the reminder.
All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline value of the outcome variable.
Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.




                                                     33
       Table A6: Eﬀects of Peer Support on Search and Employment Outcomes

                                 Search                                  Employment
                         (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)            (5)
                    Search Hours      Applications     Empl Responses        Job Oﬀers       Employed
WS Basic                 0.023            0.118            −0.028                0.022          0.020
                        (0.897)          (0.273)            (0.059)             (0.022)        (0.025)

WS Plus                 −0.217              0.392              0.051              0.050∗∗           0.059∗∗
                         (0.907)           (0.305)            (0.064)            (0.025)           (0.027)

WS Plus x Peer          −0.494             0.545              0.095              0.019            −0.019
                         (0.974)          (0.366)            (0.074)            (0.030)            (0.031)
Observations           1886             1895               1894               1881               1969
R2                        0.092            0.320              0.110              0.021              0.024
Control Mean             14.095            3.835              0.544              0.130              0.115
Notes: * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions use panel data over two follow-up periods.
Standard errors (reported in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level.
Coeﬃcient on Peer interaction term expresses the additional value of the peer support.
All regressions control for location-ﬁxed eﬀects and baseline value of the outcome variable.
Outcome variables are winsorized at the 5% level.




                                                 34
                                 JOB SEARCH ACTION PLAN

Name:
Phone No:
Instructions: We invite you to write your personal job search plan for a typical week.
              Please be specific and make realistic goals.

     Day       Time of day                     Activity                                    Details
               (Ex: Morning)    (Ex: search newspaper / internet, drop CVs)   (Which newspaper? Where drop CVs?)


Monday



Tuesday



Wednesday



Thursday



Friday



Saturday



Sunday



                                                                                                    Completed?
                                      Weekly Goals
                                                                                            (Fill in Yes/No at home)
                                                                                           Week   Week   Week   Week
                                                                                            1      2      3      4

1) Each week I plan to identify ___________ job opportunities.

2) Each week I plan to submit __________ applications.

3) Each week I plan to search for work for __________ hours.

4)
