                                                    WPS8025


Policy Research Working Paper                      8025




        Sustainability of Demand Responsive
         Approaches to Rural Water Supply
                              The Case of Kerala

                                    Luis Andres
                                   Saubhik Deb
                                 Martin Gambrill
                                  Elisa Giannone
                                   George Joseph
                                 Pramod Kannath
                                  Manish Kumar
                                   P.K. Kurian
                                   Rajesh Many
                                  Abdu Muwonge




Water Global Practice Group
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8025


  Abstract
  This paper presents the findings of an impact evaluation to                       supply schemes were more successful in delivering ade-
  assess the performance and sustainability of the demand                           quate, regular, and quality water supply, experienced fewer
  responsive community-based approach toward rural water                            breakdowns and water shortages, and enjoyed higher con-
  supply in the state of Kerala, India. To achieve the study’s                      sumer satisfaction with the quality of service delivery. The
  objectives, conceptual definitions of the “performance” and                       success of the community-based approach demonstrates
 “sustainability” of rural water supply schemes were first                          that people are willing to contribute toward the capital
  developed, as were indicators for their systematic measure-                       costs of the schemes and pay for the water they use for
  ment. Performance and sustainability indicators for demand                        a better service delivery. The findings of this paper sug-
  responsive approaches were compared with the more con-                            gest that the community-based approach can be a superior
  ventional supply-based approach to rural water supply. The                        alternative to traditional supply driven models in expand-
  study found that participatory community driven water                             ing and improving water service delivery in rural areas.




  This paper is a product of the Water Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at Landres@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
  Sustainability of Demand Responsive Approaches to
        Rural Water Supply: The Case of Kerala
     Luis Andres, Saubhik Deb, Martin Gambrill, Elisa Giannone, George Joseph, Pramod Kannath,
                   Manish Kumar, P.K. Kurian, Rajesh Many, and Abdu Muwonge1




JEL Classification: D02; Q01; Q25
Key Words: Drinking water; rural water schemes; demand responsive approach;
sustainability. 




                                                       
1
   The authors are thankful to Maria Angelica Sotomayor, Srinivasa Rao Podipireddy, Miguel Vargas Ramirez, Smita Misra, and 
Junaid Kamal Ahmad, Country Director for his invaluable comments.   
 
This paper is a product of the Water Global Practice. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to 
its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers 
are  also  posted  on  the  Web  at  http://econ.worldbank.org.  Usual  disclaimer  applies.  The  authors  may  be  contacted  at 
landres@worldbank.org. 
    1. Introduction
In the early 1990s there was increasing recognition of the failure of supply driven water and sanitation
service provision. Rural water schemes built during this period tended to focus more on the construction
of facilities to increase access quickly without paying sufficient attention to the post construction phase.
This often led to costly reinvestment after the collapse of the water schemes. From the mid- to late-
1990s, given the pervasive problems relating to the performance and sustainability of rural water
infrastructure in the developing world, the World Bank and other development partners worked to
develop new approaches to implementing rural water supply schemes which were intended to improve
the sustainability of the resultant services. At this time, national and state governments, in their effort
to achieve long-term sustainability and improved performance of water supply services, started to focus
on institutional arrangements that would ensure the involvement of beneficiaries in system planning,
design, construction and management, in order to facilitate cost recovery as well as to improve the
operation and maintenance (O&M) of the water schemes. There was growing consensus, both in
academic and policy/implementation spheres, that water supply interventions needed to be ‘demand
responsive’ – i.e. they needed to include community participation and community contributions towards
capital and O&M costs in order to increase the ownership and the sustainability of the schemes and to
reduce a community’s dependence on higher levels of government for sustainable rural water supply
provision (Sara and Katz, 1997).

In Kerala in southern India, there is a coexistence of different service delivery approaches for the
provision of rural water supply within the same state. Until the late 1990s, the Kerala Water Authority
(KWA), which followed a ‘supply driven’, or top-down, engineering-based, approach to the provision
of water supply, was the only agency responsible for piped water supply and sanitation service delivery
in the state’s rural villages and small towns. In 1997, under an initiative to decentralize service delivery,
the Government of Kerala (GoK) allowed the Local Self-Government Institutions (LSGIs) to take over
existing small water supply schemes from KWA or to implement their own new standalone water supply
projects. In 2000, with a view to furthering the decentralization efforts, GoK decided to empower
Beneficiary Groups (BGs), created at the community level, to carry out the following tasks related to
rural water supply schemes in the state to: (i) make planning and investment decisions, (ii) manage
development funds; (iii) lead/supervise construction; and (iv) operate and maintain the resultant
systems. The Kerala Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (KRWSA) was set up in 1999 as a
Special Purpose Vehicle to plan, implement and supervise a World Bank financed Kerala Rural Water
Supply and Sanitation Project, (the ‘Jalanidhi Project’). Between 2000 and 2008, GoK successfully
implemented the Jalanidhi project which was designed to follow a ‘demand responsive approach’
(DRA) to rural water supply, implementation of which encompassed, among other things, beneficiary
participation, capital cost contributions from beneficiaries and from the rural local governments (Gram


                                                     2 
 
Panchayats, or GPs), a policy of providing universal household connections within the BGs,2 and full
O&M cost recovery from user fees.

There is a growing volume of literature on the sustainability of community driven rural water supply
schemes which mostly investigate the success and the risk factors for the equitable and effective
operation of these schemes. Capitalizing upon the coexistence of the different approaches to rural water
supply provision in Kerala, namely those following a DRA and those that are supply driven, this paper
examines and compares the sustainability and performance of rural water schemes built under various
regimes, and provides recommendations for future reforms in the rural water sector. The paper aims to
contribute to this literature by: (i) proposing a multidimensional definition of ‘sustainability’ and of
‘performance’ of rural water schemes; (ii) selecting a matched sample of similar schemes from the
demand and the supply approaches in order to ensure comparability between them; and (iii) using
impact evaluation techniques for analyzing relative performance, strengths, and weakness of the water
supply schemes across various dimensions of performance and sustainability. The paper provides
evidence on the effectiveness of DRA vis-à-vis the more traditional supply driven approaches to the
implementation of water supply schemes using quasi-experimental matching techniques identifying
comparable supply driven and demand driven schemes and analyzing their performances and relative
strengths and weaknesses.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a background on DRA followed by a
discussion on different types of water supply arrangements in rural Kerala. Issues related to the
measurement of performance and sustainability of water supply schemes are addressed in Section 3.
Section 4 introduces the empirical strategy including the data sources and the econometric model used
for comparing the performances of water supply schemes. This is followed in Section 5 by a discussion
of the descriptive data as well as empirical results from the econometric estimations. Section 6
concludes by highlighting the implications of this study for future reforms in the rural water sector in
India and, by extension, in other developing countries.


      2. Background

      2.1 Background on the demand responsive approach

Worldwide, 80 percent of the people who have limited access to drinking water supplies live in rural
areas (United Nations, 2010). But the sustainability of rural water infrastructure has been a critical
challenge mostly due to the remoteness of rural locations and the lack of financial and technical
capabilities to operate and maintain schemes in these areas. One of the United Nations’ 2000

                                                       
2Kerala is one of the pioneering states to introduce universal household connections for rural water supply under the DRA. It
was not previously the norm in Kerala and still is not in most of rural India.

                                                             3 
 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) was to increase the proportion of the world’s population that
has access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation (United Nations, 2010). While the international
community has made advancements toward these goal over the past two decades, progress in rural areas
is lagging when compared to urban areas (United Nations, 2011). The recent Sustainable Development
Goals built on the MDGs proposed a higher measure of access to safely managed water (United Nations,
2015).

Many countries focused on construction of facilities to expand access quickly. However, inadequate
attention to post construction O&M led to subsequent collapse of many of these schemes and need for
further reinvestment. For instance, a 2009 Water Aid study from Tanzania found that nearly half of
improved public water points in rural areas are not functioning, and 25 percent of systems are inoperable
after only two years following installation (Taylor, 2009). Similar findings were reported in Nigeria
(Andres et al., 2016). These systems fail at such high rates in large part because sustainability of rural
water systems in low income countries depends on “the relationship of the user with the life cycle of
the water systems” (Jones, 2012).

So to achieve long-term sustainability, governments and development partners started to focus on
institutional arrangements that would ensure involvement of users in planning, implementation, and
O&M of schemes and financial contribution by users to at least cover the O&M costs. It was important
to have infrastructure sustainability, as there was enough evidence that by 2025, nearly 1.4 billion
people, amounting to a quarter of the world’s population or a third of the population in developing
countries, are destined to face absolute water scarcity (Cosgrove, 2003).

Community driven projects with active beneficiary participation in planning and implementation are
likely to be more responsive to the needs of the beneficiaries in creating infrastructure, giving
communities control over decisions, improving service delivery, creating ownership, and strengthening
the capacity of the communities to undertake other development activities (Chambers, 1983; Sen, 1999;
Dongier et. al., 2003). Literature on performance assessment of various community driven, participatory
water supply schemes shows that such projects can create effective infrastructure and improve
performance of water supply schemes. Participatory-demand-driven models for provision of rural water
supply have been found to be successful in delivering well-designed and functioning systems in Ghana
and Peru (Thorsten II, 2007). Marks and Davis (2012) reveal that demand based community
participation in building drinking water systems increases the community’s sense of ownership for the
water system, and improves the functioning of rural water projects in rural Kenya. Isham and Kahkonen
(1999) found that greater community participation is associated with improved service delivery in India
and Sri Lanka. An assessment of ten community driven projects in Benin, Bolivia, Honduras, Indonesia,
Pakistan, and Uganda shows that community driven projects with active beneficiary participation are
likely to be more sustainable (Sara and Katz, 1997). Similarly, a more recent study in rural areas of

                                                    4 
 
Pakistan found that community participation is crucial for developing ownership and for ensuring long-
term sustainability of rural water supply projects (Haq, Hassan and Ahmad, 2014). Several studies have
also highlighted the importance of capacity development and institutional support to ensure the long-
run sustainability of these projects. An impact evaluation of small community water systems in Bolivia
funded by the Bolivian Social Investment Fund found that training and capacity development of
communities are crucial for improved performance of these schemes in terms of access and availability
of water (Newman et. al., 2002). In Malawi, newer community driven rural water supply schemes were
found to be performing better than the older ones, indicating poor sustainability of the schemes due to
lack of institutional support (Kleemeier, 2000). In Suriname, socially appropriate technological choice
along with involvement and support of the community in general and women in particular were found
to be the factors crucial for success of community driven water supply projects (Smith, 2011).

While assessments of various participatory community driven water supply projects have found
evidence supporting their success in improving service delivery, there is very little evidence on the
relative effectiveness of community driven projects compared to traditional supply driven projects. A
study of rural water supply schemes from ten states (including Kerala) in India found that community
managed schemes performed ‘somewhat better’ than traditional supply driven schemes (Misra, 2008).
Though the study did not focus on a detailed comparison, it found that compared to traditional supply
driven schemes, community managed schemes experience less frequent breakdowns and also lesser
proportion of beneficiary households report water shortage.

       2.2 Various Approaches to Rural Water Supply in Kerala

According to the 2011 Population Census, Kerala is the home to 33.4 million people which constitutes
about 2.8 percent of the total population in India. Although the state receives one of the highest levels
of rainfall in the country, with an average of 3,000mm annually, the undulating terrain of the state drains
most of the rainwater into the sea. Denudation of tropical forests and vegetation in the aftermath of
population explosion adversely affected the natural recharge of aquifers and the water retention capacity
of the soil. In addition, the steep and crowded topography provides little opportunity for water storage.
With increasing demand for water due to rising population, the groundwater has been over exploited
with insufficient recharge thus decreasing water tables.3 As a result, several districts in Kerala face
widespread source failures during summer months and many habitations in midland and highland face
near drought conditions. In addition, Kerala also struggles with water quality issues with near universal
bacteriological contamination in the open wells; and presence of excess iron, fluoride, salinity, and
excess nitrate in ground water.



                                                       
3   10 years ago a bore-well struck water at 80 feet below the ground, but now it touches only after 140 feet (World Bank 2013).

                                                                5 
 
KWA was created in 1984 as an autonomous organization under the GoK and was entrusted with the
responsibility of providing piped water supply and sanitation services to both urban and rural areas of
the state. Under KWA large investments were undertaken in creating infrastructure and expanding piped
water supply coverage throughout the state. However, O&M of the infrastructure created received far
less attention. As a result, assets created often suffered from lack of proper management and
maintenance leading to sub-optimal scheme performance and dysfunctional schemes. Moreover, there
was limited scope for large projects in rural hinterlands due to dispersed settlements.

In 1997, the GoK embarked on a major decentralization process which involved transfer of financial
resources, decision making authority and the responsibility for the provision of certain essential
services, including rural water supply and sanitation to the local governments. Under this, GOK
entrusted the local authorities with the responsibility of water and sanitation service delivery and took
the decision to transfer all small rural water supply schemes to GPs with concomitant power to levy and
collect user charges for providing water services.

In 1999, the Government of India launched substantial sector reforms geared towards DRA for rural
water supply and sanitation service provision with the launch of the Sector Reform Project (SRP) which
was further scaled up as Swajaldhara in 2002. As a beneficiary of Indian programs, the GoK pioneered
rural water reforms by carrying out the World Bank-financed Jalanidhi (‘water is treasure’) project
between 2000 and 2009. Jalanidhi covered 112 (11%) of the state’s GPs spanned across 13 districts (out
of 14) and implemented 3,694 small water supply schemes (mostly groundwater based) and 16 large
surface water based schemes. The project followed a DRA encompassing beneficiary participation,
capital cost contributions from beneficiaries and the GPs, universal household connection provision,
full O&M cost recovery from user fees, and an integrated strategy to the water, sanitation, environment
and health sectors. Major policy reforms were successfully implemented in the Jalanidhi GPs by which
RWSS service responsibility was transferred to local governments and BGs with concurrent
empowerment and accountability measures. By the end of its implementation period, the project had
helped provide access to improved water services to an additional 1.3 million people in the state.

The DRA piloted under Jalanidhi aimed to empower BGs to make investment decisions, manage
development funds, and plan, construct and operate water supply schemes. The novel DRA contrasts
significantly with the traditional supply driven approach in which projects are designed, implemented,
and operated by the KWA that put more emphasis on construction and less on operational and financial
sustainability of the schemes built. Jalanidhi facilitated active participation of the community including
vulnerable groups, women, and indigenous population in planning, construction and O&M of water
supply schemes to ensure sustainability of infrastructure.




                                                     6 
 
Around the same time as Jalanidhi, several other community driven projects were implemented in
different parts of Kerala. SRP was implemented in Kasaragod and Kollam districts of Kerala by the
respective District Panchayats. In Kasaragod, Malappuram, Palakkad, and Thrissur districts,
Swajaldhara schemes were implemented through KWA. Whereas Jeevadhara was implemented in
Idukki and Alappuzha districts by an NGO, Socio Economic Unit Foundation (SEUF), with financial
support from the Government of the Netherlands. Like Jalanidhi, all these projects followed the
community based DRA in varying degrees.

In this paper, we compare the performances of the community driven, demand responsive Jalanidhi
schemes with the traditional supply driven schemes built and managed by the KWA (KWA-BM). In
addition, we analyze the performance of Jalanidhi schemes vis-à-vis other community managed
schemes that include SRP, Swajaldhara, Jeevadhara as well as schemes built and transferred by KWA
(KWA-BT) to local institutions for operation and management.


    3. Measuring the Performance of Water Supply Schemes
Measuring the performance of various water supply schemes requires a multidimensional approach that
would not only capture performance, i.e. quality of service delivery, but also the factors that are critical
for the long-term sustainability of the schemes. Accordingly, six indexes have been identified – three
indexes to measure quality of service delivery and one index each to capture operational, financial, and
institutional sustainability of water supply schemes. The service delivery indexes include Availability
and Reliability index to capture quantity, quality, reliability, and adequacy of water supply; Household
Satisfaction index capturing performance rating of water schemes by the household; and Cost of Service
Index measuring affordability of service. The sustainability indexes include O&M index measuring the
quality of O&M in terms of frequency and length of service disruptions; O&M Cost Recovery index
capturing financial sustainability; and Institutional Sustainability index measuring the quality of the
institutions (BGs) created for the day to day management of the community based schemes. In addition,
an Overall Performance index has been calculated by aggregating the above six indexes.

The selection of various indices and their constituent indicators has been informed by the existing
literature (Sara and Katz, 1997; Abrams et al., 1998; Carter et al., 1999; Sugden, 2001; Harvey and
Reed, 2004; Mishra, 2008; Montgomery et al., 2009; Mazango and Munjeri, 2009, among others) as
well as consultations with water practitioners. A detailed description of the constituent indicators of the
six indexes is presented below:

    i)   Availability and Reliability Index: (a) Water supplied every day (Yes=1/No=0); (b) No. of days
         per week water supplied (Days); (c) Adequate water supply (Yes=1/No=0); (d) No irregular
         supply (Yes=1/No=0); (e) No bad taste (Yes=1/No=0); (f) No Bad odor (Yes=1/No=0); (g) No


                                                     7 
 
          colored water (Yes=1/No=0); (h) No cloudy water (Yes=1/No=0); (i) No low water pressure
          (Yes=1/No=0); and (j) No seasonal shortage (Yes=1/No=0).
    ii) Household Satisfaction Index: Household satisfaction with (a) Overall services of water supply;
          (b) Water quality; (c) Water pressure; (d) Hours of supply; and (e) Regularity of supply. All the
          indicators are household ratings from 1 (Very Dissatisfied) to 5 (Very Satisfied).
    iii) Household Cost of Service Index: (a) Monthly water charges (₹ ); (b) Household opinion on
          capital contribution/connection charges for the water scheme (High=1, Fair=2, Low=3); and
          (c) Household opinion on monthly water tariff (High=1, Fair=2, Low=3).
    iv) Operation and Maintenance Index: (a) Yearly laboratory testing for water quality
          (Yes=1/No=0); (b) Number of water system breakdowns (no water for one day or more) during
          the last one year; (c) Number of days the longest breakdown lasted during the last one year;
          and (d) Scheme facing no water shortage anytime during last year (Yes=1 / No=0).
    v) O&M Cost Recovery Index: (a) Annual revenue from water sales as proportion to annual O&M
          costs; and (b) Proportion of schemes with full O&M cost recovery.
    vi) Institutional Sustainability Index: (a) Proportion of female members in Beneficiary Group (BG)
          Executive Committee; (b) Female President in BG (Yes=1/No=0); (c) Female Secretary in BG
          (Yes=1/No=0); (d) Female Treasurer in BG (Yes=1/No=0); (e) Female Pump Operator in BG
          (Yes=1/No=0); (f) Regular election to the Executive Committee (Yes=1/No=0); (g)
          Presentation of Annual Report to the General Body (Yes=1/No=0); (h) Maintenance of Records
          (Yes=1/No=0); (i) Investments in water schemes made by the BG post-Project Completion
          (Yes=1/No=0); (j) BG with savings bank account (Yes=1/No=0); and (k) Current balance in
          the savings account.

Finally, to construct the performance and sustainability indexes, continuous variables among the
constituent indicators were converted to z-scores. Z-scores are standardized values with a mean of 0
and standard deviation of 1. All these z-scores as well as the binary indicators were aggregated and then
standardized again to estimate the index. Constituent indicators for which higher values are associated
with worse performance were assigned a negative sign during aggregation to ensure that for the
standardized index a positive z-score is associated with a better than average performance. An overall
performance index was constructed by aggregating all the six indexes and then converting them to z-
scores.

Based on these indexes, a systematic assessment of the performance and sustainability of traditional
supply driven approach as well as the more recent community based approaches to rural water supply
schemes in Kerala was undertaken. This exercise was intended to examine and compare the
sustainability and performance of rural water schemes built under different institutional regimes and
provide recommendations for future reforms in the rural water sector.


                                                     8 
 
    4. Empirical Strategy and Data
    4.1 Identification of Sample

Selection of the sample has been guided by the need to identify schemes that are very similar in
characteristics but under different types of institutional arrangements so that the differences in
performance across scheme types can be solely attributed to their respective institutional arrangements.
Accordingly, Jalanidhi schemes have been matched with KWA-BM schemes and other community
managed schemes based on four characteristics – water source, age of the scheme, size of the schemes
defined by population coverage, and distance between the treatment and control schemes. Since
geographical coordinates were not available for the majority of the schemes, latitude and longitude data
for the GPs where the schemes are located have been used to calculate the distance between the
schemes. In the first step of the matching exercise, schemes from different institutional arrangements
that use similar type of water source (river, open dug well, bore well, ponds, lakes) and have similar
age profile have been identified. In the next step, matched pairs have been identified by selecting
schemes that are closest to each other with a similar population coverage

Using the matching exercise, a total of 200 similar and comparable water schemes from the above
mentioned three groups have been identified which formed the final matched sample. The final sample
consists of 90 Jalanidhi schemes, 44 KWA-BM schemes and 66 other community managed schemes.
The distribution of the final matched sample by institutional arrangement is presented in the table below.

                 Table 1: Distribution of Final Matched Sample by Scheme Type
               Scheme                  Identified             Out of           Built
               Jalanidhi-I                90                  3,710         2001 to 2009
               KWA-BM                     44                   395          2004 & 2005
               Other Community Managed     66                  750          1999 to 2010
               Total                      200                 4,855

    4.2 Data

Data collection for the selected sample was undertaken using household surveys of beneficiaries,
technical and financial audits of water schemes, and institutional assessment of BGs for the Jalanidhi
and other community managed schemes. The following is a brief description of the data collection tools
used in the study.

Technical and Financial Audit: The technical audit was focused on assessing the current state of water
supply infrastructure such as working of the pumps, condition of the reservoir, functioning of the water
treatment plan, frequency of breakdowns, frequency of water quality testing, total daily supply of water
with respect to the design criteria, water source reliability, quality, and household service level. The


                                                    9 
 
financial audit gathered information on O&M cost, water tariff, connection charges, and revenue
collection from the water tariff

Household Survey: Household surveys were conducted to find out the benefit and satisfaction from the
service provided. The survey asked questions related to availability of water at the household level,
adequacy of water, the quality of water provided, reliability of service etc. It also included questions
related to satisfaction with service quality, and affordability of water tariff and capital
contribution/connection charges.

Institutional Assessment: The BG survey was conducted to assess the institutional strength of the
community management schemes. The process included interviews of the key stakeholders from the
Beneficiary groups as well as focus group discussions of members of the BGs. Institutional assessments
collected information on composition of executive committee, frequency of meetings, regularity of
election to the Executive Committee, maintenance of records, preparation of annual report, and financial
and investment decisions of the BGs.

Field surveys were undertaken from March to June 2014. The survey team was unable to locate some
of the schemes. A total of 2,583 households from 157 schemes were surveyed. Technical and financial
audits were carried out in 172 schemes. Moreover, 135 BGs were surveyed for the institutional
assessment. Table 2 provides a summary of the data collected by scheme type through various survey
instruments.

Table 2: Data Collection by Survey Instrument and Scheme Type
                                      Household    Technical  Financial                 Institutional
 Dataset
                                        Survey       Audit      Audit                    Assessment
 Jalanidhi                                 87         87          87                          90
 KWA BM                                    22         35         35
 Other Community Managed
                                           48         50         50                           45
 Schemes
 Total No of Schemes                      157         172        172                         135
 Number of Observations                  2,582        172        172                         135

Since the analysis is at the scheme level, data collected through household surveys were aggregated at
the scheme level. The technical and financial audits as well as the institutional surveys collected data at
the scheme level only. We used imputation technique to handle missing data due to non-response and
lack of information. Data imputation at the household level was done only if at least 20 percent of the
surveyed households from a particular scheme responded to the question. The missing value was
predicted based on the information collected from the 20 percent (or more) households such as
education and proxies for income and other characteristics of the schemes. To impute data at the scheme




                                                    10 
 
level, we predicted the missing observation with the value obtained by running a regression using other
characteristics of the scheme as predictor.

    4.3 Methodology

We compared the means of the indexes and their underlying indicators for Jalanidhi, KWA-BM, and
other community managed schemes to assess their relative performance and strength and weakness.
This was supplemented by a propensity score matching (PSM) analysis using the data from the technical
audits of our sample to estimate the average treatment effect on treated (ATT) of the Jalanidhi schemes
vis-à-vis KWA-BM schemes and other community managed schemes. PSM exercise was carried out to
improve upon the initial matching exercise which was constrained by the availability of reliable
secondary data.

For the PSM exercise, Jalanidhi was defined as the treatment and the control group was selected from
the KWA-BM/other community managed schemes. The objective of the PSM was to construct two
statistically matched samples from treatment and control groups based on various scheme
characteristics. In other words, PSM would select schemes from Jalanidhi and match them with those
schemes from KWA-BM that have characteristics similar to the selected Jalanidhi schemes. The
matching is done based on propensity scores or probabilities estimated from a Probit model using
Jalanidhi schemes as a binary dependent variable and scheme characteristics as regressors. For the
Probit specification, we used age of scheme, designed per capita supply of water, availability of water
treatment facility, and reliance on dependable sources of water (such as perennial river, deep tube wells,
and bore wells) as proxies for scheme characteristics.

For constructing the matched sample, we implemented a radius matching with caliper. Following Stuart
(2010), we chose a caliper of 0.2 standard deviation of the estimated propensity scores. We also tested
for balance in the matched sample to ensure that the treatment and control groups are comparable.
Finally, we estimated the ATT on various performance and sustainability indexes to capture the impact
of Jalanidhi schemes vis-à-vis KWA-BM/other community managed schemes.




                                                   11 
 
    5. Empirical Results
In this section, we discuss the summary statistics of various indexes of scheme functionality and their
constituent indicators for Jalanidhi, KWA-BM, and other community managed schemes. This is
followed by a discussion of the results from the PSM exercise.

    5.1 Summary Statistics

Indicators relating to Water Availability and Reliability are based on data from household surveys
aggregated at the scheme level. Around 50 percent of Jalandihi schemes and 60 percent of other
community managed schemes are supplying water every day of the week. The number is much lower
for the KWA schemes where only 27 percent of the schemes were reported supplying water daily. On
average, water is available only for 3.7 days for Jalanidhi and other community managed schemes and
for 3.2 days for traditional supply driven KWA schemes. Moreover, the supply was considered adequate
for 63 percent of Jalanidhi schemes compared to 62 percent for other community managed schemes and
55 percent for KWA schemes. Regarding regularity of water supply, 36 percent of Jalanidhi schemes
were reported supplying water irregularly compared to 43 percent of other community managed
schemes and 41 percent of KWA schemes. The majority of the respondents from the community
schemes found water pressure in the network adequate. Around 33 percent of Jalanidhi schemes and 38
percent of other community managed schemes were reported having low water pressure in the network.
In contrast, beneficiaries of around 70 percent of the traditional supply driven schemes complained
about low water pressure. Similarly, beneficiaries of around 70 percent of the traditional supply driven
schemes reported facing water shortage during summer months compared to only 38 percent for other
community managed schemes and 49 percent of Jalanidhi schemes. The community schemes also
perform better in terms of quality of water supplied. Beneficiaries of more than 50 percent of the KWA
schemes reported getting colored water compared to only 8 percent for Jalanidhi schemes and 13 percent
for other community managed schemes.

So Jalanidhi and other community managed schemes perform better compared to traditional supply
driven KWA schemes in terms of availability, adequacy and quality of water supply. However, there is
no major systemic difference in performance between Jalanidhi and other community managed
schemes. Jalanidhi schemes perform marginally better in areas of regularity and adequacy of water
supply whereas other community managed schemes perform better in weekly frequency of water supply
and lack of seasonal shortage.




                                                  12 
 
Table 3: Availability and Reliability Index
                                                                                         Other
                                                                  KWA Built &
                                                Jalanidhi                             Community
                                                                   Managed
    Indicators                                  Schemes                                Managed
                                                                   Schemes
                                                                                        Schemes
                                              Mean        SD      Mean      SD       Mean     SD
    Water Supplied Everyday                   0.49         0.5    0.27      0.46      0.62     0.49
    No. of Days Per Week Water Supplied       3.71        0.86    3.21      0.95      3.78     0.97
    Adequate Water Supply                     0.63        0.49    0.55      0.51      0.62     0.49
    No Irregular Supply                       0.64        0.48    0.59       0.5      0.57      0.5
    No Bad Taste                              0.94        0.23    0.91      0.29      0.96      0.2
    No Bad Odor                               0.95        0.21    0.95      0.21      0.98     0.15
    No Colored Water                          0.92        0.27    0.45      0.51      0.87     0.34
    No Cloudy Water                           0.86        0.35    0.64      0.49      0.83     0.38
    No Low Pressure                           0.67        0.47    0.32      0.48      0.62     0.49
    No Seasonal Shortage                      0.51        0.5     0.32      0.48      0.62     0.49

The findings of relative performances of schemes in various dimensions of availability, reliability, and
adequacy are also corroborated by the household assessments of satisfaction with the performances of
these schemes (Table 4). The households were asked to rate on a 5-point scale – from 1 to 5 with 5
being very satisfied – their satisfaction with respect to water quality, water pressure in the network,
hours of supply, regularity of supply and overall satisfaction with service delivery. The results show
that the Jalanidhi and other community driven schemes have been rated consistently higher than the
KWA schemes in all these areas. A comparison of Jalanidhi and other community managed schemes
indicates that both these schemes have very similar satisfaction ratings.

Table 4: Household Satisfaction Index
                                       Jalanidhi           KWA Built &             Other Community
     Indicators (Scale of 1-5,         Schemes            Managed Schemes          Managed Schemes
     5 being very satisfied)
                                  Mean         SD         Mean       SD            Mean      SD
     Overall Satisfaction          3.59       0.62         3.11      0.62          3.52      0.59
     Water Quality                 3.89       0.65         3.54      0.52          3.88      0.57
     Water Pressure                3.59       0.61         3.12       0.7          3.62      0.53
     Hours of Supply               3.47       0.76         3.06      0.76          3.48      0.75
     Regularity of Supply          3.47       0.76         2.86      0.74          3.31      0.88

All the schemes surveyed charge a flat monthly tariff for water. Monthly water charges are lowest for
the KWA schemes at around ₹ 41 per month on average and cheaper by more than ₹ 20 compared to
Jalanidhi and other community driven schemes (Table 5). Households were also asked to rate the
appropriateness of capital cost contributions/connection charges and monthly water tariff. All these
water-related charges were considered to be mostly fair by the households irrespective of the scheme
type. Interestingly, in spite of having higher tariff, households served by the community managed
schemes considered the tariffs to be fair. High ownership, involvement and quality of service associated

                                                    13 
 
with the community driven schemes possibly explain the sense of satisfaction with the water tariffs
even when they are considerably higher than the traditional supply driven schemes.

Table 5: Household Cost of Service Index
                                     Jalanidhi             KWA Built &          Other Community
  Indicators                         Schemes              Managed Schemes       Managed Schemes
                                 Mean       SD               Mean     SD          Mean        SD
  HH Opinion on Contribution      2.08     0.26              2.53     0.72        2.25        0.53
  (High=1,Fair=2,Low=3)
      HH Opinion on Tariffs          2.02      0.28          2.19     0.57         1.95        0.2
      (High=1,Fair=2,Low=3)
      Monthly Water Charges (₹ )    62.88      24.11         41.25    13.15       65.00      24.18

The O&M index was constructed completely based on data collected through technical audits and aims
to capture the operational sustainability of the schemes. Unlike the community managed schemes, the
majority of the KWA schemes carried out yearly water quality testing. 64 percent of KWA schemes
reported carrying out yearly water quality testing compared to only 21 percent of Jalanidhi schemes and
13 percent of other community managed schemes. However, Jalanidhi schemes on average have fewer
breakdowns and fewer days of water outages compared to either KWA schemes or the other community
managed schemes. Also fewer percentage of community managed schemes (both Jalanidhi and other
community schemes) reported facing water shortage anytime of the year compared to supply driven
KWA schemes.

Table 6: Operation and Maintenance Index
                                             Jalanidhi         KWA Built &        Other Community
    Indicators                               Schemes          Managed Schemes     Managed Schemes
                                            Mean      SD      Mean       SD        Mean        SD
    Yearly Analysis of Water Quality         0.21     0.41     0.64     0.49       0.13       0.34
    Number of Breakdowns Last Year           3.16     2.34     5.17     4.87       5.46       5.05
    Longest Breakdown Last Year (Days)      10.64    14.78    11.94     12.92      12.99      15.02
    Scheme Facing No Water Shortage          0.54      0.5     0.36     0.49       0.47        0.5
    Anytime Last Year

The financial audits indicate that full O&M cost recovery remains a challenge for many of the
community driven schemes in spite of the fact that on average revenue from water sales exceeds the
O&M costs for both Jalanidhi and other community managed schemes (Table 7). Around 50 percent of
the community managed schemes reported to achieve full O&M cost recovery. Revenue as proportion
to O&M costs is higher for other community managed schemes compared to Jalanidhi schemes. But
these other community managed schemes also show large variations in performance as reflected by
high standard deviation. Cost recovery indicators were not reported by most of the KWA schemes. So
a comparative analysis with traditional supply driven schemes could not be undertaken.


                                                    14 
 
Table 7: O&M Cost Recovery Index
 Indicators                                                   Jalanidhi        Other Community
                                                              Schemes          Managed Schemes
                                                            Mean      SD         Mean         SD
    Revenue as Proportion to O&M Costs                      1.21      0.77       1.74         2.28
    Proportion of Schemes with Full O&M Cost Recovery       0.47       0.5        0.5         0.51

Performance of Jalanidhi schemes in most of the dimensions of institutional sustainability is better
compared to other community driven schemes (Table 8). Almost one-third of the BG executive
committee members of Jalanidhi schemes are women with 9 percent of the BGs having a woman
president and 14 percent having a woman secretary. Almost half of the Jalanidhi BGs have women
treasures compared to one-fourth for the other community managed schemes. Jalanidhi BGs also have
more regular elections for the executive committees and 74 percent of these BGs reported preparing
and presenting Annual Reports in general body meetings compared to 64 percent of the BGs for the
other community managed schemes. Similarly, a larger majority of the Jalanidhi BGs reported having
a savings bank account and the average balance in these accounts is almost three times compared to
other community managed schemes. However, the average balance even for the Jalanidhi BGs is only
₹ 17,161 which severely limits the ability of the majority of the BGs to undertake big investments when
necessary.

Table 8: Institutional Sustainability Index
 Indicators                                              Jalanidhi Schemes      Other Community
                                                                                Managed Schemes
                                                         Mean         SD         Mean      SD
    Proportion of Female in BG Executive
    Committee                                             0.32        0.19        0.27         0.20
    Female President in BG                                0.09        0.28        0.11         0.32
    Female Secretary in BG                                0.14        0.34        0.16         0.37
    Female Treasurer in BG                                0.49         0.5        0.25         0.44
    Female Pump Operator in BG                            0.13        0.33        0.08        0.27
    Regular Election (Yes/No)                             0.66        0.48        0.41          0.5
    Annual Report (Yes/No)                                0.74        0.44        0.64         0.48
    Maintenance of Records (Yes/No)                       0.16        0.37        0.00         0.00
    Investments post-Project Completion (Yes/No)          0.13        0.33        0.11         0.31
    Proportion of BGs with Savings Bank Account           0.70        0.46        0.54         0.50
    Current Balance in the Savings Account (₹ )          17,161      26,217       6,181       7,472

Table 9 and Table 10 compare the performance indexes of Jalanidhi schemes with traditional supply
driven KWA schemes and the other community managed schemes respectively. The indexes have been
computed separately for two groups – Jalanidhi-KWA schemes and Jalanidhi-other community driven
schemes. As a result, the mean values of the indexes for Jalanidhi schemes differ across tables. Since
the performance indexes are z-scores, the mean of each of these indices is 0 by construction. So
construction of indices separately for the two groups makes the comparisons straightforward. Positive

                                                   15 
 
values for an index indicate above average performances whereas negative values are associated with
below average performances. For Household Cost of Service Index, the definition of the Index also
differs across two groups. Monthly water charges were not included in the Index for comparison of
Jalanidhi and KWA schemes because of non-availability of data for the majority of KWA schemes. For
similar missing data problems, “No of days water supplied per week” was not included in the
construction of the availability and reliability index for any of the comparisons. Similarly, comparison
of the O&M cost recovery index was not undertaken for either of the two groups because of the large
number of missing observations. Moreover, the institutional sustainability index was not included in
Jalanidhi-KWA comparison because the index measures the strength of water user groups and is not
relevant for the KWA schemes.

A comparison of performance indexes for Jalanidhi and traditional supply driven KWA schemes shows
that on average, Jalanidhi schemes perform better than KWA schemes in most of the dimensions
including availability and reliability, household satisfaction, O&M as well as overall performance.
However, in terms of household costs of service, KWA schemes perform better than Jalanidhi schemes.




                                                  16 
 
Table 9: Comparison of Performance Indices – Jalanidhi & KWA-BM Schemes
 Performance Indices              Jalanidhi Schemes KWA Built & Managed
                                                            Schemes
                                         Mean          SD        Mean           SD
    Availability & Reliability Index      0.14        0.99       ‐0.57          0.85
    Household Satisfaction Index          0.16        0.97       ‐0.63          0.88
    Household Cost of Service Index      ‐0.17        0.70       0.66           1.61
    Operation & Maintenance Index         0.05        0.97       ‐0.18          1.12
    Overall Performance Index             0.07        0.96       ‐0.27          1.11



Table 10: Comparison of Performance Indices – Jalanidhi & Other Community Schemes
 Performance Indices              Jalanidhi Schemes       Other Community
                                                          Managed Schemes
                                         Mean            SD       Mean          SD
    Availability & Reliability Index     ‐0.01           1.01     0.02          0.99
    Household Satisfaction Index          0.02           1.02     ‐0.04         0.97
    Household Cost of Service Index       0.00           1.06     ‐0.01         0.89
    Operation & Maintenance Index         0.17           0.86     ‐0.30         1.16
    Institutional Sustainability Index    0.13           0.96     ‐0.91         0.81
    Overall Performance Index             0.13           0.96     ‐0.76         0.99

The relative performances are mixed when Jalanidhi schemes are compared with other community
managed schemes. On average, Jalanidhi schemes perform better in areas of household satisfaction,
household cost of service, O&M, institutional sustainability, and overall performance. Community
managed schemes perform better in availability and reliability of service. However, for many of these
indices, the differences in z-scores between these two groups are relatively small.

      5.2 Results from Propensity Score Matching

A propensity score matching exercise was done to assess the performances of Jalanidhi schemes vis-à-
vis other approaches by using propensity scores to identify comparable treatment and control groups
from the surveyed schemes. There were two comparisons done for the analysis. First, the performance
of the decentralized demand responsive Jalanidhi schemes were assessed using the traditional supply
driven KWA-BM schemes as control group. In the second analysis, Jalanidhi schemes were compared
with the other community managed schemes. The PSM analysis was done using the ‘psmatch2’
command in STATA. Since ‘psmatch2’ does not provide the correct standard-errors and t-statistics for
the estimates of ATT, the respective standard errors and t-statistics were estimated using bootstrapping.
Balance tests were also carried out to check for comparability of treatment and control groups. The
“Rubin’s B” and “Rubin’s R” statistics from balance tests indicate overall balance in the sample. The
test results are reported in Table A1 and Table A2 in the appendix.



                                                   17 
 
Table 11 presents the ATT estimates from comparison of matched Jalanidhi and KWA built and
managed schemes for selected indicators.4 The ATT estimates indicate that although for most of the
constituent indicators of availability and reliability index Jalanidhi schemes perform better than the
KWA schemes, the differences between them are not significant except for adequate water pressure in
the network, no colored water, and no seasonal shortage. In the matched sample, 96 percent of the
Jalanidhi schemes reported no colored water compared to 35 percent of the KWA schemes. Similarly,
49 percent of Jalanidhi schemes reported no seasonal shortage and 64 percent of Jalanidhi schemes
reported adequate pressure in the network. The respective proportions for KWA schemes are only 4
percent and 15 percent. Jalanidhi schemes also have been rated consistently and significantly higher for
all dimensions of household satisfaction. However, for satisfaction with water quality rating, the
difference is only significant at the 10 percent level. There are no significant differences between
Jalanidhi and KWA schemes in terms of household opinion regarding connection charges and water
tariffs. Similarly, there are also no significant differences between these two types of schemes in terms
of longest breakdown of the system or the percentages of schemes facing no water shortage anytime
last year. However, Jalanidhi schemes experienced significantly lower number of breakdowns than the
KWA schemes, whereas significantly higher proportion of KWA schemes carried out yearly testing of
water quality compared to Jalanidhi schemes.

Table 11: PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with KWA Built & Managed Schemes: Selected
Indicators
                                               KWA-
 Variable                           Jalanidhi   BM         ATT       SE      P-value
 Availability & Reliability Index
 No Irregular Supply                   0.62     0.41        0.20    0.23      0.379
 No Low Pressure                       0.64     0.15       0.49*    0.22      0.022
 No Seasonal Shortage                  0.49     0.04      0.45**    0.14      0.001
 Household Satisfaction Index
 Overall Satisfaction                   3.5      2.9      0.64**    0.20      0.001
 Regularity of Supply                   3.4      2.5     0.97***    0.24      0.000
 Household Cost of Service Index
 HH Opinion on Contribution             2.1      2.4       -0.29    0.32      0.362
 HH Opinion on Tariffs                  2.1      2.0       0.05     0.19      0.813
    Operation & Maintenance Index
    Yearly Analysis of Water Quality                      0.28         0.69   -0.41+   0.24   0.082
    Number of Breakdowns Last Year                        3.4          8.7    -5.3**   1.93   0.006
    Scheme Facing No Water Shortage                       0.60         0.39    0.20    0.23   0.367
    	p 0.1,	* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                       
4
  ATT estimates for full set of indicators for both Jalanidhi and KWA-BM comparison and Jalanidhi-other
community managed schemes comparison are presented in the Appendix (Table A3 and Table A4 respectively). 

                                                                 18 
 
The ATT estimates for comparison of Jalanidhi and other community managed schemes indicate no
significant differences across various indicators related to availability and reliability, household
satisfaction and household cost of service (Table 12). Jalanidhi schemes, however, experienced fewer
breakdowns compared to other community managed schemes. Jalanidhi schemes also perform
significantly better in certain dimensions of institutional sustainability. Jalanidhi schemes have a larger
proportion of females in executive committees and significantly higher bank balances compared to other
community managed schemes. Similarly, a higher proportion of Jalanidhi schemes have female
treasurers and maintain records regularly.

Table 12: PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with Other Community Managed Schemes: Selected
Indicators
 Variable                              Jalanidhi    Other     ATT        SE       P-value
                                                  Bottom-up


    Availability & Reliability Index
    No Irregular Supply                           0.62         0.53            0.10        0.13       0.443
    No Low Pressure                               0.65         0.55           0.10         0.16       0.539
    No Seasonal Shortage                          0.49         0.54           -0.05        0.13       0.723
    Household Satisfaction Index
    Overall Satisfaction                          3.5           3.5           0.04         0.15       0.820
    Regularity of Supply                          3.4           3.2           0.19         0.23       0.415
    Household Cost of Service Index
    HH Opinion on Contribution                    2.1           2.2           -0.10        0.14       0.489
    HH Opinion on Tariffs                         2.0           1.9           0.11         0.07       0.108
    Operation & Maintenance Index
    Number of Breakdowns Last Year               3.471          5.9          -2.4***       0.72       0.001
    Scheme Facing No Water Shortage              0.532         0.462           0.07        0.14       0.601
    Institutional Sustainability Index
    Proportion of Female in BG Executive
    Committee                                   0.322          0.251         0.07+         0.04       0.098
    Maintenance of Records (Yes/No)             0.163          0.006         0.16**        0.05       0.004
    Current Balance in the Savings Account      15,967         3,096       12,871***       2,568      0.000
    	p 0.1,	* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

The ATT estimates of the aggregate performance indexes indicate that Jalanidhi schemes perform better
than the KWA-BM schemes in Availability and Reliability, Household Satisfaction, O&M and Overall
Performance (Table 13). The ATT estimate for availability and reliability Index is around 1.0 which
means that that the respective z-score for Jalanidhi scheme are on an average higher than the z-scores
of comparable KWA schemes by 1. Since the difference between z-scores is not readily interpretable,
the mean z-scores of the matched Jalanidhi and KWA schemes have been converted to percentile
rankings. ATT can then be interpreted as the average difference in percentile rankings between similar
Jalanidhi and KWA schemes. Figure 1 shows that for overall performance, availability and reliability,
household satisfaction and O&M, Jalanidhi schemes on average ranks 30 to 40 percentile points higher

                                                    19 
 
than comparable KWA schemes. However, the percentile ranking of KWA schemes is higher but not
significant for household cost of service.

Table 13: PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with KWA Built & Managed Schemes: Performance
Indexes
 Index                   Jalanidhi  KWA       ATT      SE  P‐value  Percentile  Percentile 
                                                                       Rank       Rank 
                                                                    (Jalanidhi)  (KWA) 
    Availability & Reliability                                        0.124        ‐0.872  0.997**      0.36     0.006        55.0         19.2 
    Household Satisfaction                                            0.117        ‐1.002  1.119***     0.33     0.001        54.7         15.8 
    Household Cost of Service                                        ‐0.092         0.212   ‐0.304      0.57     0.595        46.4         58.4 
    Operation & Maintenance                                           0.197        ‐0.756  0.953*       0.41     0.021        57.9         22.5 
    Overall Performance                                               0.161        ‐0.925  1.086**      0.40     0.007        56.4         17.8 
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001


                                               Figure 1: Differences in Percentile Ranks between
                                                       Jalanidhi and KWA-BM Schemes
                                      60.0

                                      50.0
                                                                            38.8                                                  38.6
                                      40.0               35.8                                                   35.4
      Difference in Percentile Rank




                                      30.0

                                      20.0

                                      10.0

                                       0.0

                                      ‐10.0
                                                                                                  ‐12.0
                                      ‐20.0    Availability &         Household      Household Cost of  Operation &         Overall
                                              Reliability Index   Satisfaction Index   Service Index Maintenance Index Performance Index
                                      ‐30.0

                                      ‐40.0



PSM comparisons of Jalanidhi and other community managed schemes show no significant differences
in performances in terms of availability and Reliability index, household satisfaction index, and
household cost of service index (Table 14). The Jalanidhi schemes perform significantly better than the
other community managed schemes in the O&M index, institutional sustainability index and overall
performance index. Percentile ranks of Jalanidhi schemes for the O&M index are around 20 percentile
points higher than similar community managed schemes (Figure 2). Likewise, when the indexes were
aggregated into an overall performance index, percentile ranks of Jalanidhi schemes are on average 19
percentile points higher than comparable community managed schemes. However, the institutional
sustainability performance of Jalanidhi schemes is significantly stronger than the other community




                                                                                         20 
 
managed schemes. When compared to similar community managed schemes, Jalanidhi schemes ranked
27 percentile points higher on average.

Table 14: PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with Other Community Managed Schemes
 Index                    Jalanidhi    Other      ATT    SE P-value Percentile                                                   Percentile
                                      Bottom-                             Rank                                                     Rank
                                         up                            (Jalanidhi)                                                (Other
                                                                                                                                Bottom-up)

        Availability & Reliability                                -0.032      -0.117         0.085    0.25   0.731       48.7      45.3
        Household Satisfaction                                    -0.049      -0.032        -0.018    0.24   0.942       48.0      48.7
        Household Cost of Service                                 -0.046      -0.189         0.143    0.28   0.609       48.2      42.5
        Operation & Maintenance                                    0.182      -0.325       0.507*     0.22   0.023       57.2      37.3
        Institutional Sustainability                               0.239      -0.452       0.691**    0.23   0.003       59.4      32.6
        Overall Performance                                        0.131      -0.341        0.472*    0.22   0.031       55.2      36.6
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001


                                               Figure 2: Differences in Percentile Ranks between
                                                   Jalanidhi and Other Bottom-up Schemes
                                    40.0

                                    35.0

                                    30.0                                                                     26.9
    Difference in Percentile Rank




                                    25.0
                                                                                               20.0                      18.5
                                    20.0

                                    15.0

                                    10.0                                       5.7
                                                   3.4
                                     5.0

                                     0.0
                                                                ‐0.7
                                    ‐5.0

                            ‐10.0          Availability & Household      Household     Operation & Institutional    Overall
                                            Reliability   Satisfaction Cost of Service Maintenance Sustainability Performance
                            ‐15.0
                                              Index          Index         Index         Index         Index         Index

                                    6. Conclusion
There is a large volume of literature that looks into the quality, success and risk factors associated with
participatory community driven approaches to rural water supply. But very few studies delved into the
relative effectiveness of these community driven schemes compared to traditional supply driven
schemes, which still remain the dominant approach to service delivery in rural areas in many developing
countries. This paper developed a conceptual definition of performance of water schemes in the context
of rural water supply schemes in Kerala and compared performances of the flagship demand responsive
Jalanidhi schemes with the traditional supply driven KWA schemes as well as other community
managed schemes. Our results indicate that Jalanidhi schemes were more successful in delivering


                                                                                     21 
 
adequate, regular and quality water supply in rural areas compared to the KWA schemes. Jalanidhi
schemes also reported fewer breakdowns and water shortages indicating better O&M. The demand
responsive community based approach of Jalanidhi was more successful in generating higher consumer
satisfaction with service delivery and cost of service in spite of charging higher monthly tariffs
compared to the KWA schemes. Overall, the Jalanidhi schemes performed better than the KWA
schemes in all important dimensions in which comparisons were done.

When compared to other community managed schemes, Jalanidhi schemes performed better in O&M
and overall performance. But the main success of Jalanidhi was in creating stronger institutions, which
is one of the prerequisites for the long-term sustainability of the community based approach. The
substantial time and effort that was spent in mobilizing communities, creating capacities, and involving
communities in planning and implementation of the Jalanidhi schemes possibly explain their superior
institutional performance compared to other community managed schemes. However, achieving full
O&M cost recovery remains an elusive goal for Jalanidhi schemes in particular and all community
managed schemes in general. This coupled with relatively low bank balances for the majority of the
BGs severely limits their ability to undertake expensive maintenance work when needed, which in turn
might threaten the long-term sustainability of the community based approach to rural water supply.

The findings of this paper suggest that the community based approach can be a superior alternative to
traditional supply driven models in expanding and improving water service delivery in rural areas.
Success of the community based approach demonstrates that the people are willing to contribute
towards the capital costs of the schemes and pay for the water that they use for better service delivery.
However, to ensure long-term sustainability of the community based schemes, more attention needs to
be paid in creating stronger beneficiary level institutions, including capacity development for financial
management for successful operation and management of these schemes. In addition, institutions need
to be created to provide operational and financial support to these schemes when needed.




References
 
Abrams, L., Palmer, I., and Hart, T. (1998), Sustainability Management Guidelines. Pretoria:
     Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, South Africa

Andres, L. and B. Dasgupta (2016), “Functionality of water schemes in Nigeria” World Bank.
     (Forthcoming).
 
Black, Maggie, 1978-1998 Learning What Works, “A 20 Year Retrospective View on International
     Water and Sanitation Cooperation.” World Bank, “World Bank Policies on Participation”. (2011).
     Online                                                                                     at:
     http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTSOCIALDEVELOPMENT/EX
     TPCENG/0,,menuPK:410312~pagePK:149018~piPK:149093~theSitePK:410306,00.html

                                                   22 
 
Brikke, F. and Bredero, M. (2003). Linking Technology Choice with Operation and Maintenance in the
     Context of Community Water Supply and Sanitation. Geneva: World Health Organization and
     IRC Water and Sanitation Centre.

Carter, R. C., Tyrrel, S. F., and Howsam, P. (1999), Impact and sustainability of Community water
      Supply and sanitation Programmes in Developing Countries, Chartered Institution of Water and
      Environmental Management, 13, 292-296.

Chambers, Robert. 1983. Rural Development: Putting the First Last. London: Longman.

Cosgrove, W. J. (2003): ‘Water Resource Sector in the Coming Decades: Global Perspective’ in K.
     Prasad (ed.) Water Resource and Sustainable Development: Challenges of 21st Century. New
     Delhi: Sipra Publications.

Dongier, P., J. V. Domelen, E. Ostrom, A. Ryan, W. Wakeman, A. Bebbington, S. Alkire, T. Esmail,
     and M. Polsky. 2003. “Community Driven Development.” In World Bank, PRSP Sourcebook.
     Vol. 1. Chapter 9, Washington, D.C.

Haq, M.A, S.M. Hassan, and K. Ahmad (2014), Community Participation and Sustainability of Water
     Supply Program in District Faisalabad, Pakistan, Journal of Quality and Technology
     Management, Volume X, Issue II, Page 125 – 137.

Harvey, P. A., and Reed, R. A. (2004). Rural water supply in Africa: Building blocks for hand pump
     sustainability. WEDC, Loughborough University. United Kingdom.

Interco-operation Social Development India (ISDI), Impact Evaluation of the Kerala Rural Water
      Supply and Sanitation Project, Jalanidhi Phase 1, 2014.

Isham, J. and Kähkönen, S. (1999) “Institutional Determinants of the Impact of Community-Based
     Water Services: Evidence from Sri Lanka and India.” Working Paper 236. University of
     Maryland, Center for Institutional Reform and the Informal Sector.

Jalanidhi: A Project of Government of Kerala added by the World Bank, Kerala Rural Water Supply
      and Sanitation Agency, Online at: http://www.jalanidhi.kerala.gov.in/

Jones, S.; Abseen, A.; Stacey, N.; Weir, L. A life-cycle approach to improve the sustainability of rural
      water systems in resource-limited countries. Challenges 2012, 3, 233–260.

Kleemeier, Elizabeth. 2000. “The Impact of Participation on Sustainability: An Analysis of the Malawi
     Rural Piped Scheme Program.” World Development 28(5): 929–44.

Mazango, N., and Munjeri, C. (2009), Water management in a hyperinflationary environment: Case
    study of Nkayi district in Zimbabwe, Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C, 34(1-2),
    28-35.

Misra, S. (2008) Inefficiency of Rural Water Supply Schemes in India. Policy Paper number 44791
     extracted from the World Bank Study on Review of Effectiveness of Rural Water Supply
     Schemes in India, June 2008.

Montgomery, M. A., Bartram, J., and Elimelech, M. (2009), Increasing functional sustainability of
     water and sanitation supplies in rural sub-saharan Africa, Environmental Engineering Science,
     26(5), 1017-1023.



                                                  23 
 
Newman, J. et al (2002) “An Impact Evaluation of Education, Health and Water Supply Investments
    by the Bolivian Social Investment Fund.” World Bank Economic Review, 16(2), 241-74.

Rosengrant, M, X. Kai and S. Cline (2002): World Water and Food to 2025. Washington, D.C.:
     International Food Policy Research Institute.

Rout, Satyapriya, University of Hyderabad, Institutional variations in practice of demand responsive
      approach: evidence from rural water supply in India, Water Policy, July 2014.

Sara, J. and Katz, T. (1997) Making Rural Water Supply Sustainable: Report on the Impact of Project
Rules. Washington D.C.: UNDP-World Bank Water and Sanitation Program.

Seckler, D, R. Barker and U. Amarasinghe (1999): ‘Water Scarcity in the Twenty-first Century’,
      International Journal of Water Resource Development, 15 (1/2), 29–42.

Sen, Amartya K. 1999. Development as Freedom. New York: Knopf Press.

Sugden, S. (2001). Assessing sustainability-the sustainability snap shot. Paper presented at the 27th
     WEDC conference, Lusaka, Zambia.

Taylor, B. (2009) Addressing the Sustainability Crisis: Lessons from research on managing rural water
     projects. Available online at: http://www.wateraid.org/~/media/Publications/sustainability-crisis-
     rural-water-management-tanzania.pdf

United Nations. (2010). the Millennium Development Goals Report 2010. Retrieved from
     http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/
United Nations. (2011). The Millennium Development Goals Report 2011 Retrieved from
     http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals

United Nations. (2015). Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
     Retrieved from http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E

Voluntary Organization for Social Action and Rural Development (VOSARD), Conservation of Natural
     Resources, Drinking Water Management, Jalanidhi Project, Video online at:
     http://www.vosard.org/conservation%20of%20natural%20resources.html

World Bank 2013 A -“World Development Indicators”, Data, Rural population (% of total population),
      2010-2014, online at: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS

World Bank 2013 B- World Bank, India: Getting Water on Tap in Rural Kerala, August, 2013, Online
      at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2013/08/12/india-getting-water-on-tap-in-rural-
      kerala

World Bank 2013 C- Project Performance Assessment Report, Republic of India, Kerala Rural Water
      Supply and Environmental Sanitation Project “Jalanidhi”, June 27, 2013, Independent
      Evaluation Group Public Sector.

World Bank 2009- Implementation Completion and Results Report, Republic of India for the Kerala
      Rural Water Supply and Environmental Sanitation Project, March 9, 2009, South Asia
      Sustainable Development Unit, The World Bank Group.

World Bank 2006 - Background Paper, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation, India Water Supply and
      Sanitation, Bridging the Gap between Infrastructure and Service, January 2006, the World Bank
      Group.

                                                  24 
 
    25 
 
Appendix
Table A1: Balance Test for PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with KWA Built & Managed
Schemes
                                    Mean                               t-test             V(T)/
Variable                      Treated Control        %bias         t       p>|t|          V(C)

scheme_age                    11.064     11.53        -6.2       -0.36       0.717        0.04*
design_pc_supply              68.723    68.085         1.4        0.46       0.650        0.68
source_river_tubewell         .31915    .29787         4.7        0.22       0.826        1.04
water_treatment               .80851    .80851        -0.0        0.00       1.000        1.00

* if variance ratio outside [0.56; 1.80]


Ps R2      LR chi2   p>chi2    MeanBias    MedBias           B           R       %Var

0.003         0.40    0.982       3.1        3.0         12.9          0.62          25

* if B>25%, R outside [0.5; 2]

Table A2: Balance Test for PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with Other Community Managed
Schemes
                                    Mean                               t-test             V(T)/
Variable                      Treated Control        %bias         t       p>|t|          V(C)

scheme_age                    11.104    11.507       -14.6       -1.12       0.266        0.76
design_pc_supply              74.481    66.264        12.5        0.90       0.370        1.38
source_river_tubewell         .22078    .21117         2.1        0.14       0.886        1.03
water_treatment               .63636    .62676         1.9        0.12       0.902        0.99

* if variance ratio outside [0.64; 1.57]


Ps R2      LR chi2   p>chi2    MeanBias    MedBias           B           R       %Var

0.010         2.10    0.718       7.8        7.3         23.0          1.08           0

* if B>25%, R outside [0.5; 2]




                                                       26 
 
Table A3: PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with KWA Built & Managed Schemes: All Indicators
                                                           KWA-
    Variable                                   Jalanidhi    BM       ATT       SE     P-value
    Availability & Reliability Index
    Water Supplied Everyday                     0.426      0.255     0.170     0.14    0.233
    Adequate Water Supply                       0.617      0.423     0.194     0.25    0.439
    No Irregular Supply                         0.617      0.414     0.203     0.23    0.379
    No Bad Taste                                0.979      0.957     0.021     0.06    0.700
    No Bad Odor                                 1.000      1.000     0.000     0.02    1.000
    No Colored Water                            0.957      0.348    0.610**    0.20    0.002
    No Cloudy Water                             0.851      0.738     0.113     0.21    0.585
    No Low Pressure                             0.638      0.147    0.492*     0.22    0.022
    No Seasonal Shortage                        0.489      0.043    0.447**    0.14    0.001
    Household Satisfaction Index
    Overall Satisfaction                        3.519      2.884     0.635**   0.20    0.001
    Water Quality                               3.877      3.518     0.360+    0.19    0.061
    Water Pressure                              3.598      2.895     0.702*    0.28    0.012
    Hours of Supply                             3.459      2.813     0.646*    0.27    0.018
    Regularity of Supply                        3.432      2.458    0.974***   0.24    0.000
    Household Cost of Service Index
    HH Opinion on Contribution                  2.099      2.390     -0.292    0.32    0.362
    HH Opinion on Tariffs                       2.057      2.012      0.045    0.19    0.813
    Operation & Maintenance Index
    Yearly Analysis of Water Quality             0.277      0.686    -0.409+   0.24    0.082
    Number of Breakdowns Last Year               3.368     8.696    -5.328**   1.93    0.006
    Longest Breakdown Last Year (Days)          10.038     11.922     -1.884   3.65    0.606
    Scheme Facing No Water Shortage              0.596      0.392      0.203   0.23    0.367
    	p 0.1,	* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                     27 
 
Table A4: PSM Comparison of Jalanidhi with Other Community Managed Schemes: All
Indicators
 Variable                                      Jalanidhi     Other       ATT        SE      P-value
                                                           Bottom-up


    Availability & Reliability Index
    Water Supplied Everyday                     0.481        0.509       -0.028    0.13      0.828
    Adequate Water Supply                       0.636        0.573        0.064    0.12      0.605
    No Irregular Supply                         0.623        0.527        0.097    0.13      0.443
    No Bad Taste                                0.948        0.949       -0.001    0.04      0.977
    No Bad Odor                                 0.961        1.000       -0.039    0.02      0.105
    No Colored Water                            0.922        0.890        0.032    0.08      0.674
    No Cloudy Water                             0.857        0.847        0.010    0.10      0.916
    No Low Pressure                             0.649        0.551        0.099    0.16      0.539
    No Seasonal Shortage                        0.494        0.540       -0.046    0.13      0.723
    Household Satisfaction Index
    Overall Satisfaction                        3.543        3.508        0.035    0.15      0.820
    Water Quality                               3.854        3.917       -0.063    0.14      0.652
    Water Pressure                              3.557        3.652       -0.096    0.15      0.509
    Hours of Supply                             3.442        3.514       -0.073    0.20      0.709
    Regularity of Supply                        3.419        3.229       0.189     0.23      0.415
    Household Cost of Service Index
    HH Opinion on Contribution                   2.079       2.174       -0.096    0.14      0.489
    HH Opinion on Tariffs                        2.016       1.905        0.111    0.07      0.108
    Monthly Water Charges (Rs.)                 64.195      66.615       -2.420    6.65      0.716
    Operation & Maintenance Index
    Yearly Analysis of Water Quality             0.182       0.137        0.044    0.13      0.738
    Number of Breakdowns Last Year              3.471       5.899      -2.428***   0.72      0.001
    Longest Breakdown Last Year (Days)          10.832      13.177       -2.345    2.61      0.368
    Scheme Facing No Water Shortage              0.532       0.462        0.071    0.14      0.601
    Institutional Sustainability Index
    Proportion of Female in BG Executive        0.322        0.251      0.071+     0.04      0.098
    Committee
    Female President in BG                      0.083        0.143       -0.060    0.08      0.464
    Female Secretary in BG                      0.113        0.089        0.024    0.05      0.660
    Female Treasurer in BG                      0.478        0.232       0.246*    0.10      0.013
    Female Pump Operator in BG                  0.119        0.104        0.015    0.09      0.865
    Regular Election                            0.663        0.541        0.122    0.14      0.390
    Annual Report (Yes/No)                      0.766        0.772       -0.005    0.13      0.968
    Maintenance of Records (Yes/No)             0.163        0.006      0.157**    0.05      0.004
    Investments post-Project Completion         0.104        0.142       -0.038    0.08      0.640
    (Yes/No)
    Proportion of BGs with Savings Bank         0.675        0.608       0.067     0.13      0.606
    Account
    Current Balance in the Savings Account     15967.39     3096.37    12871.0*** 2567.90    0.000
    	p 0.1,	* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001



                                                   28 
 
