                                                   WPS8194


Policy Research Working Paper                     8194




                  Financial Globalization
                       A Glass Half Empty?

                             Facundo Abraham
                            Sergio L. Schmukler




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8194


  Abstract
  Since the 1970s, the world has embarked on a new                                  globalization has manifested in increasing gross capital
  financial globalization era. Cross-country capital flows                          flows (inflows and outflows) rather than larger net flows.
  have significantly increased in developed and developing                          Capital markets are segmented and only a few large firms
  countries. However, the characteristics of financial global-                      access international markets. International institutional
  ization differ from what was originally expected. Various                         investors do not seem to have played a stabilizing role,
  examples illustrate this point. Although the literature                           helping to exacerbate and transmit crises across countries.
  predicted large gains from financial globalization (such                          Although financial globalization has brought several ben-
  as additional funding, broad diversification, and deeper                          eficial changes, its net effects and spillovers to the overall
  financial systems), the positive effects have been more                           economies participating in it have yet to be understood.
  limited. In developed and developing countries, financial




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at facundoabraham@gmail.com and sschmukler@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                Financial Globalization:
                                 A Glass Half Empty?


              Facundo Abraham                                      Sergio L. Schmukler *




JEL Classification Codes: F21, F36, F61, F62, F63, F65
Keywords: capital flows, developing countries, emerging markets, institutional
investors, international capital markets, international integration




* This paper was prepared for the Handbook of Finance and Development, edited by Thorsten Beck and
Ross Levine. We are grateful to Thorsten Beck, Ross Levine, and Luis Servén for their very useful comments.
Research support came from the World Bank’s Development Economics Department, the Knowledge for
Change Program (KCP), and the Strategic Research Program (SRP). The authors work at the World Bank
Research Department.
Email addresses: facundoabraham@gmail.com, sschmukler@worldbank.org.
1.     Introduction

Since the 1970s, the world economy has witnessed a sharp rise in financial globalization. This

process is only comparable to the period of capital mobility and integrated capital markets across

the world that took place at the turn of the twentieth century. This first globalization wave lasted

from 1870 to 1914, when it came to a halt because of the outbreak of the First World War. The

inter-war period, with the Great Depression in between, reversed the globalization of the

international economy, drastically reducing capital flows. It took nearly 60 years for financial

globalization to make a comeback. Not until the 1970s, when the Bretton Woods system of fixed

exchange rates was dismantled, did capital mobility start to slowly increase again. This process

accelerated rapidly during the 1990s when financial globalization became a central topic in

academic and policy debates. Ever since, it has continued to receive much attention (Bordo et al.,

1999; Eichengreen and Bordo, 2003; Obstfeld and Taylor, 2003; Caprio et al., 2006; Calomiris

and Neal, 2013).

       Initial expectations were that financial globalization would boost economic growth by

increasing financial development, particularly in developing countries. First, by allowing foreign

investors into domestic markets, this process would expand the availability of capital and lower

its cost. Capital would flow from capital-abundant countries to capital-scarce countries, because

the latter offer larger returns to capital (Barro et al., 1995; Stiglitz, 2000; Mody and Murshid,

2005; Henry, 2007). Second, by granting domestic investors access to international markets,

financial globalization would expand the range of financial instruments, allowing for better risk

diversification (Obstfeld, 1994,1995). Third, by promoting reforms to the financial

infrastructure, financial globalization would reduce information asymmetry problems and

improve the efficiency of the financial sector (Schmukler, 2004; Mishkin, 2009). In other words,

financial globalization would increase the availability and quality of financial services. In turn,

higher financial development would promote growth. The financial sector performs a series of

functions that lead to higher capital accumulation and technological innovation, both of which

                                                 1
are channels to economic growth. These functions include: mobilize savings, facilitate risk

management, enhance allocation of resources, increase corporate control, and ease the exchange

of goods and services (Levine, 1997). 1

         Following the academic and policy discussions on whether financial globalization can

lead to higher economic growth, a large body of empirical literature has flourished trying to

measure different effects of financial globalization and how it has worked in practice. Several

studies have reviewed this extensive literature and concluded that, in contrast to the early

theoretical predictions, the evidence on the effects of financial globalization is overall mixed.

Whereas some authors find that financial globalization increases economic growth, others argue

that the growth effect of financial globalization is negligible or nonexistent (Mishkin, 2007;

Rodrik and Subramanian, 2009; Mougani, 2012; Moore 2014). Other surveys conclude that

financial globalization is beneficial but the relation between financial globalization and growth is

not straightforward. For example, only countries with specific characteristics benefit from

financial globalization (Prasad et al., 2003). Also, the positive effects on growth might originate

not from the direct effects of financial globalization, such as growth of the stock of capital, but

from its indirect effects. In particular, financial globalization can lead to technological spillovers,

better economic policies, deeper banking sectors, and larger and more stable finance markets,

among others (Kose et al., 2009). On the other hand, the empirical evidence shows that financial

globalization has increased risks such as higher macroeconomic instability, vulnerability to

financial crises, and contagion effects spilling across borders (Eichengreen, 2001; Schmukler,

2004; Stavarek et al., 2012).

1 A large body of theoretical and empirical literature has shown that more finance is conducive to higher economic
growth. See, for example, King and Levine (1993a), Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), Levine and Zervos (1998), Rajan
and Zingales (1998), Beck et al. (2000), Levine et al. (2000), Guiso et al. (2004), Hassan et al. (2011), and Madsen
and Ang (2016), among many others. Other papers discuss the different functions of the financial sector and how
they can affect growth. For example, King and Levine (1993b) and Laeven et al. (2015) study the link between
screening of investors by financial institutions, productivity enhancement, and growth; Levine (1991) and
Bencivenga and Smith (1991) analyze how financial intermediation can help cope with liquidity risk; Obstfeld (1994)
discusses the link between financial diversification and growth; Aghion and Howitt (2008) examine the relation
between finance, corporate governance, and growth. For a review of the theoretical and empirical literature on
finance and growth, see Levine (2005).


                                                         2
        The surveys mentioned above have typically focused on the findings in the literature

related to the effects of financial globalization on aggregate macroeconomic variables. Namely,

they discuss whether the existing academic papers find that financial globalization affects

positively, negatively, or has no effect on variables such as gross domestic product (GDP)

growth and volatility, investment, consumption, asset prices, exchange rates, and financial

stability indicators, among other macroeconomic indicators.

        In this paper, we complement these previous studies by surveying empirical evidence on

some of the major driving forces of financial globalization that affect the financial sector. This

information is relevant because it can provide a more complete understanding of (i) how

financial globalization has affected different parts of the financial system and (ii) why some of

the effects of financial globalization at the macro level could have played out differently than

anticipated. The three forces we study are: risk diversification, firms seeking financing abroad,

and institutional investors that invest internationally. For each of these driving forces, we review

the initial expectations and how they have worked once globalization took place. We show that

these forces have affected the financial system differently than originally expected.

        The main arguments of the paper can be summarized as follows. First, theoretical

models posit that two main channels would foster financial globalization. One is the net

financing from rich to poor countries, because the latter have higher returns to capital. Another

one is risk diversification, because financially globalized capital markets would allow investors to

diversify their assets worldwide, reducing risk and consumption volatility. Whereas initially these

two channels were expected to be comparably important, new evidence suggests that financial

globalization is (in relative terms) less about capital accumulation in developing countries and

more about risk diversification. Developed and developing countries have simultaneously

experienced a sharp increase in both inflows and outflows, whereas net capital flows are small

and do not exhibit a clear trend. Therefore, movements of gross capital flows have outweighed




                                                 3
those of net capital flows, and the latter do not necessarily move from the “North” (the

developed countries) to the “South” (the developing ones).

        A possible explanation for why net financing is not an important force behind

globalization could come from the fact that, whereas risk diversification can expand without

bounds, net financing cannot increase indefinitely. Financing eventually needs to be paid back. In

addition, as countries become richer, returns to capital diminish (reducing the attractiveness of

net financing). At the same time, domestic investors and financial intermediaries become more

sophisticated and increase their investments overseas (boosting risk diversification). Although

more risk diversification is beneficial to the economies involved and some temporary net

financing has occurred, the drawback is that capital flows are large, volatile, and pro-cyclical,

which can exacerbate business cycles. Moreover, gross outflows that contract during crises imply

that several adjustments might need to take place as capital gets reallocated, possibly disrupting

the financial sector.

        Second, in the movement of gross capital flows across borders, firms play a key role

because they are large participants in the demand side of funds. In a globalized world, capital

markets are expected to be integrated, allowing a wide range of firms with similar growth

opportunities to access financial services at similar costs, regardless of their location. But

contrary to these predictions, domestic and international capital markets are not substitutes.

Instead, international markets offer advantages to firms in terms of cost and maturity of

financing, number of investors, corporate governance, and informational environment,

complementing the financing offered in domestic markets. However, only a few firms have

proven to access international markets. Typically, these are the larger and better performing

firms within each country.

        Limited access to international markets could be explained by the high costs of listing in

these markets, which smaller firms cannot afford, as well as a preference of international

investors for larger and well-known firms for which information is more widely available. Firms

                                                4
that participate in international capital markets are not only larger and more desirable to begin

with, but also outperform non-participants because of their ability to issue and trade in these

global markets. In addition, whereas the benefits of financial globalization seem to be restricted

to a small number of firms, firms not participating in the globalization could become worse off.

For example, as firms in a country become international, they can migrate their trading abroad,

which can reduce the potential size and liquidity of domestic capital markets.

        Third, institutional investors are expected to channel private and public savings, diversify

risk internationally, and behave in a counter-cyclical and long-term way, possibly mitigating the

volatility of capital flows and taking advantage of profitable investment opportunities in

distressed markets with short-term liquidity needs. However, several institutional investors have

tended to exhibit herding behavior, follow momentum trading, and withdraw funds from

countries hit by a negative shock. Part of this behavior could be associated with the underlying

investors getting in and out of those funds as market conditions change, but also with the

actions of managers who are monitored on a short-run basis and face some incentives to act pro-

cyclically. In addition, institutional investors are not diversifying risk as expected, limiting their

investments only to a small group of countries and firms. Agency problems seem to play an

important role in their behavior.

        Overall, the empirical evidence in this paper shows how financial globalization might

have failed to fulfill its initial expectations. Net financing from rich to poor countries, which can

help the latter increase their capital stock and promote growth, is rather limited. In addition, the

benefits of financial globalization are not extended to all firms and countries. Moreover, whereas

institutional investors have helped channel funds to some countries and firms that otherwise

would have not received funding, an increased presence of these investors has also been

accompanied by unanticipated negative effects. Thus, financial globalization has had a somewhat

limited positive impact on countries and its benefits have not necessarily been broadly shared,

which could explain why the financial globalization literature has failed to find strong and

                                                  5
consistent positive effects of this process on overall growth, and why some of the earlier

proponents have later detracted.

        Some of the arguments in this paper relate to those mentioned in Stulz (2005), who

claims from a different angle that agency problems impose limits on financial globalization. In

particular, Stulz argues that agency problems arise from corporate insiders and state rulers that

maximize their own benefits at the expense of outside investors. This behavior results in

concentrated ownership and countries failing to reap the full benefits of financial globalization.

These limits are manifested in investment being closely related to domestic savings, domestic

factors being important for stock returns, varying financial development across countries,

investors showing significant home bias in consumption, and restricted risk sharing. Our paper

contributes to this analysis by showing other aspects in which financial globalization materialized

differently than expected, and how these are related to how firms and investors have participated

in this process.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines financial globalization and

briefly shows how it has evolved in recent decades. Section 3 describes the behavior of capital

inflows and outflows in developed and developing countries. Section 4 analyzes evidence on

access of firms to international capital markets. Section 5 discusses the role of institutional

investors. Section 6 concludes by mentioning some of the policy challenges and issues that

remain for further research.



2.      Financial Globalization: Brief Overview

As a starting point, it is important to clearly define what we understand by financial globalization

as well as present some stylized facts of this process. Throughout the paper, we discuss different

aspects of financial globalization. Thus, we find it useful to state upfront the working definitions

of the different terms we use to avoid confusion. In addition, presenting some evidence on the




                                                 6
evolution and extent of financial globalization would help readers understand the context in

which the topics discussed take place.

           Despite being widely used, there is no universal definition of what financial globalization

means. Different authors have defined it in various ways and many times have associated it with

other related terms, such as international financial integration and, sometimes, financial

liberalization. We start by defining these three important terms that are used throughout the

paper. 2

           First, we call financial liberalization the process by which countries reduce legal or “de

jure” controls that restrict cross-country capital movement. Financial liberalization includes, for

example, eliminating restrictions on capital inflows and outflows, removing limits on equity

holdings by foreigners, and abandoning multiple exchange rates or limits to the acquisition of

foreign currency.

           Second, we characterize financial integration as the actual or “de facto” increase in cross-

country capital movement (or the potential for those movements to take place), tightening the

linkages between the economies. 3 As the world moves toward deeper financial integration and

the potential for arbitrage disappears, the returns of identical internationally traded assets will be

the same in different markets, a sign that markets are indeed integrated. One manifestation of

this condition is known as the interest rate parity and can occur in two ways: covered and

uncovered. Covered interest rate parity is satisfied when investors can obtain the same returns in

a given currency on identical assets in domestic and international markets using forward

contracts to hedge the exchange rate risk. Uncovered interest rate parity occurs when, taking into

account the expected volatility of the exchange rate, the ex-ante expected returns on identical


2 For more discussion on the different definitions see, for example, Pavel and McElravey (1990), Baele et al. (2004),
Arestis et al. (2005), Gudmundsson (2008), Schmukler (2004), Kose et al. (2010), Coeuré (2013), and Levy Yeyati
and Williams (2014).
3 Capital movement will tend to occur as long as there are price differentials that can be exploited. The mere

possibility that capital can flow across countries could tend to produce a convergence in prices, without capital
actually needing to move.


                                                         7
assets in a given currency is the same in domestic and international markets. In this case,

investors are not covered against exchange rate risk because the ex-post return could differ in

different markets depending on the actual movements of the exchange rate. Although financial

integration means that the same assets are valued identically domestically and abroad in a given

currency, there are several indicators of financial integration that focus on quantities rather than

prices, as described below.

        Third, we refer to financial globalization as the process in which financial markets and

institutions around the globe increasingly allow agents and firms from any country to buy and

sell securities, lend and borrow, or perform any other financial transaction. In a fully financially

globalized world, financial services are provided in a global manner, irrespective of the country

of origin of the creditor/investors and debtor/issuer. In this sense, financial liberalization is a

precondition for financial globalization to occur (with restrictions, it is more difficult to move

across borders), whereas financial integration is one dimension or one manifestation, among

others, of financial globalization.

        In general, barriers to financial globalization tend to be more relevant for borrowers than

for savers. Typically, in the absence of legal restrictions to cross-border capital flows, savers have

few impediments to invest internationally, even in small amounts. This is especially true in the

more sophisticated financial systems of developed countries, where there are fewer limits to

cross-border activities and transaction cost are relatively low. In those cases, investors have a

wider set of options available to invest internationally. In contrast, even if legal restrictions are

eliminated, information asymmetries, cultural barriers, and others frictions might make it more

difficult for borrowers to obtain financing abroad, unless firms and international financial

intermediaries, such as banks, bring those services domestically.

        There are many measures used throughout the financial globalization literature to

quantify the extent of this process. Several of these indicators focus on measuring the degree of

financial integration, as it is a key outcome of financial globalization. Financial integration

                                                  8
measures can be classified into two groups depending on whether they focus on prices or

quantities.

        The so-called “price-based measures” focus on the law of one price, and calculate the

interest rate differentials or price differentials of similar assets in different markets. The

presumption is that, as the world becomes more financially integrated, these differentials should

disappear due to arbitrage. Studies that use these indicators have supported the view that the

world is more financially integrated. For example, there is an extensive literature that focuses on

evaluating whether the interest rate parity holds in practice. Overall, these studies find that

covered interest rate parity and, even in some cases, uncovered interest rate parity seem to hold

in the long run, such as in a five- or ten-year horizon. In the short run, there are deviations from

interest parity but these are explained by unexpected shocks, such as monetary policy shocks

(Goldberg et al., 2003; Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004; Lothian and Wu, 2011; Chinn and Quayyum,

2012; Obstfeld, 2015).

        Some have argued that measuring financial integration through the interest rate parity

condition can be misleading. Studies of interest rate parity typically select a specific type of asset

(for example, government bonds) and analyze the behavior of interest rate differentials for those

assets across countries in a specific period. However, interest rates can reflect country risk, and

many times this risk is not taken into account when comparing interest rate differentials. For

example, before 2008, the convergence of long-term sovereign bonds yields in Europe was

interpreted as a sign of sovereign bond market integration (Ehrmann et al., 2011). However, as

the European debt crisis showed, even if interest rates were similar at some point, government

bonds in Germany entailed different credit risk than bonds in Greece or Spain, and yields that

converged before the crisis diverged afterwards. In other words, European bond markets were

less integrated than initially thought.

        A more precise analysis would examine price differentials of equivalent assets traded in

more than one market at the same time. For example, some studies compare the price of an

                                                  9
equity share with the price of the corresponding depositary receipt (or DR). DRs are shares of

other countries’ corporations, issued by international depositary banks, which are traded in

international financial centers, such as London and New York. Because DRs are not a different

security but rather claims on shares traded in domestic markets, they do not have a different

credit risk than the original share. Thus, to the extent that there are no barriers to cross-market

arbitrage, such as capital controls, the price of these similar assets should remain similar over

time. Studies that use this methodology find that, for assets traded in different free markets

simultaneously, the price differentials (or cross-market premiums) are close to zero and are mean

reverting because they are arbitraged away rather quickly (Alaganar and Bhar, 2001; Levy Yeyati

et al., 2009).

        On the other hand, “quantity-based measures” focus on the extent of actual capital flows

moving across borders. Financial integration is characterized by an increase in cross-border

capital flows as investors buy and sell foreign assets, and firms and sovereigns in need of

financing obtain these funds internationally. These capital flows accumulate over time into

foreign assets and liabilities.

        Among the quantity indicators, a very popular one is that constructed originally by Lane

and Milesi-Ferretti (2007). This variable calculates the sum of aggregate foreign assets and

liabilities of countries relative to their GDP. The evolution of this index (aggregated for all

countries) suggests that since the 1970s the trend has been toward greater financial integration.

The stock of foreign assets and liabilities in the world has grown exponentially over time. In

1970, foreign assets and liabilities represented 66 percent of world GDP. By 1980 this figure had

grown to 73 percent, and by 1990 the value almost doubled and reached 132 percent. The

world’s cross-border assets and liabilities reached a peak in 2009, when they represented 360

percent of world GDP. Since the 2008-09 global financial crisis, financial integration experienced

a reversal worldwide. After shrinking in 2008, financial integration stagnated. As of 2011, foreign

assets and liabilities stood at 341 percent, below the pre-crisis value.

                                                  10
       Although the world as a whole advanced toward greater financial integration over the

decades, the trends in developed and developing countries look different (Figure 1). In

developed countries, financial integration consistently increased over time and only reversed

during the 2008-09 global financial crisis. In contrast, in developing countries financial

integration started at a lower level and did not proceed smoothly. Instead, developing countries

experienced alternated periods of integration with times of reversals during crises. The financial

integration process that started in the 1970s reversed in the late 1980s during the debt crises in

Latin America, but then increased sharply during the early 1990s. However, by the end of the

1990s and early 2000s, this process reversed again when the developing world suffered a series of

financial crises. Financial integration resumed shortly afterward in the mid-2000s, only to reverse

once again during the 2008-09 global financial crisis. As a result of starting behind and of these

fluctuations, developing countries are nowadays less financially integrated than developed

countries. Whereas in 2011 developing countries had foreign assets and liabilities representing

109 percent of GDP, in developed countries this figure reached 437 percent.

       In developed countries, debt has always been by far the predominant instrument,

accounting for the largest share of the sum of foreign assets and liabilities. In 2011, the aggregate

stock of debt assets and liabilities in these countries amounted to 220 percent of GDP, largely

exceeding the stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) and equity, which represented 87 and 60

percent of GDP, respectively. However, since the 1990s, developed countries have experienced a

significant expansion in FDI and equity foreign holdings. This increase is partially explained by

changes in the external balance sheet of the United States, which has increased its share of high-

return risky assets becoming what some authors call “the venture capitalist of the world.” This

behavior has expanded investments in equity and FDI abroad (Gourinchas and Rey, 2007).

       In developing countries, historically the most important type of foreign holding has been

debt, followed by FDI. But this trend has changed since the late 1990s when the relative

importance of debt started to diminish and, instead, FDI became increasingly more important.

                                                 11
Part of this behavior is explained by the reduction in fiscal deficits and governments’ reliance on

foreign debt. Another significant change was the rise of the stock of foreign equity, which was

practically negligible before the 1990s. Because of these changes, in 2011 the aggregate stocks of

debt and FDI assets and liabilities represented 35 percent of GDP, and the stock of equity

reached 11 percent. This contrasts with the values in 1999, when the aggregate stock of debt

amounted to 51 percent of GDP, FDI represented 21 percent, and equity reached 7 percent.

       The composition of assets and liabilities is useful not only to understand the evolution of

financial globalization but also the exposure to shocks and crises. In particular, a noteworthy

feature of the nature of foreign assets and liabilities in developing countries is the transition

toward safer forms of financial integration. On the liability side, these economies increased

equity investment and reduced debt instruments. On the asset side, they largely accumulated

international reserves. Because of these changes, developing countries have become net creditors

in debt assets and net debtors in equity assets. This new composition of foreign assets and

liabilities is safer compared to the one back in the 1990s when developing countries had large net

debtor positions in debt assets. For example, in earlier crises, large amounts of foreign currency

liabilities implied that, as currencies depreciated, the debt burden grew in local currency and

crises deepened. Instead, during the 2008-09 global financial crisis, due to the new composition

of foreign assets and liabilities, currency devaluations increased the external positions of

developing countries (measured in local currency). At the same time, because these countries

were net debtors in equity positions, external liabilities fell as equity prices plummeted.

Moreover, large international reserves were useful to deter currency and banking crises (Milesi-

Ferretti and Tille, 2011; Didier et al., 2012). This performance in a crisis period shows how

developing countries have become better prepared to withstand financial shocks, especially when

they involve currency devaluations and asset price collapses.




                                                12
3.       The Behavior of Capital Flows

3.1      Net vs. Gross Flows

As cross-border assets and liabilities increased, signaling greater financial globalization, a new

debate has emerged among academics on whether this growth has been driven by gross or net

capital flows. 4 A central question is whether financial globalization is propelled by countries

simultaneously buying and selling foreign assets or, instead, by some countries accumulating net

foreign asset positions that finance foreign liabilities in other countries.

         Economic theory has conjectured that financial globalization would mainly proceed

through two different channels: efficient allocation of capital around the world and risk

diversification (Fischer, 1997; Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004). On the one hand, standard theoretical

models predict that financial globalization leads to resources flowing from rich (North) countries

(where capital is abundant and expected returns are lower) to poorer (South) countries (which

are capital scarce and have higher returns to capital). These capital inflows would temporarily

boost investment and economic growth, permanently raising the living standards in developing

economies (Barro et al., 1995; Eichengreen et al., 1998; Henry, 2007; Gourinchas and Rey, 2014).

On the other hand, financial globalization allows investors to diversify their portfolio worldwide.

Investors could purchase assets from other countries where risk is imperfectly correlated and,

therefore, attain higher risk-adjusted rates and higher consumption smoothing, increasing welfare

(Obstfeld, 1994). 5

         The trends in gross and net capital flows can shed light on the relative importance of

these two mechanisms (Figure 2). Gross capital flows in the world have experienced a significant

increase. Whereas the median value of average gross capital flows across all countries amounted


4 Throughout the paper, we use the definition of capital flows of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Capital
inflows are defined as net acquisition of domestic assets by nonresidents. Capital outflows are defined as net
acquisition of foreign assets by residents, excluding reserve assets. Net capital inflows are defined as the difference
between capital inflows and outflows (IMF, 2016).
5 To be clear, net financing from rich to poor countries could be partly driven by risk diversification motives as well,

but for simplicity we omit that aspect from the discussion in this paper.


                                                          13
to 6 percent of GDP in the 1980s, this value had grown to 15 percent in the 2000s. All country

groups, irrespective of the income, experienced an increase in the median value of average gross

capital flows during this period. In contrast, net capital flows in the world are relatively small and

have not shown a clear pattern over time. In the 1980s, the median value of average net capital

flows as percentage of GDP across all countries was 1.6 percent. By the 2000s, this figure not

only remained small but had also dropped and stood at 1.1 percent. The trend was dissimilar

across country groups sorted by income, with the median value of average net capital flows

increasing in upper-middle-income countries but decreasing in lower-middle-income and high-

income countries.

        A significant part of gross flows takes place among developed countries, but developing

countries have also started participating in this process. Although financial integration has

advanced at a slower pace in developing countries, recent data show a rising importance of

developing countries in cross-border capital movement, particularly after the 2008-09 global

financial crisis. Not only have cross-border investments from developing to developed countries

increased, but financial transactions between developing countries have expanded as well. For

example, FDI transactions between developing countries as a ratio of total FDI grew from 8 to

12 percent between 2001 and 2014. Likewise, in the same period, the share of cross-border

portfolio investment and bank flows that took place between developing countries increased

from 1 to 3 percent and from 5 to 9 percent, respectively (Broner et al., 2017).

        In developed countries, inflows and outflows consisted mainly of bank flows before the

2008-09 global financial crisis. This two-way cross-border bank flows were explained by an

increase in cross-border ownership of banks and an expansion of bank lending in international

markets (OECD, 2011). Round-tripping between the United States and Europe also seemed to

have been important before the crisis. European banks raised wholesale funds in the United

States that were lent back to the United States through the purchase of mortgage-backed

securities. Regulatory arbitrage fostered this practice, given that European banks did not have a

                                                 14
cap on non-risk-adjusted bank leverage. Round-tripping translated into an increase in gross

capital flows between these two regions, but not in net capital flows because inflows and

outflows canceled out (Shin, 2012; Avdjiev et al., 2016). The 2008-09 global financial crisis was

followed by a retrenchment of banks as they reduced their foreign exposures and brought money

back home. The decline in bank flows was greater than the fall in portfolio and FDI flows,

which also rebounded more quickly. Because of these trends, the composition of inflows and

outflows in developed countries changed. Since the crisis, they consist mainly of portfolio flows

and FDI (Forbes 2014; IRC, 2016).

        In the case of developing economies, FDI has been the main source of capital inflows

since the 1990s. International investors looking for lower costs, high growth potential, and

market size have driven investments in developing market firms. Also, privatization of

government-owned companies was important to foster FDI flows. The emergence of FDI as the

predominant type of inflow is also partly explained by the fall in public debt flows, as

governments scaled back the issuance of sovereign bonds. Since the late 1990s, equity inflows

have also increased significantly because developing countries’ securities became more attractive

as economic growth accelerated, developing country firms increased international issuances, and

institutional investors in developed countries have sought to diversify their portfolio. In terms of

capital outflows, since the late 1990s and early 2000s, developing countries have become

important investors in FDI and debt flows. FDI emanates from developing countries because

firms in these countries engage in M&A activities in both developed and developing countries

abroad. The increase in debt outflows is mainly associated with domestic residents purchasing

more foreign debt securities, partly in the form of foreign reserves (CGFS, 2009). In some cases,

developing regions are exporters rather than importers of capital. For example, this is the case of

East Asia and the Pacific region, which is a net exporter of capital to both developed and

developing countries. In particular, this region plays an important role as sender of M&A and

syndicated loans (Didier et al., 2017).

                                                15
        After the 2008-09 global financial crisis, non-financial corporations from developing

countries have aided the financial globalization process by borrowing in international financial

markets. Between 2010 and 2014, annual international bond issuances by these corporations in

major emerging economies almost doubled, reaching 400 billion U.S. dollars (Acharya et al.,

2015). Overall, in the period 2000-13 non-financial corporations in emerging markets issued on

aggregate almost 1 trillion U.S. dollars in international bond markets. Firms in Latin America

accounted for more than half of these issuances, followed by Emerging Asia and Emerging

Europe (Fuentes and Serena, 2014). As a result, corporate debt of non-financial firms in major

developing countries surpassed 18 trillion U.S. dollars at the end of 2014, whereas in 2004 this

value stood at 4 trillion U.S. dollars (IMF, 2015). This expansion resulted in an increase of the

aggregate ratio of non-financial corporate debt to GDP in emerging markets from below 60

percent in 2006 to 110 percent in 2015, surpassing the value of this ratio in advanced economies

(Tarashev et al., 2016).

        Carry trade might have played an important role in this borrowing activity by non-

financial corporations. Carry trade implies that firms take advantage of interest rate differentials

by borrowing funds at a low interest rate abroad and investing the proceeds domestically in

assets with higher returns (Galati et al., 2007). Some authors argue that funds obtained in

international markets are not used to fund new investments or other expenditures, but instead

are being lent in domestic markets at higher rates (Caballero et al., 2016a; Bruno and Shin, 2017).

For example, there is evidence of a positive relation between foreign debt issuance by firms and

domestic credit in East Asia and Latin America (Powell, 2014). A possible reason for this

behavior is that, in a post-crisis scenario characterized by low interest rates and quantitative

easing in developed economies, developing countries have increased capital controls. Because

corporations can more easily circumvent these controls than banks, they could have become a

conduit through which foreign funds enter into developing economies (Caballero et al., 2016b).

However, the validity of this argument is not clear because corporations do not necessarily have

                                                16
an easy time circumventing capital controls, most countries have not imposed capital controls,

and a significant part of the capital raising activity has gone to investment and growth (Didier et

al., 2015; Calomiris et al., 2017). Carry trade has its risks as it increases vulnerability to currency

depreciations and spikes in international interest rates (Chui et al., 2014). In fact, the more recent

economic slowdown and currency depreciations in the developing world coupled with tightening

monetary policy in developed countries have raised concerns because they could negatively affect

the capability of highly-leveraged corporations to pay back their debts (Alfaro et al., 2017).

        Tax avoidance might also explain the borrowing pattern by developing country

corporations. As the world became more globalized, large corporations started to increasingly

use within-firm financial transactions (intra-firm debt, royalty payments, dividend repatriations,

etc.) to transfer profits to related parties located in low-tax countries (also known as “tax

havens”) to reduce their tax burden (Desai et al., 2006). These corporate financial arrangements

have translated into increasing cross-border financial flows between developing countries and

international financial centers (IMF, 2014). For example, companies can shift profits across

jurisdictions by lending to firms in high tax jurisdictions through related parties in low tax

countries, which translates into increasing debt flows (Arena and Roper, 2010). Data on the

Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS) show that in 2016, 9 percent of foreign debt

securities liabilities of Brazil were held in Cayman Islands and 8 percent in Luxembourg.

Similarly, Luxembourg and Mauritius ranked third and six, respectively, as the top holders of

debt securities liabilities of India, accounting for 9 and 5 percent of all liabilities, respectively. Tax

avoidance is particularly important for developing countries that have weak tax legislations

(Arezki et al., 2013). Still, a significant part of the borrowing activity of corporates has taken

place in countries that do not necessarily present tax advantages nor are regarded as tax havens,

such as the United Kingdom and the United States, especially when compared with the offshore

markets mentioned above.




                                                   17
        The evidence presented above suggests that the financial globalization might have less to

do with net financing from rich to poor countries than was originally anticipated. Whereas net

financing has indeed taken place, it has been limited, has not necessarily occurred from

developed to developing countries, and has been outweighed in magnitude by gross capital

flows. Financial globalization seems to be more about asset diversification in which foreign

residents invest more in domestic markets, domestic residents expand their investment overseas,

and firms participate by borrowing abroad from foreign investors and bring the proceeds to

domestic markets. This argument relates to previous studies that have also found that financial

globalization is characterized by large gross capital flows and small net capital flows, and

concluded that risk diversification might be a much more important driver of financial

globalization than net financing (Obstfeld and Taylor, 2003; Schularick and Steger, 2010).

        Different reasons could explain the rise in gross flows. First, net financing cannot

increase indefinitely because countries eventually need to return the foreign financing obtained.

In contrast, gross flows can grow as long as investors have resources to invest abroad.

Therefore, to the extent that financial globalization involves investors purchasing assets across

countries, it will involve gross flows but not necessarily net flows, because outflows and inflows

can compensate each other. Second, when economies become richer, investors seek to diversify

their portfolios and financial intermediaries seek to participate in financial activities in other

countries. At the same time, returns to capital tend to equalize across countries reducing net

financing. Hence, gross flows tend to increase over time whereas net flows decrease. This

argument also explains why between developed countries the basic channel of financial

globalization is risk diversification.



3.2     Capital Flows during the Business Cycle

Although the cross-country movement of capital flows has allowed more risk diversification and

some net financing, both of which are beneficial, capital flows are not free of risks. By enabling

                                               18
foreign investors to purchase domestic assets and domestic residents to invest abroad, countries

increase their exposure to foreign shocks.

        Capital flows in the world are pro-cyclical with both capital inflows and outflows

expanding during booms and decreasing during downturns (Broner et al., 2013). In particular,

the pro-cyclicality of capital flows seems to be explained by the behavior of flows from the

private sector (banks and corporates). In contrast, flows from the public sector are typically

counter-cyclical, particularly in developed countries (Avdjiev et al., 2017). Financial frictions

(such as risk aversion, sovereign risk, or information asymmetries between domestic and foreign

agents) could explain this empirical regularity. In the absence of financial frictions, inflows and

outflows would not necessarily respond in the same way to business cycle fluctuations because

domestic negative shocks would be matched by decreasing inflows by foreign investors but

increasing outflows by domestic investors. Instead, the above-mentioned frictions could explain

why retrenchments by domestic investors can occur during domestic crises (Broner et al., 2010;

Tille and van Wincoop, 2014). Another possible explanation for this positive correlation is that

global rather than domestic risk is the main driver of extreme capital flows episodes. In this

scenario, increases (decreases) in global risk lead to sudden stops (surges) in capital flows by

foreigners and retrenchment (flight) in capital flows by domestic investors. In other words,

during good times, investors seek to diversify risk by investing abroad, but during bad times they

return home (Forbes and Warnock, 2012).

        Another important and related feature on capital flows is that they are volatile, increasing

financial and macroeconomic instability. Higher volatility of capital flows is associated with

country characteristics such as lower income, worse institutions, and lower financial

development. There are substantial differences between capital flows to developing and

developed countries. Capital flows are more volatile in developing countries, where shocks to

capital flows are more frequent, persistent, and correlated across countries (Broner and Rigobon,

2006; Broto et al., 2011).

                                                19
       As a result of being pro-cyclical and volatile, capital flows can trigger or intensify

financial crises. Empirical studies have shown that financial liberalization can increase the

probability of a country facing banking and currency crises (Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999;

Ranciere et al., 2006; Joyce, 2011; Furceri et al., 2012; Caldera Sánchez and Gori, 2016).

Although financial liberalization can increase financial volatility in the short-run, financial

markets can become more stable in the long-run (Kaminsky and Schmukler, 2008).

       Most of the earlier literature connecting capital flows to crises has centered on net capital

flows. In particular, studies have argued that a drop in net capital inflows can trigger repayment

problems and generate balance of payment/exchange rate, banking, or debt crises (Calvo, 1998;

Calvo et al., 2004; Edwards, 2004; Levchenko and Mauro, 2007; Cavallo and Frankel, 2008).

However, movements in gross capital flows can also be informative to the crisis literature and

can complement the more traditional analysis associated with net flows.

       The literature on gross flows suggests that financial crises have a different impact

depending on whether they are triggered by a drop in capital inflows by foreign investors or a

surge in capital outflows by domestic investors. Compared to sudden flights by domestic

investors, sudden stops by foreign investors are associated with sharper drops in economic

activity and larger currency depreciations. Also, sudden stops tend to occur in multiple places

simultaneously, which suggests a common shock or a contagion effect (Cowan et al., 2008;

Rothenberg and Warnock, 2011). Foreign investors are more likely to stop funding to countries

with volatile exports base (such as commodities) and poor economic performance. In turn,

domestic investors are more prone to capital outflows when the domestic performance is poor,

the financial system is weak, and there are high external savings (Calderón and Kubota, 2013).

       In addition, even when capital inflows and outflows are matched and move in tandem or

when a country is not a net debtor, crises can ensue. For example, countries with large foreign

net creditor positions might not be able to mobilize assets with external debtors on a short

notice to cancel their debts with external creditors. This could happen if there is a mismatch in

                                                20
the maturity of assets and liabilities such that assets are long-term but liabilities are short-term,

and might take place even when a country is accumulating foreign assets on aggregate but has a

high level of external liabilities (Obstfeld, 2012a,b). Moreover, when the maturity of assets and

liabilities is similar, there could also be problems if assets and liabilities are invested in different

markets. For instance, when foreign liabilities in a country are concentrated in the banking sector

and foreigners decide to withdraw their funds, the domestic banking sector could suffer

instability if domestic investors do no compensate for that withdrawal, by, for example,

repatriating their foreign savings. In other words, even though a country can have on aggregate a

similar amount of assets and liabilities, there is still risk that capital outflows increase financial

instability if these flows hit particular markets, with potential spillover effects on other markets.

        Focusing on net (instead of gross) capital flows can also give a misleading assessment of

the sources of global financial instability and who is exposed to different risks. For example, on

the run-up to the 2008-09 global financial crisis, the size of net capital flows might have given

the impression that the rapid increase in credit to subprime borrowers in the United States was

financed by large current account surpluses in developing countries. However, when the crisis

hit, investors in emerging economies did not bear the largest losses. Instead, European investors

were the ones that did so. As mentioned earlier, gross capital flows between the United States

and Europe before the crisis show that subprime lending was partly fueled by round-tripping of

European banks that borrowed money in the United States and lent it back to the U.S. market.

Because inflows were matched by outflows, analyses that only focused on net capital flows

would have failed to disclose this pattern (Avdjiev et al., 2016).



4.      Which Firms Access Global Capital Markets?

Important drivers of cross-border capital flows are firms, which issue securities bought by

foreign investors and traded abroad. Financial globalization benefits firms by allowing them to

obtain necessary funding from foreign investors and international capital markets. The

                                                  21
emergence of these investors and markets as a funding source offers firms new sources to raise

capital, new financial services and instruments, lower costs, and better financing terms (Kim and

Singal, 2000; Chari and Henry, 2008; Larrain and Stumpner, 2017).

        At the initial stages of financial globalization, when capital markets are yet not fully

globalized, access to international capital markets is considered particularly important because it

can offer additional benefits compared to domestic markets. International financial markets offer

a bigger investor base, larger variety of financial instruments, more liquidity, and capital at a

lower cost compared to domestic markets (Stulz, 1999; Chouinard and D’Souza, 2004). In

addition, the “bonding hypothesis” argues that by cross-listing in foreign markets with enhanced

disclosure standards, protection of minority shareholder, and enforcement of regulations, among

other advantages, firms can improve corporate governance and attract more investments

(Coffee, 2002; Benos and Weisbach, 2004). Cross-listing is also assumed to increase the visibility

and prestige of firms (Bancel and Mittoo, 2001). As time goes by and financial globalization

deepens, the differences between international and domestic markets are expected to vanish.

Capital markets are likely to harmonize their rules and allow any worthwhile firm to participate in

them. As a result, capital markets are expected to eventually become universal, and firms might

be able to access the whole range of investors and financial services at similar costs across

countries, irrespective of their location.

        The empirical evidence suggests that, despite the increase in issuance and trading activity,

capital markets have globalized slower than anticipated. Only a few firms have access to

international markets, particularly in developing countries. As shown in Panel A of Figure 3,

during the period 2000-08 only two firms on average issued foreign equity per year in developing

regions, whereas among G-7 countries 17 firms did so. Furthermore, the average number of

firms that issued foreign bonds was below ten in developing regions and 113 in G-7 countries.

        Moreover, the use of foreign markets is concentrated in the largest issuances (Panel B of

Figure 3). For G-7 countries and developing regions, the largest five international equity

                                                22
issuances during the period 2000-08 accounted on average for around 90 percent of the total

amount raised in foreign equity markets each year. Bond issuances were still concentrated in

developing regions but not so much in developed ones. Whereas the average amount raised per

year by the top five international bond issuances in G-7 countries represented only 14 percent of

total foreign bond issuances, this figure amounted to around 75 percent of the total in

developing regions.

        Firms more likely to go abroad are those located in specific countries with bigger

economies, higher income levels, and better macroeconomic environments. In addition, only a

small group of firms with special characteristics access international markets. Apart from being

larger, faster growing, and more profitable, firms that issue in foreign markets are already more

linked to the international economy, as their foreign sales are larger and, thus, their revenues are

more dependent on foreign markets and consumers (Claessens and Schmukler, 2007).

Furthermore, firms with better corporate governance frameworks, such as limited power to

controlling shareholders or higher transparency, are more likely to list on foreign markets

(Doidge et al, 2009; Chen et al., 2014).

        International capital markets offer some advantages to firms because issuers in foreign

markets outperform non-issuers. After cross-listings, firms seem to enhance their corporate

governance as well as their informational environment. Relative to non-issuers, firms that cross-

list in international markets tend to exhibit higher protection to minority shareholders and are

more prone to dismiss poor performing managers (Doidge, 2004; Lel and Miller, 2008). In

addition, these firms seem to improve their reporting standards, receive greater media attention

and analyst coverage, and have higher forecast accuracy (Baker et al., 2002; Lang et al., 2003;

Herrmann et al., 2015). At the same time, cross-listed firms enjoy access to a larger investor base

that result in increased issuances and higher trading volumes (Foerster and Karolyi, 1999; Reese

and Weisbach, 2002). The finance obtained by firms in international markets is cheaper and at

longer maturities than funding from their domestic markets (Hail and Leuz, 2005; Schmukler

                                                23
and Vesperoni, 2006; Turk Ariss, 2016; Ball et al., 2017). As a result, firms with wider access to

international capital markets grow faster in terms of assets, sales, and employment than non-

issuing firms (Didier et al., 2015). However, measured by the Tobin’s Q that captures the market

value of a firm relative to its book value, it is not clear whether firms perform better after

internationalization. There is some evidence that cross-listed firms have higher ratios than non-

cross-listed firms (Doidge et al., 2004; Cetorelli and Peristiani, 2015). But other studies also show

that after firms cross-list the Tobin’s Q does not change or increases only temporarily (King and

Segal, 2009; Gozzi et al., 2015).

        To the extent that globalization implies that financial services can be provided anywhere

in the world, access to foreign markets allows firms and investors to choose the markets where

their assets are traded. An international liquid market might offer them attractive alternatives

relative to domestic markets. In fact, there is evidence that the domestic trading of firms that go

international tends to decrease. This migration effect can reduce the size and liquidity of

domestic markets (Karolyi, 2004; Levine and Schmukler, 2006). In the extreme, migration could

even make small domestic exchanges unsustainable (Claessens et al., 2002).

        These patterns seem to suggest that capital markets across the world are still segmented

offering different financial instruments, and featuring different issuers and investors. Thus, both

international and domestic markets are relevant for firms because they can act as complements,

rather than substitutes. Depending on their own characteristics and different needs, firms will

either issue at home or abroad (Gozzi et al., 2010).

        Several reasons could explain why access to international markets might be restricted to

only a set of firms. Smaller firms might not have incentives to cross-list. To list abroad, firms

need to pay high transaction costs, comply with cumbersome listing requirements, and conform

to stringent regulatory requirements. For smaller firms, these costs might be too high and offset

the benefits of cross-listing (Pagano et al., 2002). At the same time, investors’ demand for

securities issued by certain types of firms might be limited. Investors usually have large portfolios

                                                 24
to manage and prefer to invest in few liquid securities (as described in the next section).

Moreover, there is evidence that foreign investors have less information on foreign firms than

local investors in the country (Bae et al., 2008; Ferreira et al., 2017). In addition, they tend to

prefer firms that are close culturally and use the same language (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2001).

Thus, information asymmetries and cultural bias could partly explain why investors restrict their

investments to larger and better-known firms from specific countries.



5.       Institutional Investors

On the supply side of funding, institutional investors are new and important drivers of financial

globalization, at least compared to the previous wave of globalization. 6 As the assets they

manage have grown over time and as investors in developed countries have sought to reduce

their home bias and obtain higher yields, institutional investors based in these countries have

increased their foreign exposure (Figure 4). The Organization for Economic Co-operation and

Development (OECD) estimates that in 2013 pension funds, insurance companies, and

investment funds in member countries held assets for 86 trillion U.S. dollars. This figure

represents a 153 percentage increase compared to 2001, when these institutional investors held

assets for 34 trillion U.S. dollars (OECD, 2014). These investors have an international

perspective, holding around one-third of their assets in foreign markets. Their holdings range

from traditional investments, such as bonds and stocks, to more alternative investments,

including real estate, private equity, and infrastructure (IMF, OECD, and World Bank, 2015).

Following the trends in developed countries, institutional investors in developing countries have

grown as well, and some of their investments go abroad as a way to diversify risk. In Chile, for

example, pension funds are very large and invest up to 30 percent of their assets internationally.




6 Institutional investors comprise public and private pension funds, life insurance companies, non-life insurance

companies, and mutual funds (World Bank, 2015).


                                                       25
         Institutional investors are expected to play a key role in financial markets across the

globe. Because institutional investors are deep pocket investors and have a long-term horizon,

they are natural providers of stable and long-term finance to domestic firms and governments.

Institutional investors could provide long-term finance that, in principle, could facilitate

productive long-term investments that promote economic growth. Likewise, they have

incentives to invest in riskier assets and act in a counter-cyclical manner, continuing to hold

assets during market downturns. In addition, competition among governments to attract funds

from institutional investors is expected to promote reforms that enhance corporate governance,

financial regulations, public disclosure of information, and better accounting standards.

Institutional investors are also assumed to be more sophisticated. Thus, a larger presence of

these investors could enhance efficiency in capital markets as prices adjust to better reflect

fundamentals. Furthermore, institutional investors could offer significant benefits to small

investors. Due to their large size, economies of scale, and efficiency to process and absorb

information, institutional investors can diversify risk appropriately, provide a better trade-off

between risks and return, and reduce transaction costs (Davis, 2000; Stein, 2009; Della Croce,

2011).

         Although institutional investors have grown significantly and have channeled funds to

countries and firms that would otherwise receive little attention (aiding in the globalization

process), the evidence suggests that the role of institutional investors in financial globalization

might be more limited than originally foreseen. International institutional investors are not

necessarily diversifying risks as much as expected because many of them invest in a relatively

small number of countries and firms. For example, international mutual funds typically hold less

than one hundred stocks and this number is even smaller for specialized funds (Didier et al.,

2013). Likewise, there is also evidence that pension funds and insurance companies from

developed countries invest in restricted type of assets in developing countries. Pension funds

remain highly concentrated in short-term government bonds and even hold a significant fraction

                                                26
of their assets in bank deposits, whereas insurance companies limit their investments to

government bonds (IMF, OECD, and World Bank, 2015).

        This lack of diversification could be caused by competition among managers within fund

families, who manage and process information independently and, thus, have a limited capacity

to follow many assets simultaneously (Didier et al, 2013). Also, foreign investors in a country

typically prefer to limit their investment to those firms that are bigger, have large cash positions

and low leverage, and implement good accounting standards, among other indicators of

enhanced performance (Aggarwal et al., 2005; Ferreira and Matos, 2008). Institutional investors,

like other investors, also seem to exhibit a preference toward familiar companies that are closer

and share their same language and culture (Beugelsdijk and Frijns, 2010; Anderson et al., 2011).

Principal-agent problems can explain the incentives for institutional investors to limit

investments to government bonds, cash, and other short-term securities. For example, investors

and regulators monitor institutional investors on a short-term basis, making managers reluctant

to invest in longer-term securities that could be profitable in the long run but have low returns in

the short run (Stein, 2005).

       Instead of playing a stabilizing role, institutional investors can be pro-cyclical, helping to

exacerbate crises in the countries where they invest. Empirical evidence shows that many

international institutional investors invest using past performance: they buy past winners and sell

past losers. As a result, these investors tend to withdraw from countries in bad times and

increase investment in good times, which intensifies economic cycles (Grinblatt et al, 1995;

Patro, 2006; Xiao, 2007; Gelos, 2011; Raddatz and Schmukler, 2012).

       The investment strategy of buying winners and selling losers, known as momentum

trading, can be explained by behavioral biases of institutional investors including overreaction to

information, use of stop-and-loss orders, and avoidance of low capitalization securities, which

drive investors to sell stocks with large negative returns (Sias, 2007). Furthermore, this trading

strategy could be explained by portfolio rebalancing. When funds have below-average returns,

                                                27
they tend to reduce funding to countries in which they are overexposed. Likewise, when returns

are above average, funds withdraw from underexposed countries. Typically, a fund has returns

below average when it is overexposed to a country with low returns, and has returns above

average when it is underexposed in a country with low returns (Broner et al., 2006).

       The pro-cyclicality of institutional investors can also be associated with the so-called

“benchmark effect.” Mutual funds have increasingly started to follow market indexes as a

benchmark to make investment decisions in different countries. As these indexes are adjusted,

mutual funds that follow them reallocate their portfolio to reflect the new composition, which

will affect capital flows to countries. This benchmark effect can induce pro-cyclicality in certain

cases. For example, this effect will amplify shocks in countries that are larger or have a good

performance because funds allocate the injections/redemptions they receive following the

weight of each country in the index. That is, countries with a larger weight will have more

inflows during good times because investors are pouring in funds, amplifying the cycle. The

counterpart is that these countries will experience higher withdrawals during market downturns.

In contrast, countries that have performed poorly in the past will have a lower relevance in the

index and, thus, suffer lower withdrawals during crises (Raddatz et al., 2017).

       Momentum trading can be exacerbated by a tendency toward herding behavior in which

institutional investors buy and sell assets at the same time (Voronkova and Bohl, 2005; Choi and

Sias, 2009; Nirei et al., 2012; Raddatz and Schmukler, 2013; Blake et al., 2015). As a result,

herding amplifies the negative effect of pro-cyclicality. There are several motivations behind the

decisions of institutional investors to herd. Herding can be caused by informational problems.

Institutional investors tend to copy others when they lack information or instruments are more

opaque (Venezia et al., 2011; Raddatz and Schmukler, 2013). Informational cascades, in which

investors ignore their own information and instead infer information from the trading of others,

can also be important (Sias, 2004). In addition, reputational concerns can be important because

institutional investors can suffer a reputational cost when acting different than the rest. Evidence

                                                28
shows that during bubble periods, mutual funds that hold fewer stocks underpinning the bubble

exhibit a lower performance (Dass et al., 2008). Furthermore, herding can also arise from

institutional investors using similar risk models (Kremer and Nautz, 2013).

       Institutional investors can also trigger contagion effects, spreading crises across

countries. Fund managers and investors can produce contagion because they are prone to selling

assets in one country when prices fall in another (Kaminsky et al., 2004; Boyer et al., 2006;

Chiang and Zheng, 2010; Puy 2013). Likewise, political decisions in one country, such as a

decision to increase capital controls, might induce institutional investors to decrease exposure to

comparable countries that might be expected to implement similar policies (Forbes et al., 2016).

Furthermore, institutional investors can help transmit shocks originated in their home countries.

There is evidence that, regardless of their macroeconomic stability, developing countries more

exposed to international funds experience larger decreases in external funding when conditions

in developed countries worsen (Cerutti et al., 2015). One possible explanation could be that a

negative shock in the home country where a fund is domiciled might induce investors to

withdraw their money from it. This behavior will lead to a fire sale in which funds need to

liquidate their positions, including foreign investments, expanding the crisis toward other

countries (Jotikasthira et al., 2012). This pro-cyclical behavior of institutional investors could be

one of the reasons why financial globalization is associated with crises.

       Although we have highlighted many of the negative effects of institutional investors, they

do help channel financing across countries and can produce some positive effects. For example,

they help complete financial markets, offering new forms of financing and managing household

savings. Moreover, there is some evidence that international mutual funds might help extend the

maturity structure of corporate bonds. Empirical evidence shows that these funds invest longer

term in corporate bonds than the domestic funds of the countries in which they invest. This

behavior can be explained by the ability of international mutual funds to take higher risk given

their larger size and their possibility to hedge risk investing in different countries (World Bank,

                                                 29
2015). Also, as explained above, it might be the case that domestic funds might have incentives

to hold short-term liabilities. Domestic institutional investors might be subject to short-run

monitoring by investors, regulators, and asset-management companies. This short-run

monitoring generates incentives for managers to be averse to investments that are profitable in

the long term but can have poor short-term performance (Opazo et al., 2015). Thus,

international institutional investors, even with their shortcomings, might sometimes be an

improvement over domestic institutional investors.



6.      Conclusions

Following the extensive debate on the effects of globalization, this paper argues that, although

financial globalization has advanced significantly in recent decades, it has not developed as

originally expected. The ways in which financial globalization has manifested differ from those

anticipated by academic and policy discussions in several dimensions. The paper provides some

examples of these deviations.

        First, the net financing channel of financial globalization is less important than expected

and, instead, the large movements of capital across borders are driven mostly by domestic and

foreign investors seeking to simultaneously diversify their portfolio worldwide. Whereas risk

sharing has its benefits, by allowing domestic investors to invest abroad and foreign investors to

invest domestically, countries become more exposed to foreign shocks. Second, only a few firms

seem to be benefiting from financial globalization. In addition, financial globalization could

produce negative externalities that affect firms that are not direct participants of the globalization

process. Third, several institutional investors are not necessarily diversifying risk as broadly as

expected. Moreover, instead of behaving in a counter-cyclical manner, they tend to act in a pro-

cyclical way, which might exacerbate financial crises and help expand them across countries.

        These examples illustrate that the mechanisms through which financial globalization was

expected to promote growth are operating in a more limited way. Moreover, although financial

                                                 30
globalization entails many positive effects, its benefits do not seem to be broadly shared across

countries and firms, and those exposed to globalization are subject to new adverse shocks. Thus,

these results might provide some explanations to why the existing financial globalization

literature has not consistently found a strong positive effect of this process across countries.

        The examples shown in this paper also highlight some of the important challenges and

tradeoffs that policy makers face. First, given the volatility of capital flows that can exacerbate

economic cycles, countries could benefit from implementing policies that smooth their pro-

cyclicality. Among the policies that reduce pro-cyclicality, an important ongoing proposal relates

to the use of macroprudential policies and capital controls. The goal of macroprudential policies

is to reduce risks to financial stability. Whereas macroprudential instruments were typically aimed

only at the banking sector, recent proposals argue to extend their use to the non-banking

financial sector, including institutional investors. Some macroprudential policies for these

financial intermediaries include reducing leverage, requiring them to hold enough liquidity to

cover short-term redemptions, restricting large exposures, and designing resolution plans to deal

with failures (ESRB, 2016).

        Likewise, some academic and international organizations (such as the International

Monetary Fund) have started to recognize that capital controls might be a desirable tool to

safeguard macroeconomic and financial stability (IMF, 2011, 2012). A counter-cyclical capital

control policy can smooth the impact of capital flows by limiting inflows during booms and

relaxing them during recessions (Forbes et al., 2015). For example, proposed measures to

manage capital flows include taxes on certain inflows, minimum holding periods, and currency-

specific reserve requirements, among other policies (OECD, 2015). However, their effectiveness

and general equilibrium consequences are yet to be understood.

        Counter-cyclical policies could be complemented with measures that help reduce and

manage liquidity crises. The large volatility of capital flows exposes financial markets to sudden

stops by foreign investors and capital flight by domestic agents. These events could cause a sharp

                                                 31
reduction of liquidity and drops in asset prices unless new funds are injected into the market. To

counteract these declines, government could have mechanisms in place to provide liquidity

support when market forces alone are not capable of counteracting the fall in liquidity during

crisis episodes. Liquidity provision instruments can include lender of last resort facilities, deposit

insurance schemes, emergency liquidity assistance, and contingent term repo facilities, among

others.

          Second, given the difficulties for many firms to raise capital internationally, one challenge

is how to assist firms that cannot do so and channel some of the gains from globalization to

those firms. 7 To the extent that the likelihood of firms to go abroad is related to country

characteristics, it would be useful to understand which specific attributes limit access to

international markets and implement reforms that promote internationalization. Likewise, it

would be helpful to understand the constraints that might exist in international financial centers

that could allow more cross-listings and capital raisings by smaller firms, and whether any

measure could assist in lowering transaction costs. Nevertheless, in competitive markets it might

prove difficult to lower those costs.

          Third, another important question that policy makers debate is how to encourage

institutional investors to diversify their portfolio allocations more broadly, act less pro-cyclically,

and invest at longer maturities. Designing monitoring tools for institutional investors implies a

tradeoff between the short-term monitoring of managers (which leads to shorter investments but

lowers risks) and giving them more freedom in the short term to maximize risk-adjusted returns

(which might encourage longer-term investments though with higher risks).

          The analysis in this paper raises some other important questions that could be addressed

in further research. Regarding firm financing and trading activity, it would be useful to

understand to what extent the internationalization of firms still harms rather than enhances


7A similar discussion has also emerged in the debate of how globalization has affected international trade and labor
markets, among others.


                                                        32
domestic markets. This issue includes analyzing why some firms see their trading activity migrate

abroad instead of having both domestic and international activity, or why the trading activity is

not concentrated in domestic markets where both domestic and international investors can

participate. Another question entails studying why the potential positive spillovers of

internationalization, such as increased linkages between domestic and international markets or

the introduction of new corporate governance practices by international firms, are not significant

enough to overcome the negative effect of migration. Moreover, it would be helpful to know to

what extent the financing of certain firms abroad has had positive spillovers to the financing of

other firms in domestic markets. To the extent that large firms raise capital from international

financiers rather than from domestic ones, the latter might be more willing to finance other

firms. Also, firms raising funds abroad could provide trade credit to firms that are more

financially constrained. However, these spillover effects have not been observed or documented

so far, at least in a systematic way.

        Another important topic for future research is to understand the incentives behind the

behavior of institutional investors. Despite being sophisticated, institutional investors often

follow simple investment strategies based on previous performance and tend to copy the

behavior of others. Agency problems that seem to play a key role in this type of behavior do not

appear trivial to eradicate. Likewise, research could also shed light on the reasons that make

managers not prone to diversify risks. It seems relevant to understand better why fund managers

do not share information and only concentrate their investments on a few large firms, despite

the large potential benefits from diversification, and the relative contribution of the different

factors behind their behavior.

        To conclude, the evidence discussed in this paper shows that financial globalization has

yielded bittersweet results. On the positive side, globalization has advanced significantly in recent

years and, as a consequence, the world financial system is much more integrated than a few

decades ago. On the negative side, not all countries and firms have been able to benefit from the

                                                 33
globalization process, and the volatility associated with it has impacted both participants and

non-participants in global financial systems. Depending on the initial expectations and the weight

assigned to the positive and negative effects, readers will conclude that financial globalization is,

so far, either a story of a glass half full or of a glass half empty.




                                                    34
References

Acharya, V., S. Cecchetti, J. De Gregorio, S. Kalemli-Özcan, P. Lane, and U. Panizza, 2015.
   Corporate Debt in Emerging Economies: A Threat to Financial Stability? Washington, DC: Brookings
   Institution.
Aggarwal, R., L. Klapper, and P. Wysocki, 2005. “Portfolio Preferences of Foreign Institutional
   Investors,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 29 (12), 2919-2946.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt, 2008. The Economics of Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Alaganar, V. and R. Bhar, 2001. “Diversification Gains from ADRs and Foreign Equities:
   Evidence from Australian Stocks,” Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and
   Money, 11 (1), 97-113.
Alfaro, L., G. Asis, A. Chari, and U. Panizza, 2017. “Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt in
   Emerging Markets,” CEPR Discussion Paper DP12038, Centre for Economic Policy
   Research.
Anderson, C., M. Fedenia, M. Hirschey, and H. Skiba, 2011. “Cultural Influences on Home Bias
   and International Diversification by Institutional Investors,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 35
   (4), 916-934.
Arena, M. and A. Roper, 2010, “The Effect of Taxes on Multinational Debt Location,” Journal of
   Corporate Finance, 16 (5), 637-654.
Arezki, R., G. Rota-Graziosi, and L. Senbet, 2013. “Capital Flight Risk,” Finance & Development,
   50 (3).
Arestis, P., S. Basu, and S. Mallick, 2005. “Financial Globalization: The Need for a Single
   Currency and a Global Central Bank,” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 27 (3), 507-531.
Avdjiev, S., B. Hardy, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and L. Servén, 2017. “Gross Capital Inflows to Banks,
   Corporates, and Sovereigns,” NBER Working Paper 23116, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Avdjiev, S., R. McCauley, and H. S. Shin, 2016. “Breaking Free of the Triple Coincidence in
   International Finance,” Economic Policy, 31 (87), 409-451.
Bae, K.-H., R. Stulz, and H. Tan, 2008. “Do Local Analysts Know More? A Cross-Country
   Study of the Performance of Local Analysts and Foreign Analysts,” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 88 (3), 581-606.
Baele, L., A. Ferrando, P. Hördah, E. Krylova, and C. Monnet, 2004. “Measuring Financial
   Integration in the Euro Area,” Occasional Paper Series 14, European Central Bank.
Ball, R., L. Hail, and F. Vasvari, 2017. “Equity Cross-Listings in the U.S. and the Price of Debt,”
   Review of Accounting Studies, forthcoming.
Baker, H., J. Nofsinger, and D. Weaver, 2002. “International Cross-Listing and Visibility,” Journal
   of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 37 (3), 495-521.
Bancel, F. and R. Mittoo, 2001. “European Managerial Perceptions of the Net Benefits of
   Foreign Stock Listings,” European Financial Management, 7 (2), 213-36.
Barro, R., G. Mankiw, and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995. “Capital Mobility in Neoclassical Models of
   Growth,” American Economic Review, 85 (1), 103-115.
Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza, 2000. “Finance and the Sources of Growth,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 58 (1-2), 261-300.
Bencivenga, V. and B. Smith, 1991. “Financial Intermediation and Endogenous Growth,” The
   Review of Economic Studies, 58 (2), 195-209.
Benos, E. and Weisbach, M., 2004. “Private Benefits and Cross-listings in the United States,”
   Emerging Markets Review, 5 (2), 217-240.
Beugelsdijk, S. and B. Frijns, 2010. “A Cultural Explanation of the Foreign Bias in International
   Asset Allocation,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 34 (9), 2121-2131.
Blake, D., L. Sarno, and G. Zinna, 2015. “The Market for Lemmings: The Herding Behavior of
   Pension Funds,” Discussion Paper PI-1408, The Pensions Institute.

                                                35
Bordo, M., B. Eichengreen, and J. Kim, 1999. “Was There Really an Earlier Period of
   International Financial Integration Comparable to Today?” in S. Lee (ed.), The Implications
   of the Globalization of World Financial Markets. Seoul: Bank of Korea.
Boyer, B., T. Kumagai, and K. Yuan, 2006. “How Do Crises Spread? Evidence from Accessible
   and Inaccessible Stock Indices,” Journal of Finance, 61 (2), 957-1003.
Broner, F., T. Didier, A. Erce, and S. Schmukler, 2013. “Gross Capital Flows: Dynamics and
   Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60 (1), 113-133.
Broner, F., T. Didier, S. Schmukler, and G. von Peter, 2017. “Global Capital Flows: The Big
   Sur?” Working Paper, Bank for International Settlements and World Bank.
Broner, F., G. Gelos, and C. Reinhart, 2006. “When in Peril, Retrench: Testing the Portfolio
   Channel of Contagion,” Journal of International Economics, 69 (1), 203-230.
Broner, F., A. Martin, and J. Ventura, 2010. “Sovereign Risk and Secondary Markets,” American
   Economic Review, 100 (4), 1523-1555.
Broner, F. and R. Rigobon, 2006. “Why Are Capital Flows So Much More Volatile in Emerging
   than in Developed Countries?” in R. Caballero, C. Calderón, and L. Céspedes (eds.), External
   Financial Vulnerability and Preventive Policies. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Broto, C., J. Díaz-Cassou, and A. Erce, 2011. “Measuring and Explaining the Volatility of Capital
   Flows to Emerging Countries,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 35 (8), 1941-1953.
Bruno, V. and H. S. Shin, 2017. “Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: A Firm-Level
   Analysis,” Review of Financial Studies, 30 (3), 703-749.
Caballero, J., U. Panizza, and A. Powell, 2016a. “Foreign Currency Corporate Debt in Emerging
   Economies: Where Are the Risks?” VOX, February 5.
Caballero, J., U. Panizza, and A. Powell, 2016b. “The Second Wave of Global Liquidity: Why
   Are Firms Acting Like Financial Intermediaries?” IDB Working Paper 641, Inter-American
   Development Bank.
Caldera Sánchez, A. and F. Gori, 2016. “Can Reforms Promoting Growth Increase Financial
   Fragility? An Empirical Assessment,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers 1340,
   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Calderón, C. and M. Kubota, 2013. “Sudden Stops: Are Global and Local Investors Alike?”
   Journal of International Economics, 89 (1), 122-142.
Calomiris, C., M. Larrain, and S. Schmukler, 2017. “Capital Inflows, Equity Issuance Activity,
   and Corporate Investment,” mimeo.
Calomiris, C. and L. Neal, 2013. “History of Financial Globalization,” in G. Caprio (ed.),
   Handbook of Key Global Financial Markets, Institutions, and Infrastructure. London:
   Elsevier.
Calvo, G., 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden
   Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, 1 (November), 35-54.
Calvo, G., A. Izquierdo, and L. Mejía, 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance
   of Balance-Sheet Effects,” Proceedings, issue June, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Caprio, G., P. Honohan, and J. Stiglitz, 2006. Financial Liberalization. Cambridge, MA:
   Cambridge University Press.
Cavallo, E. and J. Frankel, 2008 “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More Vulnerable to
   Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,” Journal of International Money and
   Finance, 27 (8), 1430-1452.
Cerutti, E., S. Claessens, and D. Puy, 2015. “Push Factors and Capital Flows to Emerging
   Markets: Why Knowing Your Lender Matters More than Fundamentals,” IMF Working
   Paper 15/127, International Monetary Fund.
Cetorelli, N. and S. Peristiani, 2015. “Firm Value and Cross Listings: The Impact of Stock
   Market Prestige,” Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 8 (1), 150.
CGFS (Committee on the Global Financial System), 2009. Capital Flows and Emerging Market
   Economies. Basel: Bank for International Settlements.

                                                36
Chari, A., and Henry, P., 2008. “Firm-Specific Information and the Efficiency of Investment,”
   Journal of Financial Economics, 87 (3), 636-655.
Chen, L., J. Ng, and A. Tsang, 2014. “The Effect of Mandatory IFRS Adoption on International
   Cross-Listings,” The Accounting Review, 90 (4), 1395-1435.
Chiang, T. and D. Zheng, 2010. “An Empirical Analysis of Herd Behavior in Global Stock
   Markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 34 (8), 1911-1921.
Chinn, M. and S. Quayyum, 2012. “Long Horizon Uncovered Interest Parity Re-Assessed,”
   NBER Working Papers 18482, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Choi, N. and R. Sias, 2009. “Institutional Industry Herding,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94 (3),
   469-491.
Chouinard, E. and C. D’Souza, 2004. “The Rationale for Cross-Border Listings,” Bank of Canada
   Review, 2003-2004 (Winter), 23-30.
Chui, M., I. Fender, and V. Sushko, 2014. “Risks Related to EME Corporate Balance Sheets:
   The Role of Leverage and Currency Mismatch,” BIS Quarterly Review September 2014, Bank
   for International Settlements.
Claessens, S., D. Klingebiel, and S. Schmukler, 2002. “The Future of Stock Exchanges in
   Emerging Economies: Evolution and Prospects,” in R. Litan and R. Herring (eds.),
   Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Claessens, S. and S. Schmukler, 2007. “International Financial Integration through Equity
   Markets: Which Firms from which Countries Go Global?” Journal of International Money and
   Finance, 26 (5), 788-813.
Coeuré, B., 2013. “The Way Back to Financial Integration,” speech at conference organized by
   the Banco de España and the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee, Madrid, March 21.
Coffee, J. 2002. “Racing Towards the Top? The Impact of Cross-listings and Stock Market
   Competition on International Corporate Governance,” Columbia Law Review, 102, 1757-1831.
Cowan, K., J. De Gregorio, A. Micco, and C. Neilson, 2008. “Financial Diversification, Sudden
   Stops, and Sudden Starts,” in K. Cowan, S. Edwards, and R. O. Valdes (eds.), Current
   Account and External Finance. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Dass, N., M. Massa, and R. Patgiri, 2008. “Mutual Funds and Bubbles: The Surprising Role of
   Contractual Incentives,” Review of Financial Studies, 21 (1), 51-99.
Davis, E., 2000. “Pension Funds, Financial Intermediation and the New Financial Landscape,”
   Discussion Paper PI-0010, Pensions Institute.
Della Croce, R., F. Stewart, and J. Yermo, 2011. “Promoting Longer-Term Investment by
   Institutional Investors: Selected Issues and Policies,” OECD Journal: Financial Market Trend
   2011, 1, 145-64.
Desai, M., C. Fritz Foley, and J. Hines, 2006. “The Demand for Tax Haven Operations,” Journal
   of Public Economics, 90 (3), 513-531.
Didier, T., C. Hevia, and S. Schmukler, 2012. “How Resilient and Countercyclical Were
   Emerging Economies to the Global Financial Crisis?” Journal of International Money and Finance,
   31 (8), 2052-2077.
Didier, T., R. Levine, and S. Schmukler, 2015. “Capital Market Financing, Firm Growth, and
   Firm Size Distribution,” Policy Research Working Paper 7353, World Bank.
Didier, T., R. Llovet Montanes, and S. Schmukler, 2017. “The International Financial Integration
   of East Asia and the Pacific,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 44 (C), 52-66.
Didier, T., R. Rigobon, and S. Schmukler, 2013. “Unexploited Gains from International
   Diversification: Patterns of Portfolio Holdings around the World,” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 95 (5), 1562-1583.
Doidge, C., 2004. “U.S. Cross-Listings and the Private Benefits of Control: Evidence from Dual-
   Class Firms,” Journal of Financial Economics, 72 (3), 519-553.
Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, K. Lins, D. Miller, and R. Stulz, 2009. “Private Benefits of Control,
   Ownership, and the Cross-Listing Decision,” Journal of Finance, 64 (1), 425-466.

                                                 37
Doidge, C., A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2004. “Why Are Foreign Firms Listed in the U.S. Worth
   More?” Journal of Financial Economics, 71 (2), 205-238.
Edwards, S., 2004. “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals
   and Sudden Stops,” IMF Staff Papers, 51 (0), 1-49.
Ehrmann, M., M. Fratzscher, R. Güürkaynak, and E. Swanson, 2011. “Convergence and
   Anchoring of Yield Curves in the Euro Area,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (1), 350-
   364.
Eichengreen, B., 2001. “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do the Cross-Country Studies Tell
   Us?” World Bank Economic Review, 15 (3), 341-365.
Eichengreen, B. and M. Bordo, 2003. “Crises Now and Then: What Lessons from the Last Era
   of Financial Globalization,” in P. Mizen (ed.), Monetary History, Exchange Rates and
   Financial Markets: Essays in Honor of Charles Goodhart. London: Edward Elgar Publisher.
Eichengreen, B., M. Mussa, G. Dell’ Ariccia, E. Detragiache, G. M. Milesi-Ferretti, and A.
   Tweedie, 1998. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical and Practical Aspects,” IMF
   Occasional Paper 172, International Monetary Fund.
ESRB (European Systemic Risk Board), 2016. “Macroprudential Policy Beyond Banking: An
   ESRB Strategy Paper,” ESRB Strategy Paper, European Systemic Risk Board.
Ferreira, M. and P. Matos, 2008. “The Colors of Investor’s Money: The Role of Institutional
   Investors around the World,” Journal of Financial Economics, 88 (3), 499-533.
Ferreira, M., P. Matos, J. Pereira, and P. Pires, 2017. “Do Locals Know Better? A Comparison of
   the Performance of Local and Foreign Institutional Investors,” Journal of Banking and Finance,
   82, 151-164.
Fischer, S., 1997. “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” speech at the IMF
   Seminar Asia and the IMF, Hong Kong, September 19.
Foerster, S. and A. Karolyi, 1999. “The Effects of Market Segmentation and Investor
   Recognition on Asset Prices: Evidence from Foreign Stocks Listing in the United States,”
   Journal of Finance, 54 (3), 981-1013.
Forbes, K., 2014. “Financial Deglobalization? Capital Flows, Banks, and the Beatles,” speech at
   Queen Mary University, London, November 18.
Forbes, K., M. Fratzscher, T. Kostka, and R. Straub, 2016. “Bubble Thy Neighbor: Portfolio
   Effects and Externalities from Capital Controls,” Journal of International Economics, 99 (C), 85-
   104.
Forbes, K., M. Fratzscher, and R. Straub, 2015. “Capital-Flow Management Measures: What Are
   They Good For?” Journal of International Economics, 96 (S1), S76-S97.
Forbes, K. and F. Warnock, 2012. “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and
   Retrenchment,” Journal of International Economics, 88 (2), 235-251.
Fuertes, A. and J. M. Serena, 2014. “Firms’ Financial Soundness and Access to Capital Markets,”
   Banco de España Financial Stability Review no 27.
Furceri, D., S. Guichard, and E. Rusticelli, 2012. “Episodes of Large Capital Inflows and the
   Likelihood of Banking and Currency Crises and Sudden Stops,” International Finance, 15 (1), 1-
   35.
Galati, G., A. Heath, and P. McGuire, 2007. “Evidence of Carry Trade Activity,” BIS Quarterly
   Review, Bank for International Settlements.
Gelos, G., 2011. “International Mutual Funds, Capital Flow Volatility, and Contagion - A
   Survey,” IMF Working Paper 11/92, International Monetary Fund.
Goldberg, L., J. Lothian, and J. Okunev, 2003. “Has International Financial Integration
   Increased?” Open Economics Review, 14, 299-317.
Gourinchas, P. and H. Rey, 2007. “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: U.S.
   External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” in R. Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account
   Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                                38
Gourinchas, P. and H. Rey, 2014. “External Adjustment, Global Imbalances and Valuation
   Effects,” Handbook of International Economics, 4, 585–645.
Gozzi, J., R. Levine, M. Martinez Peria, and S. Schmukler, 2015. “How Firms Use Domestic and
   International Corporate Bond Markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 58, 532-551.
Gozzi, J., R. Levine, and S. Schmukler, 2010. “Patterns of International Capital Raisings,” Journal
   of International Economics, 8 (1), 45-57.
Grinblatt, M. and M. Keloharju, 2001. “How Distance, Language, and Culture Influence
   Stockholdings and Trades,” Journal of Finance, 56 (3), 1053-1073.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, and R. Wermers, 1995. “Momentum Investment Strategies, Portfolio
   Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior,” American Economic Review, 85
   (5), 1088-1105.
Gudmundsson, M., 2008. “Financial Globalization: Key Trends and Implications for the
   Transmission Mechanism of Monetary Policy,” in Financial Market Developments and Their
   Implications for Monetary Policy. Basel: Bank for International Settlements.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales, 2004. “Does Local Financial Development Matter?” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (3), 929-969.
Hail, Luzi and C. Leuz, 2005. “Cost of Capital and Cash Flow Effects of U.S. Cross Listings,”
   Working Papers 05-2, University of Pennsylvania.
Hassan, M. K., B. Sanchez, and J. S. Yuc, 2011. “Financial Development and Economic Growth:
   New Evidence from Panel Data,” The Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, 51 (1), 88-104.
Henry, P., 2007. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” Journal of
   Economic Literature, 45 (4), 887-935.
Herrmann, D., T. Kang, and Y. Yoo, 2015. “The Impact of Cross-Listing in the United States on
   the Precision of Public and Private Information,” Journal of International Business Studies, 46 (1),
   87-103.
IMF (International Monetary Fund), 2011. Recent Experiences in Managing Capital Inflows - Cross-
   Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework. Washington, DC: IMF.
IMF, 2012. The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows - An Institutional View. Washington,
   DC: IMF.
IMF, 2014. Spillovers in International Corporate Taxation. Washington, DC: IMF.
IMF, 2015. “Corporate Leverage in Emerging Markets - A Concern?” in IMF Global Financial
   Stability Report October 2015: Vulnerabilities, Legacies, and Policy Challenges Risks Rotating to Emerging
   Markets. Washington, DC: IMF.
IMF, 2016. World Economic Outlook, April 2016: Too Slow for Too Long. Washington, DC: IMF.
IMF (International Monetary Fund), OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
   Development), and World Bank, 2015. Capital Market Instruments to Mobilize Institutional Investors
   to Infrastructure and SME Financing in Emerging Market Economies: Report for the G20. World Bank,
   Washington, DC; International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC; and OECD, Paris.
IRC Task Force on IMF issues (IRC), 2016. “Dealing with Large and Volatile Capital Flows and
   the Role of the IMF,” Occasional Paper Series 180, European Central Bank.
Jayaratne, J. and P. Strahan, 1996. “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
   Deregulation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (3), 639-670.
Jotikasthira, P., C. Lundblad, and T. Ramadorai, 2012. “Asset Fire Sales and Purchases and the
   International Transmission of Funding Shocks,” Journal of Finance, 67 (6), 2015-2050.
Joyce, J., 2011. “Financial Globalization and Banking Crises in Emerging Markets,” Open
   Economics Review, 22 (5), 875-895.
Kaminsky, G., R. Lyons, and S. Schmukler, 2004. “Managers, Investors, and Crises: Mutual Fund
   Strategies in Emerging Markets,” Journal of International Economics, 64 (1), 113-134.
Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart, 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-of-
   Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, 89 (3), 473-500.


                                                     39
Kaminsky, G. and S. Schmukler, 2008. “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: Financial
   Liberalization and Stock Market Cycles,” Review of Finance, 12 (2), 253-292.
Karolyi, A., 2004. “The Role of American Depositary Receipts in the Development of Emerging
   Equity Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86, 670-690.
Kim, E. and V. Singal, 2000. “Stock Market Openings: Experience of Emerging Economies,”
   Journal of Business, 73 (1), 25-66.
King, M. and D. Segal, 2009. “The Long-Term Effects of Cross-Listing, Investor Recognition,
   and Ownership Structure on Valuation,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22 (6), 2393-2421.
King, R. and R. Levine, 1993a. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,” The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 108 (3), 717-737.
King, R. and R. Levine, 1993b. “Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth: Theory and Evidence,”
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 32 (3), 513-542.
Kose, A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2009. “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal,”
   IMF Staff Papers, 56 (1), 8-62.
Kose, A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2010. “Financial Globalization and Economic
   Policies,” Handbook of Development Economics, 5, 4283-4359.
Kremer, S. and D. Nautz, 2013. “Causes and Consequences of Short-Term Institutional
   Herding,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 37 (5), 1676-1686.
Laeven, L., R. Levine, and S. Michalopoulos, 2015. “Financial Innovation and Endogenous
   Growth,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 24 (1), 1-24.
Lane, P. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti, 2007. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and
   Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of International
   Economics, 73 (2), 223-250.
Lang, M., K. Lins, and D. Miller, 2003. “ADRs, Analysts, and Accuracy: Does Cross-Listing in
   the U.S. Improve a Firm’s Information Environment and Increase Market Value?” Journal of
   Accounting Research, 41 (2), 317-345.
Larrain, M. and S. Stumpner, (2017). “Capital Account Liberalization and Aggregate
   Productivity: The Role of Firm Capital Allocation,” Journal of Finance, 72 (4), 1825-1858.
Lel, U. and D. Miller, 2008. “International Cross-Listing, Firm Performance, and Top
   Management Turnover: A Test of the Bonding Hypothesis,” Journal of Finance, 63 (4), 1897-
   1937.
Levchenko, A. and P. Mauro, 2007. “Do Some Forms of Financial Flows Protect from Sudden
   Stops?” World Bank Economic Review, 21 (3), 389-411.
Levine, R., 1991. “Stock Markets, Growth, and Tax Policy,” Journal of Finance, 46 (4), 1445-1465.
Levine, R., 1997. “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda,” Journal of
   Economic Literature, 35 (2), 688-726.
Levine, R., 2005. “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence,” in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf
   (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Levine, R., N. Loayza, and T. Beck, 2000. “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
   Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46 (1), 31-77.
Levine, R. and S. Schmukler, 2006. “Internationalization and Stock Market Liquidity,” Review of
   Finance, 10 (1), 153-187.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos, 1998. “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American
   Economic Review, 88 (3), 537-558.
Levy Yeyati, E., S. Schmukler, and N. van Horen, 2009. “International Financial Integration
   through the Law of One Price: The Role of Liquidity and Capital Controls,” Journal of
   Financial Intermediation, 18 (3), 432-463.
Levy Yeyati, E. and T. Williams, 2014. “Financial Globalization in Emerging Economies: Much
   Ado about Nothing?” Economia Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association,
   14 (Spring), 91-131.


                                               40
Lothian, J. and L. Wu, 2011. “Uncovered Interest-Rate Parity over the Past Two Centuries,”
   Journal of International Money and Finance, 30 (3), 448-473.
Madsen, J. and J. Ang, 2016. “Finance-Led Growth in the OECD since the Nineteenth Century:
   How Does Financial Development Transmit to Growth?” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
   98 (3), 552-572.
Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. and C. Tille, 2011. “The Great Retrenchment: International Capital Flows
   During the Global Financial Crisis,” Economic Policy, 26 (66), 285-342.
Mishkin, F., 2007. “Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39
   (2-3), 259-294.
Mishkin, F, 2009. “Globalization and Financial Development,” Journal of Development Economics, 89
   (2), 164-169.
Mody, A., and A. Murshid, 2005. “Growing Up with Capital Flows,” Journal of International
   Economics, 65, 249-6.
Moore, W., 2014. “Managing the Process of Removing Capital Controls: What Does the
   Literature Suggest?” Journal of Economic Surveys, 28 (2), 209-237.
Mougani, G., 2012. “An Analysis of the Impact of Financial Integration on Economic Activity
   and Macroeconomic Volatility in Africa within the Financial Globalization Context,”
   Working Paper Series 144, African Development Bank.
Nirei, M., T. Stamatiou, and V. Sushko, 2012. “Stochastic Herding in Financial Markets
   Evidence from Institutional Investor Equity Portfolios,” BIS Working Papers 371, Bank for
   International Settlements.
Obstfeld, M. 1994. “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American Economic Review,
   84 (5), 1310-1329.
Obstfeld, M., 1995. “International Capital Mobility in the 1990s,” in P.B. Kenen (ed.),
   Understanding Interdependence. Princeton, PA: Princeton University Press.
Obstfeld, M., 2012a. “Does the Current Account Still Matter?” American Economic Review, 102 (3),
   1-23.
Obstfeld, M., 2012b. “Financial Flows, Financial Crises, and Global Imbalances,” Journal of
   International Money and Finance, 31 (3), 469-480.
Obstfeld, 2015. “Trilemmas and Tradeoffs: Living with Financial Globalization,” in C. Raddatz,
   D. Saravia, and J. Ventura (eds.), Global Liquidity, Spillovers to Emerging Markets and Policy
   Responses. Santiago: Central Bank of Chile.
Obstfeld, M., and A. Taylor, 2003. “Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth,” in
   M. Bordo, A. Taylor, and J. Williamson (eds.), Globalization in Historical Perspective.
   Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, M., and A. Taylor, 2004. Global Capital Markets. New York, NY: Cambridge
   University Press.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development), 2011. “Getting the Most
   Out of International Capital Flows,” in OECD Economic Outlook, Volume, 2011, Issue 1.
   OECD: Paris.
OECD, 2014. “Are Institutional Investors the Answer for Long-Term Development
   Financing?” in Development Co-operation Report 2014: Mobilizing Resources for Sustainable
   Development. OECD: Paris.
OECD, 2015. The OECD’s Approach to Capital Flow Management Measures Used with a Macro-
   Prudential Intent: Report to G20 Finance Ministers, 16-17 April 2015, Washington, D.C. Paris:
   OECD.
Opazo, L., C. Raddatz, and S. Schmukler, 2015. “Institutional Investors and Long-Term
   Investment: Evidence from Chile,” Word Bank Economic Review, 29 (3), 479-522.
Pagano, M., A. Röell, and J. Zechner, 2002. “The Geography of Equity Listing: Why Do
   Companies List Abroad?” Journal of Finance, 57 (6), 2651-2694.


                                                41
Patro, D., 2006, “International Mutual Fund Flows,” mimeo, Office of the Comptroller of the
   Currency.
Pavel, C. and J. McElravey, 1990. “Globalization in the Financial Services Industry,” Economic
   Perspectives, May, 3-18.
Powell, A. 2014. Global Recovery and Monetary Normalization: Escaping a Chronicle Foretold?
   Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
Prasad, E., K. Rogoff, S. J. Wei, and A. Kose, 2003. “Effects of Financial Globalization on
   Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” IMF Occasional Paper 220, International
   Monetary Fund.
Puy, D., 2013. “Institutional Investors Flows and the Geography of Contagion,” Journal of
   International Money and Finance, 60 (C), 73-93.
Raddatz, C. and S. Schmukler, 2012. “On the International Transmission of Shocks: Micro-
   Evidence from Mutual Fund Portfolios,” Journal of International Economics, 88 (2), 357-374.
Raddatz, C. and S. Schmukler, 2013. “Deconstructing Herding: Evidence from Pension Fund
   Investment Behavior,” Journal of Financial Services Research, 43 (1), 99-126.
Raddatz, C., S. Schmukler, and T. Williams, 2017. “International Asset Allocation and Capital
   Flows: The Benchmark Effect,” Journal of International Economics, 108, 413-430.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales, 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth,” The American Economic
   Review, 88 (3), 559-586.
Ranciere, R., A. Tornell, and F. Westermann, 2006. “Decomposing the Effects of Financial
   Liberalization: Crises vs. Growth,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 30 (12), 3331-3348.
Reese, W. and M. Weisbach, 2002. “Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests, Cross-Listing
   in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66 (1),
   65-104.
Rodrik, R. and A. Subramanian, 2009. “Why Did Financial Globalization Disappoint?” IMF Staff
   Papers, 56 (1), 112-138.
Rothenberg, A. and F. Warnock, 2011. “Sudden Flight and True Sudden Stops,” Review of
   International Economics, 19 (3), 509-524.
Schmukler, S., 2004. “Financial Globalization: Gain and Pain for Developing Countries,”
   Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, 89 (2), 39-66.
Schmukler, S. and E. Vesperoni, 2006. “Financial Globalization and Debt Maturity in Emerging
   Economies,” Journal of Development Economics, 79 (1), 183-207.
Schularick, M. and T. Steger, 2010. “Financial Integration, Investment, and Economic Growth:
   Evidence from Two Eras of Financial Globalization,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92
   (4), 756-768.
Shin, H. S., 2012. “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium,” IMF Economic Review, 60 (2),
   155-192.
Sias, R., 2004. “Institutional Herding,” Review of Financial Studies, 17 (1), 165-206.
Sias, R., 2007. “Reconcilable Differences: Momentum Trading by Institutions,” Financial Review,
42 (1), 1-22.
Stavarek, D., I. Repkova, and K. Gajdosova, 2012. “Theory of Financial Integration and
   Achievements in the European Union,” in R. Matousek and D. Stavarek (eds.), Financial
   Integration in the European Union. Abingdon: Routledge.
Stein, J., 2005. “Why Are Most Funds Open-End? Competition and the Limits to Arbitrage,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (1), 247-272.
Stein, J., 2009. “Sophisticated Investors and Market Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 64 (4), 1517-
   1548.
Stiglitz, J., 2000. “Capital Market Liberalization, Economic Growth, and Instability,” World
   Development, 28 (6), 1075-1086.
Stulz, R., 1999. “Globalization, Corporate Finance and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of Applied
   Corporate Finance, 12 (3), 8-25.

                                                42
Stulz, R., 2005. “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, 60 (4), 1595-1638.
Tarashev, N., S. Avdjiev, and B. Cohen, 2016. “International Capital Flows and Financial
   Vulnerabilities in Emerging Market Economies: Analysis and Data Gaps,” Bank for
   International Settlements.
Tille, C. and E. van Wincoop, 2014. “International Capital Flows under Dispersed Private
   Information,” Journal of International Economics, 93 (1), 31-49.
Turk Ariss, R., 2016. “Legal Systems, Capital Structure, and Debt Maturity in Developing
   Countries,” Corporate Governance, 24 (2), 130-144.
Venezia, I., A. Nashikkar and Z. Shapira “Firm Specific and Macro Herding by Professional and
   Amateur Investors and Their Effects on Market Volatility,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 35,
   1599-1609.
Voronkova, S. and M. Bohl, 2005. “Institutional Traders’ Behavior in an Emerging Stock
   Market: Empirical Evidence on Polish Pension Fund Investors,” Journal of Business Finance and
   Accounting, 32 (7-8), 1537-1560.
World Bank, 2015. Long-term Finance: Global Financial Development Report 2015-2016. Washington,
   DC: Word Bank.
Xiao, Y., 2007. “What Do Bond Holdings Reveal about International Funds’ Preferences?”
   Emerging Markets Review, 8 (3), 167-180.




                                               43
                      Figure 1. Foreign Assets and Liabilities in Developed and Developing Countries
This figure displays the aggregate stock of foreign assets and liabilities for developed countries (Panel A) and developing
countries (Panel B) as percentage of GDP during 1970-2011. Foreign assets and liabilities include debt, equity, foreign direct
investment (FDI), and other investments.
                                                    Panel A. Developed Countries
               500%

               450%

               400%

               350%

               300%
   % of GDP




               250%

               200%

               150%

               100%

               50%

                 0%
                      1970
                      1971
                      1972
                      1973
                      1974
                      1975
                      1976
                      1977
                      1978
                      1979
                      1980
                      1981
                      1982
                      1983
                      1984
                      1985
                      1986
                      1987
                      1988
                      1989
                      1990
                      1991
                      1992
                      1993
                      1994
                      1995
                      1996
                      1997
                      1998
                      1999
                      2000
                      2001
                      2002
                      2003
                      2004
                      2005
                      2006
                      2007
                      2008
                      2009
                      2010
                      2011
                                                     Equity    Debt     FDI    Other

                                                    Panel B. Developing Countries

               140%


               120%


               100%


                80%
    % of GDP




                60%


                40%


                20%


                 0%
                      1970
                      1971
                      1972
                      1973
                      1974
                      1975
                      1976
                      1977
                      1978
                      1979
                      1980
                      1981
                      1982
                      1983
                      1984
                      1985
                      1986
                      1987
                      1988
                      1989
                      1990
                      1991
                      1992
                      1993
                      1994
                      1995
                      1996
                      1997
                      1998
                      1999
                      2000
                      2001
                      2002
                      2003
                      2004
                      2005
                      2006
                      2007
                      2008
                      2009
                      2010
                      2011




                                                      Equity    Debt     FDI   Other

               Source: Extended data from Lane and Milessi-Ferretti (2007).
                    Figure 2. Gross and Net Capital Flows across Country Groups Grouped by Income
This figure displays the median value of average gross capital flows (Panel A) and net capital flows (Panel B) across country
groups per decade. Values are reported separately for high-income, upper-middle-income, and lower-middle-income countries.
Gross capital flows are the sum of capital inflows and outflows. Net capital flows are capital inflows minus capital outflows.
Values are scaled by trend GDP.
                                                        Panel A. Gross Capital Flows
                        35                                                                                                         32.7

                        30

                        25

                        20
       % of GDP




                                                                                                                           15.1
                        15                                                                            13.6

                                                  9.5                     9.1
                        10         7.9                                                         7.8                   8.4
                                          7.0                                          7.2
                                                          4.9
                        5
                                                                  2.0
                        0
                                         1970s                   1980s                       1990s                         2000s
                             Lower-middle-income countries            Upper-middle-income countries          High-income countries


                                                         Panel B. Net Capital Flows
                   4
                             3.5
                  3.5               3.4

                   3                                    2.7
                  2.5
   % of GDP




                                                                                                                           1.9
                   2
                                            1.6
                  1.5                                                   1.4
                                                                                     1.3

                   1                                                                         0.8     0.9

                                                                0.4                                                0.6
                  0.5

                   0
                                   1970s                      1980s                        1990s                         2000s
                                                                                                                                  -0.2
              -0.5

                             Lower-middle-income countries        Upper-middle-income countries              High-income countries


                    Source: Broner et al. (2013).
                                                                   Figure 3. Use of Foreign Bond and Equity Markets by Firms
Panel A displays the average number of firms issuing foreign private bonds and equity per year during 2000-08. Panel B displays
the average amount raised per year during 2000-08 by the top five foreign bond and equity issuances as percentage of the total
amount raised in foreign bond and equity markets, respectively. Values are reported by country groups.

                                                                         Panel A. Number of Firms Using Bond and Equity Markets
                                                    120
                                                                                                                                              113

                                                    100
        Number of firms




                                                     80


                                                     60


                                                     40

                                                                                                                                                     17
                                                     20
                                                                  10
                                                                                                 5                        6
                                                                              2                         1                         1
                                                      0
                                                                       Asia                  Eastern Europe            Latin America         G-7 countries

                                                                                            Bond issuances     Equity issuances


                                                                       Panel B. Share of Amount Raised by Top Five Bond and Equity
                                                                                        Issuances in Foreign Markets

                                                                                                                                  99
                                                     100                        96
      % of total amount raised in foreign markets




                                                                                                                                                     87
                                                      90                                                86

                                                      80            74                           75                       75
                                                      70
                                                      60
                                                      50
                                                      40
                                                      30
                                                      20                                                                                      14
                                                      10
                                                          0
                                                                         Asia                 Eastern Europe            Latin America        G-7 countries
                                                                                     Top five bond issuances     Top five equity issuances

                                                    Source: Didier et al. (2015).
                                           Figure 4. Assets under Management by Institutional Investors
This figure displays the financial assets under management by pension funds, insurance companies, and investment funds. Only
data for OECD countries are included. Investment funds include both open-end and closed-end funds. Pension funds and
insurance companies’ assets include holdings in mutual funds, which might be counted also in investment funds.


                           100

                            90

                            80

                            70
   Trillion U.S. dollars




                            60

                            50

                            40

                            30

                            20

                            10

                             0
                                 2001


                                        2002


                                               2003


                                                        2004


                                                                  2005


                                                                             2006


                                                                                     2007


                                                                                               2008


                                                                                                          2009


                                                                                                                  2010


                                                                                                                         2011


                                                                                                                                2012


                                                                                                                                       2013
                                                  Pension funds          Insurance companies          Investment funds

                           Source: OECD (2014).
