                                        98620




URUGUAY SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC
              JUNE 2015
                               ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the members of the Uruguay Country Team from all Global Practices
and the IFC, as well as all the partners and stakeholders in Uruguay, who have contributed to
the preparation of this document in a strong collaborative process. (A full description of this
process is found in Annex I.) We are very grateful for the generosity in providing us with
substantive inputs, knowledge and advice, especially given the time limitations.

The team is co-led by Zeinab Partow (Sr. Economist, GMFDR), Alan Fuchs (Economist,
GPVDR) and Cristina Savescu (Country Economist, GMFDR). Zafer Mustafaoglu (Program
Leader) provided overall coordination. In addition, the following people provided substantive
inputs and guidance: Jesko Hentschel (Country Director), Augusto de la Torre (LAC Chief
Economist), Daniel Lederman (Lead Economist, LCRCE)), Frank Sader (Principal Strategy
Officer), Louise J. Cord (Practice Manager). Program leaders Julian Lampietti, Michele
Gragnolati, Rafael Rofman and Javier Suarez were essential to guiding the team in identifying
key constraints in their respective sectors. Our thanks also go to peer reviewers Luis Felipe
Lopez-Calva, Lead Economist; Peter Siegenthaler, Lead Economist; Norbert Matthias Fiess,
Principal Economist; and David Rosenblatt, Economic Adviser.

The table below identifies the full list of extended team members that have been consulted in
the preparation of this SCD, and who have contributed their time, expertise, and affiliations.

 CMU/Global Practice/Cross Cutting Solution     Team Member(s)
 Area/IFC
 Agriculture                                    Holger Kray

 Education                                      Diego Ambasz

 Governance                                     Daniel Alvarez

 IFC                                            Frank Sader, Alex Cantor

 Poverty                                        Carlos Rodríguez-Castelan, Maria Ana Lugo,
                                                Rafael de Hoyos Navarro
 Social Protection and Labor                    Rafael Rofman, Anil Onal (Aging)

 Trade and Competitiveness                      Alberto Criscuolo, Luis Rubalcaba, Graciela
                                                Miralles Murciego, Gonzalo Varela, Alberto
                                                Portugal, Jose Daniel Reyes
 Transport and ICT                              Gregoire Gauthier, Daniel Benitez

 Urban, Rural and Social Development            Catalina Marulanda, Sarah Keener, Joan Hoffman,
                                                Santiago Scialabba
 Energy                                         Lucia Spinelli

 Water                                          Remi Trier, Carmen Yee-Batista

 Environment                                    Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor

 Uruguay Country Office                         Ruxandra Burdescu, Valeria Bolla

 CMU team                                       Program Leaders plus Sabine Hader, Yanina
                                                Budkin, Eugenia Marinova
                                                          TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................ 1
I.         Introduction and Motivation ........................................................................................................... 6
II.        Country Context ............................................................................................................................ 12
      A.      Poverty, Shared Prosperity and Inclusiveness—Determinants and Trends .............................. 12
      B.      The Nature of Growth in Uruguay ............................................................................................ 33
III.          Sustaining Uruguay’s Inclusive Growth ................................................................................... 45
      A.      Implications of Smallness and Openness .................................................................................. 45
              i. Smallness, Openness, and Macroeconomic Management ..................................................... 45
              ii. Access to Finance ................................................................................................................. 50
              ii. Human Capital, Skills and Education ................................................................................... 51
              iii. Innovation and Productivity ................................................................................................ 56
              iv. Infrastructure ........................................................................................................................ 61
              v. Natural Resource Management ............................................................................................. 65
      B.      Challenges to Uruguay’s Social Compact................................................................................. 70
              i. An Aging Society................................................................................................................... 70
              ii. Social Mobility ..................................................................................................................... 73
              iii. Excluded Groups ................................................................................................................. 74
              iv. Jobs and Labor Markets ....................................................................................................... 75
      C.      Data and Knowledge Gaps........................................................................................................ 77
IV.           Tensions and Prioritization ....................................................................................................... 79
Annex I. Engagement and Planning...................................................................................................... 98
Annex II. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators and Growth Determinants ........................................ 100
Annex III. Note on Ethnic Minorities and Exclusion in Uruguay ...................................................... 102
Annex IV. Ethnic Minorities and Labor Markets in Uruguay ............................................................ 114
Annex V. Broad Fiscal Implications of an Aging Population in Uruguay ......................................... 122
Figures
Figure 1. High Annual Export Growth, 2004-12
Figure 2. Historically High GDP Volatility and Low Growth
Figure 3. Correlation between Argentine and Uruguay GDP
Figure 4. Share of Vulnerable Employment
Figure 5. Informal Employment
Figure 6. Perceived Levels of Corruption and Trust in Government
Figure 7. Socioeconomic Groups in Uruguay, 2002-13
Figure 8. Class Composition in Latin America
Figure 9. Urban, Rural, and National Poverty, 2002-2013
Figure 10. Poverty Incidence by Age Group in Latin America, 2013
Figure 11. Poverty Incidence by Age Group, Uruguay 2006-2013
Figure 12. Shared Prosperity in LAC and Other Selected Countries, 2006-12
Figure 13. Decomposition of the Total Changes in Moderate Poverty, 2003-12
Figure 14. Changes in Moderate Poverty by Income Sources, 2003-12
Figure 15. Poverty Rates and Skill Level, Selected Countries
Figure 16. Skill-composition of Bottom 40 Percent
Figure 17. Labor Force Participation of Bottom 40 and Top 60, 2013
Figure 18. Change in Labor Force Participation Rates for Bottom 40 and Top 60
Figure 19. Male Labor Force Participation
Figure 20. Female Labor Force Participation
Figure 21. Annualized Wage Growth by Skill Level, Selected Countries
Figure 22. Annualized Wage Growth by Sector and Skill Level
Figure 23. Changes in Hourly Wage (2007-2013)
Figure 24. Changes in Hourly Wage (2007-13) for the Bottom 40
Figure 25. Average Wage Changes in Non-Tradable Sectors (2007-13)
Figure 26. Average Wage Changes in Tradable Sectors (2007-13)
Figure 27. Recent Years Have Witnessed Wage Compression
Figure 28. Younger Workers Have Been Integrated Into the Labor Force at High Rates
Figure 29. Gini Coefficient, Uruguay, 2003-12
Figure 30. Gini Coefficient, Uruguay, LAC and OECD
Figure 31. Fiscal Policy: Gini Coefficients
Figure 32. Access to Drinking Water by Department
Figure 33. Access to Electricity by Department
Figure 34. Dropout Rates by Age and Income Quintile
Figure 35. Uruguay GDP Growth, 1961-2013
Figure 36. Employment and Unemployment
Figure 37. Saving, Investment and FDI
Figure 38. Comparative Investment/GDP ratios
Figure 39. Sectoral Contributions to Growth
Figure 40. Demand Components’ Contribution to Growth
Figure 41. Merchandise Trade as a Share of GDP vs. Income Level
Figure 42. Services Trade as a Share of GDP vs. Income Level
Figure 43. Selected Merchandise Exports, Growth and Global Shares
Figure 44. Technological Change in Agriculture, 1980-2010
Figure 45. Exports by Destination, Pre- and Post-Crisis
Figure 46. MFN Tariffs on Capital Goods Imports
Figure 47. Uruguay MFN Tariffs on Capital Goods Imports
Figure 48. Financial Development and Income Level
Figure 49. School Attendance by Age Group
Figure 50. Uruguay Has Lost Its Historical Education Advantage with Respect to LAC Average
Figure 51. Proportion of Ninis by Gender
Figure 52. Share of Youth Who are Ninis, by Income Decile and Gender
Figure 53. Education and Labor Market Status by Age and Gender
Figure 54. Uruguay Spends Little on R&D
Figure 55. Grain and Wood Production in Uruguay
Figure 56. Port Technical Efficiency in Latin America
Figure 57. Index of ICT Development
Figure 58. Broadband Downloading Speeds
Figure 69. Uruguay Age Pyramids, 1950, 2000, and 2050
Figure 60. Primary Fiscal Deficit Scenarios, 2010-2050
Figure 61. Public Debt Scenarios, 2010-2050

Tables
Table 1. Official Poverty Rates by Department, 2006-2013
Table 2. Growth Accounting: Growth Rates of Capital, Labor and TFP
Table 3. Uruguay. Over-Trading and Under-Trading Export Relationships
Table 4. Gross Enrollment Ratios (2003-2012)
Table 5. Prioritization

Boxes
Box 1. Equity Enhancing Reforms in Uruguay
Box 2. The Social Protection System in Uruguay
Box 3. Strengthening Uruguay’s Participation in Global Value Chains
Box 4. Energy and Telecoms
Box 5. Non-Renewable Resources
Box 6. Collective Bargaining in Uruguay
Box 7. Determinants of Growth in Uruguay


                                  Currency Equivalent
                          1 US$ = 26.7 Uruguayan Peso (UYU)
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
                                           MIC Middle-Income Country
ANCAP        Administración Nacional de    MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee
     Combustibles, Alcoholes y                   Agency
     Portland                              ninis Ni Estudian Ni Trabajan (out of
ANTEL        Administración Nacional de          school and out of work)
     Telecomunicaciones                    OECD         Organisation for Economic
BROU         Banco República Oriental            Co-operation and Development
     del Uruguay                           OSE Obras Sanitarias del Estado
CAF Corporación Andina de Fomento          PANES        Plan de Atención Nacional
CASEN        Caracterización                     a la Emergencia Social
     Socioeconómica Nacional               PER Public Expenditure Review
CEDLAS       Center for Distributive,      PISA Program for International Student
     Labor and Social Studies                    Assessment
CGS Credit Guarantee Schemes               PMR Product Market Regulation
CUTI Cámara Uruguaya de Tecnología         PPP Purchase Price Parity
     de la Información                     PPP Public-Private Partnership
ECH Encuesta Continua de Hogares           R&D Research and Development
ECLAC        Economic Commission for       SCD Systematic Country Diagnostic
     Latin America and the Caribbean       SIGA Sistema Nacional de Garantías
ENH Encuesta Nacional de Hogares           SME Small and Medium Enterprise
EU   European Union                        SNIS Sistema Nacional Integrado de
FDI Foreign Direct Investment                    Salud
FOB Free on Board                          SOE State-Owned Enterprise
FONASA       Fondo Nacional de Salud       SPCI Shared Prosperity Convergence
FSAP Financial Sector Assessment                 Index
     Program                               TEU Ton-Equivalent Unit
FTA Free Trade Agreement                   TFP Total Factor Productivity
FTAA Free Trade Area of the Americas       TISA Trade in Services Agreement
FTZ Free Trade Zone                        VAT Value-Added Tax
GDP Gross Domestic Product                 USD United States Dollar
GHG Greenhouse Gas                         UTE Usinas y Trasmisiones Eléctricas
ICT Information & Communication            WBG World Bank Group
     Technology                            WDI World Development Indicators
IDB Inter-American Development Bank        WEF World Economic Forum
IFC International Finance Corporation      WITS World Integrated Trade Solution
IMF International Monetary Fund
INAC Instituto Nacional de Carnes
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas
INEC Instituto Nacional de Estadística y
     Censos
INIA Instituto Nacional de Investigación
     Agrícola
IRP Impuesto a las Retribuciones
     Personales
IRPF Impuesto a la Renta de las
     Personas Físicas
LAC Latin America and Caribbean
MAGP         Ministerio de Agricultura,
     Ganadería y Pesca
Executive Summary


Over the past decade, Uruguay’s growth has been sustained, strong, and inclusive and
the country has bolstered its resilience and reduced its vulnerability to external shocks.
The expansion that followed the economic and financial crisis of 2001-02 was the first
significant acceleration in GDP growth since the early 1970s. Annual growth since 2003 has
averaged five percent, as ground lost during the crisis was more than recouped, and it has been
inclusive. Shared prosperity was boosted, as the mean per capita income of the bottom 40
percent rose far more rapidly than that of the population as a whole. Income inequality—while
high by the standards of the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD)—fell from a Gini coefficient of 45.5 in 2006 to 38.4 in 2013, and poverty has been
reduced by nearly two-thirds—from 35 percent in 2002 to 12 percent in 2013 (both are the
lowest in Latin America). Per capita GDP is among the highest in Latin America at $18,940 1
(current PPP $, 2013), and the country’s middle class, as a proportion of the population, is the
largest in the region. One of Uruguay’s greatest successes during this period has been the sharp
reduction in unemployment, a function of rapid job creation (labor force participation rates rose
to historical highs) accompanied by a growth in real wages.

                Poverty Headcounts, Selected Latin American and OECD Countries, 2010-2011
                    14
                    12
                    10
                     8
                     6
                     4
                     2
                     0
                                                                                                                                            Chile
                                                                                                          Brazil


                                                                                                                               Costa Rica




                                                                                                                                                                                 Turkey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          USA
                                                                                                                                                                        Israel




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Italy
                                                   Ecuador
                                                             Mexico



                                                                                      Spain




                                                                                                                                                                                                    UK
                                                                      Panama
                                                                               Peru


                                                                                              Dom. Rep.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Greece
                                                                                                                                                              Ireland
                                     El Salvador
                          Paraguay




                                                                                                                                                    Uruguay




                                                                                                                                                                                          Estonia
                                                                                                                   Argentina




                                                     Poverty headcount at $1.25                                                                Poverty headcount at $2

                   Source: PovcalNet: the on-line tool for poverty measurement developed by the Development
                   Research Group of the World Bank, http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet.


This strong economic performance and progress in attaining the World Bank’s twin
goals, has been framed by two fundamental features: Uruguay’s status as a small, open
economy and its strong social compact. As a small, open economy, Uruguay’s growth is a
function of the extent and quality of its integration into global markets, and the recognition of
this reality has propelled the country to integrate into global markets. Without recourse to
significant economies of scale and with a social compact that supports decent wages earnings,

1
    Unless otherwise specified, the currency used throughout this report is the US$.
                                                                                                                           1
Uruguay’s growth has to rely on the export of goods and services that embody high levels of
productivity. Over the past decade Uruguay has moved along this path, adding value to its
exports, diversifying into new products and markets, and promoting non-traditional services
exports. Moreover, with the bulk of its exports originating in its rich endowment of natural
resources (agriculture, including agri-business, forestry, livestock and tourism), Uruguay is
branding itself as a source of clean, green products, hoping to reap the benefits of exporting to
high-price niche markets, but also contributing to significant global public goods through
sustainable agriculture and low carbon emissions.

Uruguay’s significant achievements in poverty reduction and shared prosperity are in
good part a function of its social compact. The compact reflects a high societal value placed
on the reduction of poverty, on equity and decent labor conditions, as well as on a strong social
welfare system and an important role for the State in service delivery. Great importance has
been placed on ensuring that economic growth translates into good jobs and on improving
income distribution while maintaining a near-universal approach to social welfare. In practice,
this has translated into significant reforms over the past decade that have had important
redistributive and social benefits and that have ensured that the gains from strong growth are
shared widely across the population. These measures have included a progressive tax reform,
social security and health reforms, investment promotion favoring investments with job
creation, the reintroduction of Wage Councils with a focus on raising the lowest wages more
rapidly than the average, and the formalization of large sectors of hitherto informal workers,
including own-account and agricultural workers.

Challenges to the Growth Model

This model of employment creation through global market expansion, wage increases
aimed at lowering income inequality, and the progressive expansion of an encompassing
social welfare model faces a number of challenges. One challenge relates to global
conditions, which have turned less favorable, with softer commodity prices, lower demand,
and the likelihood of reduced international liquidity in the coming years. In Uruguay’s
immediate neighborhood, Argentina and Brazil are experiencing economic slowdowns. For
Uruguay this translates into the likelihood of reduced economic growth in the medium term.
GDP growth in 2014 is estimated at 3.5 percent, and projections are for further slowdowns in
2015 and 2016. In light of more constrained domestic, regional, and global economic
conditions, a central concern facing policymakers is the sustainability of Uruguay’s substantial
achievements in the reduction of poverty and inequality.

Second, with waning economic growth, coupled with an aging society, the financial
sustainability of the social model can become a challenge, and sustaining a social compact
built upon near-universal social benefits and a strong social welfare system becomes more
onerous. Population aging will have a sizable impact on Uruguay’s social security and health
care system. Preliminary analysis indicates that primary fiscal deficits will increase by 1.8
percentage points of GDP between 2014 and 2050, from 0.4 to 2.2 percent under the baseline
assumptions, and will also be reflected in higher debt levels, in the absence of further reforms.
                                               2
Third, a significant education and skills deficit is a challenge for the sustainability of
Uruguay’s accomplishments, particularly in the context of an advanced aging process
and a growth model that depends on high levels of productivity. While Uruguay’s human
capital and skills endowment has been the cornerstone of its ability to innovate in areas such
as agriculture, software, and nontraditional services, skills appear to be in increasingly short
supply, and there is a growing labor endowment gap with respect to some comparators.
Uruguay’s endowment of human capital appears to underlie its labor productivity gap with
respect to comparators and the OECD, affecting the ability to absorb and adopt new
technologies. The education system does not perform at a level commensurate with the needs
of the country in terms of growth based on high skills, innovation, and productivity.

Fourth, the quality of infrastructure is inadequate given the growth model; while exports
(particularly agricultural exports) have increased exponentially over the past decade, this
has not been met with increased investment or maintenance in transport infrastructure.
It is estimated that the volume of merchandise transported largely on the road network grew by
180 percent between 2000 and 2011, and projections point to an increase in the demand for
transport of between 68 and 135 percent for Uruguay’s key agricultural exports. However,
Uruguay suffers from an infrastructure gap that poses a constraint to continued high growth
rates. The quality of road and railroad infrastructure rank 90th and 103rd out of 144 countries,
respectively, in the World Economic Forum’s 2014 Global Competitiveness Index. Improved
infrastructure, logistics, and better trade facilitation are key to enhancing competitiveness, and
a seamless connection between farms, firms and global markets is essential.

Fifth, Uruguay suffers from a significant productivity gap relative to aspirational
comparators, and productivity upgrading through improved managerial quality and a
greater propensity to innovate in processes and products will be key to competing in
international markets. Although innovation in some value chains is high, indications are that
on average, Uruguay lags far behind Asian Tigers and some middle-income countries in its
ability to innovate at the technological frontier, and that it has fallen farther behind as it has
grown richer. Sustaining high productivity growth to support a growth model based on trade
integration and participation in global value chains will require closing the technology and
innovation gap, improving production and marketing processes, cultivating entrepreneurship,
adaptability, and nimbleness, ensuring adequate access to finance, as well as upgrading
institutions and markets. However, in terms of innovation, Uruguay ranks 86th out of 144
countries (Global Competitiveness Report, 2014-2015), and innovation explains less than 10
percent of total factor productivity (TFP) growth in the country, compared to more than 40
percent in high-productivity growth countries such as Finland, Ireland, Korea, and Singapore
when they had per capita incomes levels similar to Uruguay’s. Uruguay’s spending on research
and development (0.4 percent of GDP) is significantly less than OECD countries (2.2 percent)
and below some Latin American countries with a lower GDP per capita.

Additionally, a number of tensions in Uruguay’s growth model are emerging. One such
tension is that between a growth model based on high skills, productivity, and innovation and
Uruguay’s social compact, which focuses on equity. Over the short term an innovation-driven
                                                3
growth model may result in increased inequality as skill premia rise, although over the longer
term the spillovers from stronger growth and additional investment in skills—mediated by a
progressive social compact—may be expected to have a net positive impact on inclusion. On
the other hand, the aspiration of rising wages in the future, especially for the lower income
groups, will need to take into account productivity changes.

The importance of a massive push in terms of education and skills emerges as critical to
sustaining the advances in both growth and the twin goals that have characterized the
past decade, but this is confronted with significant disparities and deficiencies in the school
system, particularly at the secondary level. And while Uruguay’s advances in reducing poverty
and enhancing inclusion are very considerable, children and youth suffer disproportionately
from exclusion, in terms of incomes and education in particular. Low social mobility, driven
by highly unequal education outcomes across income groups is another major concern. The
result is clearly untenable in terms of the social compact and the needs of an aging society, and
cracks are already emerging, as illustrated by a substantial number of marginalized youth who
are not in school or at work. There is also some friction between Uruguay’s significant reliance
on its natural resources as the foundation for export expansion and its objective of increasingly
exploiting a “green” niche in global markets. Resolving these tensions in ways that support a
deepening of the social compact without undermining the engines of growth will determine the
sustainability of Uruguay’s achievements.

Priorities and the Way Forward: Global Integration with Equity

Following a decade of strong growth accompanied by important social progress, Uruguay
seems to have reached a juncture where it needs to reinvigorate its development model
by strengthening its focus on global integration with equity. A first ingredient of such a
strategy is to stimulate productivity growth in a way that ensures broad social participation in
the resulting benefits. The requirements imposed by global integration with high productivity
and value addition on the one hand, and by a wage bargaining model that has helped to ensure
greater income equality on the other, mean that a massive education and skill-building effort,
with particular emphasis on those who need them most, is essential. Removing bottlenecks to
greater connectivity and integration into global markets through enhanced transport
infrastructure is another priority. With the bulk of its exports originating in its rich endowment
of natural resources, Uruguay can use its innovations in sustainable agriculture and resource
use to promote itself as a source of clean, green products, translating this asset into greater
value addition and the possibility of capturing premiums in high-price export markets.

A second ingredient of such a renewed strategy is adaptation of the social compact to a
changing reality. As Uruguay has advanced in reducing poverty and enhancing equity, other
challenges have come to light and will need to be addressed. These include the need for a
greater emphasis on early childhood development in order to combat the impacts of child
poverty and to ensure equality of opportunity. Poverty is more prevalent among children than
adults, and although poverty declined in all age groups in recent years, it fell faster for adults
and the elderly than for children, resulting in a larger proportion of the poor being concentrated
                                                4
in the 0-18 year old group. Another major concern is the low social mobility associated with
youth exclusion and poor educational outcomes. Unemployment is far more prevalent among
young people than it is in older cohorts. The social welfare model will need to shift to address
these rising challenges.




                                               5
                      Uruguay Systematic Country Diagnostic

   I.      Introduction and Motivation

1.      This Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) seeks to identify the opportunities and
critical binding constraints that face Uruguay in achieving sustainable progress towards
ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. It is intended to stimulate an open
and forward-looking dialogue between the World Bank Group, the Uruguayan Government,
and the broader public. It is a joint product of the World Bank Group and has included
consultations with the national authorities, members of academia, civil society, and other
stakeholders. Following this introduction, Chapter II describes the country context,
characterizing the main features of poverty, inclusion, and growth. Chapter III discusses the
implications of being a small, open country for sustainable, inclusive growth on the one hand,
and the repercussions of Uruguay’s social compact and strong premium placed on an equitable,
homogeneous society, on the other. The key constraints facing Uruguay in terms of poverty
reduction, inclusiveness, growth, and sustainability emerge from this discussion. Section IV
prioritizes these constraints in the context of emerging tensions or tradeoffs that inhere in
Uruguay’s social and economic realities.

2.       Uruguay today stands out in Latin America for its high per capita income, low
inequality, low poverty, and virtual absence of indigence. Uruguay has a long history as an
egalitarian society with a strong welfare state and powerful unions. As a proportion of the total
population, the size of Uruguay’s middle class is the largest in Latin America, encompassing
well over half the population. The country ranks at or near the top of Latin America on many
measures of well-being, including the Human Development Index (3rd in region after Chile
and Argentina) and the Human Opportunity Index, where it is at the top of the region. It ranks
third on the Index of Economic Freedom, after Chile and Colombia. The stability of its
institutions and low levels of corruption are reflected in a high degree of trust in government
by citizens.

3.      Two defining characteristics—the country’s smallness and openness, and its
strong and deeply rooted social compact—help explain Uruguay’s achievements in the
areas of growth, poverty reduction, and shared prosperity as well as future opportunities
and challenges. Uruguay’s population (3.4 million) is slightly smaller than that of Panama and
half that of the city of Bogota, while in its own neighborhood, Brazil and Argentina have
economies that are 40 and 11 times the size of Uruguay’s, respectively. It is also a highly
urbanized country: 95 percent of the populace lives in urban areas, including 52 percent that
lives in Montevideo, the capital.
4.      Uruguay has emerged as a successful exporter, behind only Panama and Peru in
the region over the past decade in terms of export growth, and compares favorably to
Asian counterparts (see Figure 1), with an export basket grounded in its comparative
advantage of natural resources. Nevertheless, smallness and openness can have adverse
implications in terms of volatility and exposure to shocks, in terms of the options for
diversification, as well as the limitations arising from the inability to benefit from economies
of scale.



                                               6
                                                                       Figure 1. High Annual Export Growth, 2004-12
5.      Uruguay’s size and increasing           12
global       integration       render      it
                                                10
particularly sensitive to conditions in
the global economy and to those in its           8
neighborhood. Historically, this has             6
been reflected by high volatility and low        4
growth (see Figure 2) as international
                                                 2
commodity prices and fluctuations in
capital flows, upon which Uruguay                0
depends to a large extent, have had a
particularly strong impact on its
economic performance. Moreover, in
addition to these typical external Source: World Bank, WDI.
disturbances faced by small, open
economies, Uruguay is subject to a number of additional idiosyncratic shocks stemming from
its much larger neighbors, Brazil, and especially, Argentina. This is illustrated by a high
correlation between GDP growth rates (and the business cycles) of Uruguay and Argentina,
although this has declined in recent years (see Figure 3). The two deepest crises in recent
Uruguayan history have followed on crises in Argentina. Uruguay is also exposed to climate
change, further heightening its vulnerability. Building resilience to these various sources of
volatility is essential to protect the achievement in poverty reduction and equity.

 Figure 2. Historically High GDP Volatility and                                 Figure 3. Correlation of De-trended GDP between
 Low Growth                                                                     Uruguay and Argentine

                          3

                         2.5
 GDP Growth volatility




                          2
                                              Argentina
                               Uruguay
                         1.5

                          1

                         0.5       OECD
                                                   LAC
                                               L
                          0
                               0          2        4      6        8   10
                                              Mean GDP Growth, %


 Note: Data are for 1961-2013, covering middle-income and                       Note: De-trended quarterly GDP, using the Cristiano-
 high-income countries with available data in Latin America                     Fitzgerald filter. The correlation coefficient between
 and the Caribbean (LAC), Organisation for Economic Co-                         Uruguay and Argentina GDP is 0.66 for the 2003-2013
 operation and Development (OECD, and East Asia. Real                           period, down from 0.88 during 1990-2002.
 GDP growth rate is a 3-period centered moving average.                         Source: Staff calculations.
 Source: World Bank, WDI.


6.      Smallness also implies limitations to the potential for economic diversification.
Uruguay cannot aspire to diversify its economy to the same extent as a larger country such as
Brazil, Mexico or the United States. It is constrained to choose within a more limited spectrum
of options, grounded in its comparative advantage. Similarly, a lack of economies of scale

                                                                            7
affects costs throughout the economy: due to fixed costs, the provision of many services is
more expensive than it would otherwise be. For instance, the public sector in small states—
including in Uruguay—is often larger, per capita or as a proportion of GDP, than it is in larger
states. Again, this implies that it is difficult for a small country such as Uruguay to compete on
the basis of costs.
7.     As Uruguay cannot easily compete in the world on the basis of lowering costs
through increasing scale, it must do so with higher levels of productivity and value
addition. Thus, issues related to human capital, skills, and innovation are particularly
important. Similarly, in a country where the bulk of exports derives from the natural resource
base—agriculture and agro-industries—sustainable resource management and climate change
adaptation and mitigation are critical to sustained productivity and competitiveness. Indeed,
Uruguay has sought to develop strategies to simultaneously conserve its vital natural wealth
while expanding low carbon growth strategies in agriculture that embody significant
innovation as well as market opportunities globally in response to increasingly aware and
demanding consumers.

8.      The second characteristic feature of Uruguay is its deeply ingrained social
compact, which places a high value on the reduction of poverty and on equity and decent
labor market conditions. A social compact can be considered across a variety of sometimes
overlapping dimensions: (a) satisfactory material conditions, such as employment, income,
health, education, and housing; (b) solidarity, reflected in social networks that generate shared
values that influence democratic participation and adherence to legal norms;
(c) inclusion, as reflected in integration in civil society and the existence of a functioning social
protection network; (d) equality in terms both of access to opportunities and in material
circumstances; and (e) social safety and order. Expressed in another way, the social compact
may be understood as the ability to achieve economically effective and socially legitimate
policies and public-private cooperation. This fosters a solid democracy and institutions that are
able to deliver public goods necessary for the development of new growth activities and broad
(and broadly accepted) social policies.
9.      Reflecting its strong social compact, Uruguay stands out in Latin America for its
high per capita income, low poverty, and virtual absence of indigence as well as low
inequality. Uruguay also has the region’s largest middle class as a proportion of the total
population, at 56 percent. Even relative to a number of high-income OECD countries, Uruguay
performs well in poverty indicators, although not in terms of inequality. These achievements
are the results of over a century’s worth of pioneering social policies that represent an important
aspect of the country’s strong social compact. Uruguay’s social security system—whose
origins can be traced back to the 1800s—was one of the first and most comprehensive in Latin
America; by 1920 it covered a significant coverage portion of the working population,
including teachers, public sector employees, and private sector workers (Rofman and Carranza,
2005). Ethnically, Uruguayan society is relatively homogeneous, with close to 94 percent of
the population identifying itself as white, while around 8 and 5 percent self-identify as of
African and indigenous descent, respectively.2

10.    Labor policies provide higher quality jobs for Uruguayan workers than do
conditions for workers in the rest of the region. The rate of vulnerable employment—i.e.,

2
  Respondents to the household survey are permitted to identify themselves with more than one ethnicity, thus
the sum is over 100 percent.
                                                       8
the number of own-account workers and unpaid family workers as a share of total
employment—is low, signaling that the quality of jobs available is relatively high (see Figure
4). Informal employment is the lowest in the region, and stood at 25.6 percent of total
employment in 2012, following successful efforts by the State to register domestic employees
and agricultural workers, sectors that have traditionally been characterized by a high degree of
informality (see Figure 5). A strong welfare state is accompanied by powerful unions; over the
past decade, unionization has tripled from about 110,000 in 2003 to over 350,000 in 2013 or
about 21 percent of employed workers (US Department of State, 2014) and the reported
collective bargaining coverage for Uruguay, at 89 percent (2007) of all wage and salaried
earners, remains considerably higher than that of most countries in the region, and is similar to
levels in OECD countries.

11.     An aging population is another distinctive feature of Uruguayan society with
important ramifications for the country’s social compact. Uruguay is at a more advanced
stage in its demographic transition than its peers in the region, and in this respect, is more
similar to Eastern European countries. The number of people 65 years or older grew from 8
percent of the total population in 1950 to 14 percent in 2010, and is expected to reach nearly
30 percent by 2100. Conversely, the 15 and under population is shrinking, from 28 percent of
the total population in 1950 to approximately 23 percent in 2010, and is expected to decline to
close to 15 percent by 2100. A large and growing aging population, in the context of a strong
social compact, generates expectations for ever-greater health and pension coverage and
quality. There may also be important consequences for intergenerational equity if the pressure
to provide services for the elderly is resolved at the expense of younger and future generations.

 Figure 4. Share of Vulnerable Employment                               Figure 5. Informal Employment, % of Total
 2012 or latest available                                               2010-2014 (latest available)

   Honduras                                                              80
       Bolivia
     Ecuador                                                             70
        Brazil
         Chile                                                           60
    Colombia
   Nicaragua                                                             50
         Peru
                                                                         40
    Paraguay
   Costa Rica                                                            30
  Guatemala
  El Salvador                                                            20
    Dom Rep
          LAC                                                            10
      Mexico
     Panama                                                               0
                                                                                                              Costa Rica




                                                                                                                                                                                              Peru
                                                                                                                                                                  Chile
                                                                                                                                             Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                       Colombia


                                                                                                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                                     Panama
                                                                               Uruguay
                                                                                         Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                   Paraguay




     Uruguay
                                                                                                                                 Dom. Rep.
                                                                                                                           LAC




   Argentina
        OECD
                 0   10      20      30     40      50         60


 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (database)            Note: LAC average for 13 countries, non-agricultural
                                                                        informal employment in 2012. Source: ILO FORLAC for
                                                                        all countries except Costa Rica where the source is INEC,
                                                                        and Chile, where the source is INEG. Data is for 2010 in
                                                                        the Dominican Republic; 2011 in Paraguay; 2012 in
                                                                        Argentina, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay; 2013 in
                                                                        Costa Rica and Colombia and 2014 in Chile and Panama.




                                                                    9
12.     Uruguay’s institutional capital—another aspect of the social compact—is high not
only in comparison with Latin America, but also with Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries. People have considerable trust in
government and the perception of corruption is low. The State is widely recognized as
trustworthy and effective in the delivery of public goods, and society has explicitly voiced its
preference for having the State play an active and expansive role in most public service sectors.
This trust is a reflection of the country’s tradition for consensus-based policies and of the strong
performance of the public sector in ensuring nearly universal coverage and adequate quality
and transparency in the provision of services. Figure 6 shows two subjective measures of
government performance: perceived governmental corruption and confidence (or trust) in
government. Fewer than 40 percent of people say that they believe corruption is widespread in
government. This is by far the lowest score in the region, and more than 20 percentage points
lower than in the second-lowest scoring country, Brazil. It is significantly lower than the OECD
average (56 percent). Uruguay also has the highest levels of confidence in government for the
region, with almost two-thirds of people saying that they trust national government (compared
to 41 percent of people in OECD member countries). Trust in government is one of the most
important foundations upon which the legitimacy and sustainability of political systems are
built.


Figure 6. Perceived Levels of Corruption and Trust in Government
 %




                                    Perceived Govermment Corruption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Confidence in Government
  90                                                                                                                                                                                                                70
  80                                                                                                                                                                                                                60
  70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
  60
  50                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
  40                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
  20
  10                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                        Ecuador



                                                                                                                                                                                                          Uruguay
                               Colombia




                                                                                 Bolivia
       Honduras



                                          Guatemala




                                                                                                     Venezuela



                                                                                                                                      Chile
                                                                                                                                              El Salvador




                                                                                                                                                                                           OECD average
                                                             Paraguay




                                                                                                                                                                                  Brazil
                                                      Peru


                                                                        Panama




                                                                                                                 Mexico
                                                                                                                          Nicaragua
                  Costa Rica




                                                                                           Dom Rep




                                                                                                                                                            Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OECD average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Venezuela




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dom Rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Uruguay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Brazil



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bolivia



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          El Salvador




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mexico


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Guatemala


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Chile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nicaragua




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Paraguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Panama




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Costa Rica




Source: OECD/ECLAC (2014), from Gallup Organization (2013), Gallup World Monitor (database).


13.     Finally, a stable democracy forms a central anchor of the social compact. Uruguay
has Latin America’s oldest two-party political system, democratic institutions, a long-standing,
broadly based, and effective social welfare system, and a deeply ingrained preference for
equality and political consensus—all somewhat unique in the region. In 2004, the Uruguayan
electorate in 2004 voted into power a center-left coalition, the Frente Amplio (FA); the 2002
crisis, with soaring poverty rates and unemployment afflicted more than 40 percent of the
working force, may have contributed. The FA won its third successive election in November
2014. It is a reflection of the stability of Uruguay’s democracy that this shift away from the
two parties (the Blancos and the Colorados) that had dominated the political scene for nearly
200 years did not generate significant disruptions in the post-crisis period, and that institutional
continuity was ensured.

14.   Smallness, openness, and a society with a strong and progressive social compact
have played a central role in the significant achievements Uruguay has made toward the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
twin goals. The need to focus on productivity and value addition by virtue of being a small
open economy had allowed an improved correspondence between existing skills and jobs,
resulting in efficiency gains and higher wages. A progressive social compact ensures that the
benefits of growth are shared more equitably across the population. With a negligible rate of
extreme poverty and good performance in promoting shared prosperity—although challenges
remain—the relevant questions to be addressed by this Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
relate to the sustainability of the processes that have led to such success.

15.     It can be argued that since the 2002 crisis and until recently, Uruguay’s two
characteristics have been mutually supportive: the need to tackle the dramatic rise in
poverty and vulnerability resulting from the 2002 crisis was supported by domestic policies
that addressed social imperatives as well as imbalances and constraints to growth in a context
of very favorable external conditions. Yet inherent in these two characteristics is the possibility,
or probability, of serious challenges in the future, particularly as external conditions turn less
favorable and as domestic pressures—including those associated with an aging population—
emerge. Over the past decade, Uruguay has succeeded in balancing the demands of a strong
social compact with those emerging from its reality as a small and open economy. It has been
possible to support poverty reduction and improved equity, perhaps at the cost of some loss of
economic efficiency, principally because economic growth has been so robust. How easy will
it be to accomplish this over the next few years, as both domestic and external conditions
change and economic constraints become more binding?

16.     The SCD addresses this and related questions, helping to frame the constraints to
sustainability of Uruguay’s achievements and to foster the achievement of the twin goals.
As a small open economy, how has Uruguay managed to circumvent the economics of scale
issue that hampers diversification and raises costs, and what may be the emerging challenges?
Similarly, the fixed costs of providing some key services in a small economy often impact
production costs as inputs are more expensive than they are in larger markets; how has Uruguay
addressed this constraint?

17.      Similarly, the future of Uruguay’s social compact raises a number of questions:
What has been the key to the movement out of poverty and is the pace of poverty reduction
likely to continue? Is equality of opportunity assured? Who are the remaining poor and is a
broad social protection system adequate to reach remaining excluded groups—and, if not, what
else is required?

18.     Tensions and tradeoff are likely to emerge between the two defining national
characteristics. One tradeoff may be between the importance of competitiveness to a small,
open economy and the centrality of a highly regulated labor market that ensures decent wages
and working conditions as elements of the social compact. Another is the need to balance
economic efficiency with the social preference for a large role for the State. And in relation to
Uruguay’s demographic transition, will tensions emerge between the demands of an aging
society and the coming reality of a smaller work force as the working-age population starts to
decline? These questions and tensions, as well as others identified in the analysis, will guide
the SCD discussion as it moves from a description of the country context to an identification
of the key challenges facing Uruguay in sustaining its achievements, and will inform the
identification of priorities.


                                                11
                  II.          Country Context

A.                      Poverty, Shared Prosperity and Inclusiveness—Determinants and Trends

19.     Uruguay has all but eliminated extreme poverty and has seen moderate poverty
decline significantly in the last decade (see Figure 7). Close to one million people have been
lifted out of poverty, recouping the ground lost during the crisis of 2001-2002. By 2013, only
12 percent of the population lived below the official poverty line, less than one-third of the rate
observed seven years earlier. Extreme poverty declined even more, to 0.5 percent, representing
less than one-ninth the rate in 2004, the year in which poverty levelled off after the 2001-2002
crisis. Nevertheless, poverty reduction has slowed since 2008.

20.     In the last 10 years the size of the middle class has grown steadily, and today
represents the largest socioeconomic group in Uruguay. In 2002, 42 percent of Uruguayans
were living on incomes between $10-50 per person per day3 (in PPP 2005 values), the World
Bank’s economic definition of the middle class (Ferreira et al. 2013). By 2013 more than 60
percent of the population belonged to this group (see Figure 8). This implies that close to
300,000 Uruguayans have joined the middle class during the recent growth spurt, making
Uruguay the country with the largest middle class in the region (in relative terms), and together
with Argentina, one of only two countries in the region where the middle class composes more
than half the population. The vulnerable—defined as those with incomes between $4-10 per
day—account for 28 percent of the population. They compose the second largest income strata
in the population, and are at high risk of slipping back into poverty in the event of shocks.


    Figure 7. Socioeconomic Groups: Uruguay, 2002-13                                                         Figure 8. Class Composition in Latin America,
                                                                                                             Selected Countries, 2012
                  60
                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                               90
                  50
                                                                                                               80
                  40                                                                                           70
    Headcount %




                                                                                                               60
                  30                                                                                           50
                                                                                                               40
                  20                                                                                           30
                                                                                                               20
                  10                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                0
                  -
                                                                                                                        Mexico




                                                                                                                       Panama
                                                                                                                     Honduras


                                                                                                                      Colombia




                                                                                                                      Paraguay
                                                                                                                    Guatemala
                                                                                                                     Nicaragua


                                                                                                                             DR


                                                                                                                       Ecuador


                                                                                                                           Peru




                                                                                                                     Argentina
                                                                                                                    El Salvador




                                                                                                                     Costa Rica
                                                                                                                          Brazil

                                                                                                                           Chile
                                                                                                                         Bolivia




                                                                                                                       Uruguay
                        2002

                                2003

                                       2004

                                              2005

                                                     2006

                                                            2007

                                                                   2008

                                                                          2009

                                                                                 2010

                                                                                        2011

                                                                                               2012

                                                                                                      2013




                               Middle Class                                  Vulnerable
                               Poor                                          Moderate Poor Official
                               Extreme Poor Official                                                                  Poor     Vulnerable    Middle Class    Rich



    Source: Own calculations based on data of SEDLAC and ECH, 2002-                                          Source: Own calculations based on data of SEDLAC.
    2013.
    Note: Data correspond to Montevideo and urban areas with more than 5,000 inhabitants. Poverty, vulnerability and middle class estimates
    based on World Bank definitions (poverty line = $4 USD per day, Vulnerable are those living on incomes between $4 and $10 USD per day,
    middle class are those living with $10 to $50 USD per day, and rich are those with more than $50 USD per day).




3
    Unless otherwise specified, the currency used throughout this report is the US$.
                                                                                                      12
21.    A distinguishing feature of poverty in Uruguay relative to the Latin America and
Caribbean (LAC) region is that poverty is more of an urban phenomenon than a rural
one (see Figure 9). This may be explained in part by the facts that 95 percent population lives
in urban areas, and that the average family farm is more than 200 hectares (ha) in size and
engages in production for the market rather than in subsistence farming. Nevertheless, while
they may be physically large relative to the regional average, family farms can be economically
small and vulnerable to changing market conditions or climate.

22.     Although average poverty is low in Uruguay, considerable regional variation
exists. For example, in the department of Maldonado, only 3 percent of the population lived in
poverty in 2013 (see Table 1), whereas in Montevideo the poverty rate was closer to 16 percent,
and in places like Rivera or Artigas it was 18 percent. There is therefore scope for regional
convergence strategies.

23.     Despite success in reducing absolute poverty rates when compared to its regional
peers, in the past few years child and youth poverty has declined more slowly than adult
and elderly poverty. The number of poor children in Uruguay, as measured by the national
poverty line, has fallen by more than one-half between 2006 and 2011, as has the incidence of
poverty among children; rates of child poverty are the lowest in the region (Figure 10). Despite
these notable achievements, the incidence of poverty remains highest among children and
youth – and lowest among the elderly (see Figure 11) and is high compared the levels in OECD
countries. In 2011, 44 percent of children aged 14 or under were deprived of at least one basic
need, compared to 34 percent for the population as a whole (INE-PP, 2013). In the same year,
close to 57 percent of all individuals living in moderate poverty (under $4 dollars a day) were
under 18 years of age, compared to 35 percent in the 24 to 64 year group, and 2.5 percent of
those aged 65 and above. As a result of strong real wage growth, the high coverage of
contributory and non-contributory pensions, and the indexation of contributory pensions to
wages, poverty rates among the adult population, particularly the elderly, have declined
dramatically, leading to a relative concentration of poverty among children and youth over the
past decade. Government programs have identified youth poverty as a key concern in the
poverty reduction agenda, and a main pillar of the proposed Sistema Nacional Integrado de
Cuidados is to address some of the underlying issues through expanded pre-school education
and other related interventions. Beyond poverty, exclusion and more limited opportunities, the
impacts of child and youth poverty extend to the potential for productivity, competitiveness
and growth in the economy as a whole.




                                              13
Figure 9. Urban, Rural and National Poverty,                                                                                       Table 1. Official Poverty Percentage
2002-2013                                                                                                                          Rates by Department (2006-2013)
                          45                                                                                                                              2006    2013
                                                                                                                                   Maldonado              14      3
                          40
                                                                                                                                   Colonia                18      2
                          35                                                                                                       Flores                 21      5
  Poverty Headcount (%)




                          30                                                                                                       Florida                21      7
                          25
                                                                                                                                   San Jose               22      6
                                                                                                                                   Lavalleja              22      6
                          20                                                                                                       Canelones              23      8
                          15                                                                                                       Rio Negro              24      11
                          10                                                                                                       Soriano                24      6
                                                                                                                                   Montevideo             26      16
                           5
                                                                                                                                   Rocha                  27      9
                           0                                                                                                       Paysandu               28      8
                               2002
                                      2003
                                             2004
                                                    2005
                                                               2006
                                                                      2007
                                                                              2008
                                                                                     2009
                                                                                            2010
                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                           2012
                                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                   Durazno                28      11
                                        National                        Rural                      Urban                           Treinta y Tres         31      8
                                                                                                                                   Salto                  31%     10
                                                                                                                                   Tacuarembo             34      12
Source: INE (National Institute of Statistics) 2014.                                                                               Cerro Largo            34      12
                                                                                                                                   Rivera                 37      18
                                                                                                                                   Artigas                42      18




                                                Figure 10. Poverty Incidence by Age Group in Latin America, 2013


                                                                40
                                                                                                                                           Brazil
                                                                                                                                           Chile
                                                                35
                                                                                                                                           Costa Rica
                                                                30                                                                         Panama
                                                                                                                                           Peru
                                                                25                                                                         Uruguay
                                                     Percemt




                                                                20

                                                                15

                                                                10

                                                                 5

                                                                 0
                                                                             0 to 14         15-24                25-34    35-44   45-54       55-64    65+


                                               Source: Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (CEPAL)
                                               Note: Poverty figures reflect CEPAL estimates of poverty lines, which differ from official figures.




                                                                                                                          14
                           Figure 11. Poverty Incidence by Age Group, Uruguay 2006-2013

                          60


                          50


                          40
                Percent




                          30


                          20


                          10


                          0
                               under 14   14 to 24     25 to 29     30 to 49    50 to 64     65 to 79    Total

                                  2006    2007       2008    2009        2010   2011       2012   2013


             Source: Ministry of Social Development, Social Observatory.
             Note: Poverty incidence measured against the national poverty line.




Shared Prosperity

24.     Uruguay has seen an improvement in shared prosperity as the income of the
bottom 40 percent has grown faster than that of the population as a whole. Between 2003
and 2012, the real per capita income of the bottom 40 percent grew by more than 7.8 percent
annually, while mean income growth was around 4.3 percent. In contrast, households in the
top 20 percent of the income distribution experienced the smallest increase in income. In fact,
in Uruguay the bottom 40 percent has seen an increase in income much greater than the regional
average, just behind Bolivia and Colombia (see Figure 12). Moreover, the income growth of
the bottom 40 percent in Uruguay has been greater than in other countries with similar levels
of development, such as Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Nevertheless, in terms of boosting
shared prosperity Uruguay still has some way to go to attain welfare levels of the world’s top
performers as measured by the Shared Prosperity Convergence Index (SPCI).4


4
  In 2012, Uruguay was at 34 percent of the “benchmark” associated with the top 10 performers in 2000 , well
ahead of LAC’s weighted average, which stood at 21 percent in the same year. The SPCI tracks progress of equity-
adjusted growth in different regions and thus underscores the challenges faced in delivering inclusive growth. The
SPCI is based on the Sen’s Welfare Index, which consists of a measure of GDP per capita (Y t̅ ) adjusted by income
inequality (Gini), and is calculated: Sen indext = Yt ̅ ∗ (1 − Ginit) This indicator provides useful information when
compared to a benchmark, which is the population-weighted average of Sen’s Welfare Index of the world top 10
performers in 2000. The Sen’s Welfare Index benchmark is 65.9, derived from the population weighted average
of the Sen’s Welfare Index of the top 10 countries in 2000 (Luxembourg, Qatar, Norway, Denmark, USA,
Netherlands, Switzerland, Austria, Canada, and Singapore), based on WDI data as of June 2014. To accurately
calculate and track changes in the Sen Index, a comparable series of surveys for each specific country is needed
to compute the inequality indicator. In the case of GDP per capita in constant PPP, values are obtained from WDI
indicators. GDP per capita is used instead of the mean of the household surveys because the former captures more
information than the latter. Still, income from household surveys could also be used, though it does not necessarily
present the same trend and growth levels as GDP per capita.
                                                                    15
             Figure 12. Shared Prosperity in Latin America, the Caribbean, and Other Selected
             Countries, Annualized Growth Rate 2006-2012




              Note: The orange diamonds represent the annualized growth rate of per capita income for the bottom 40% of
              the income distribution and the solid bars represent the annualized growth rate of per capita income for the
              whole population.




Determinants of Poverty Reduction

25.     Gains in poverty reduction have been mainly driven by household income growth.5
Following the Datt-Ravallion (1992) decomposition for the 2003-12 period, almost 20 points
of the reduction of 26.4 percentage points in the moderate poverty headcount (from 39.4 to
13.1 percent) came from income growth, while the remaining 6.7 was a function of
improvements in income distribution (see Figure 13). However, this is the result of two very
different periods: between 2003 and 2007, growth was the main driver of the observed
reduction in the proportion of people in poverty, whereas over the next five years (from 2008
to 2012) the almost 10 percent decline in the poverty headcount driven by economic growth
was accompanied by a decline of similar magnitude associated with an improved distribution
of income due to transfers, pensions, and taxes. Poverty reduction decompositions in other
LAC countries during this period reveal similar trends: economic growth accounted for two-
thirds of poverty reduction between 2003 and 2012 with changes in the distribution of income
accounting for the remaining third. In Uruguay this situation can be largely explained by the
array of reforms that were approved between 2005 and 2007, including (a) a progressive tax
reform that simplified the tax system, reduced indirect taxes, and reformulated personal income
tax; (b) health reform that increased coverage to virtually every Uruguayan; and
(c) reinstatement of the Wage Councils, in which employers, government, and labor unions
negotiate sectorial wage increases (see Box 1). Also, Uruguay observed a marked reduction of
informal employment—measured as the working population not covered by social security—
with respect to total employment, which fell from a peak of 40.7 percent in 2004 to 25.6 percent
in 2012 (ILO 2014).


5
  Reductions in the proportion of people who fall below a poverty threshold (the poverty line) can be decomposed
into two parts: rising income levels (economic growth: seen as shifts in the income distribution) and/or
improvements in the distribution of these incomes (income redistribution: reduction in the dispersion of the
income distribution). See Datt and Ravallion, 1992.
                                                                16
26.     The remarkable progress on the social front is explained largely by labor income
growth. According to a recent analysis (Perera and Llambí, 2014, in OECD/ECLAC, 2014),
labor income dominates household income in Uruguay, with an average share of 60 percent of
total income in 2012. The decline in unemployment and rising wages have been instrumental
in the fall in poverty rates since the crisis. Following Barros et al. (2006) and Azevedo, et al.
(2012b), it is possible to isolate the role played by different income sources in reducing poverty
in Uruguay (Figure 14). As labor income is the main income source at the household, household
income is very sensitive to changes in labor income. Almost 83 percent of the decline in
extreme poverty and 60 percent of the reduction in moderate poverty after the crisis can be
attributed primarily to the increase in the average monthly labor earnings of workers, and 22
and 24 percent of the decline in extreme and moderate poverty, respectively, is a function of
more household members being employed. Transfers, both public and private, also played a
significant role in the reduction of poverty, particularly to lift households out of extreme
poverty (22 and 11 percent of the reductions in extreme and moderate poverty, respectively).


                           Figure 13. Decomposition of the Total Changes in
                           Moderate Poverty, Uruguay, 2003-12
                                    2003-2012                      2003-2007       2007-2012
                             5.0

                             0.0                                       1.4

                            -5.0                                       -9.8           -9.6

                           -10.0        -19.7

                           -15.0                                                      -8.3

                           -20.0
                                        -6.7
                           -25.0

                           -30.0

                                                  Growth        Distribution

                          Source: ECH.
                          Note: The figure shows a Datt-Ravallion (1992) decomposition based on
                          official moderate poverty lines between 2003 and 2012 relative to households
                          in Montevideo and in urban areas with more than 5,000 inhabitants.




                                                        17
 Box 1. Equity Enhancing Reforms in Uruguay (2006-2007)

 The Tax Reform approved by Congress and ratified by the President on December 26, 2006 introduced
 several changes to the composition of fiscal revenues. One of the reform’s main objectives was to create a
 more progressive tax system by reducing the importance of indirect taxes and increasing the share of income
 tax in total tax revenue. The reform also aimed at increasing efficiency and transparency by removing taxes
 that were distortive or had low collection rates. By reducing the profit tax and unifying social security
 contributions across sectors, the reform further promoted investment and employment.

 More specifically, the IRP (Impuesto a las Retribuciones Personales, a tax on wages and pensions) was
 replaced by the IRPF (Impuesto a la Renta de las Personas Físicas), which taxes both capital and labor
 income, but at different rates. For labor income, the latter is structured by income bands and the marginal
 rates increase with income, ranging from 10 percent to 25 percent, whereas for capital income it ranges from
 3 percent to 12 percent, depending on the source. Similarly, the Basic VAT rate was reduced from 23 percent
 to 22 percent, and the Minimum VAT (applied to basic goods and services such as bread, vegetables, beef,
 rice, health services) rate was reduced from 14 percent to 10 percent.

 The Wage Councils—reinstalled by the Frente Amplio administration that took office in 2005*—consist of a
 tripartite negotiations among employers, labor unions, and government representatives and are organized in
 “Rounds.” The first two Rounds took place in 2005 and 2006, the third in 2008, a fourth in two annual
 instances in 2010 and 2011, and the fifth in 2014. For each of the Rounds, the government has set guidelines
 regarding the duration of the agreements (trying to favor increasingly longer periods), the within agreement
 periodicity of adjustment, expected inflation, correction factors for discrepancies between expected and
 observed inflation, targets for real wage growth, and ceilings for adjustment above such proposed increases.
 The duration of the agreements remained largely within the government guidelines. The results of the Wage
 Councils are reached by voting (in which government representatives break any tie).

 The Health Reform—one of the most important reforms of the 2005-2009 administration—restructured the
 health financing and service provision system. The new Integrated National Health System ( Sistema Nacional
 Integrado de Salud) was created by law with the main objective of providing universal integral health
 services and universal and equitable coverage. The reform extended health insurance coverage to all, and
 significantly reduced out-of-pocket spending on health. As lowest income individuals without insurance face
 health shocks, the related expenditures can be catastrophic, forcing people to incur debt or sell assets to cover
 costs. Health insurance coverage helps to reduce such situations; similarly, insurance coverage allows the
 poor greater access to preventive medicine, in turn helping to reduce poverty and inequality.

 * The Wage Councils were created by law in 1943, suspended by the military rule between 1973 and 1985, and then reinstated for a
 second period between 1985 and 1990.




27.     Social spending and income transfers have also had an important impact on
poverty reduction in Uruguay. Complementing the fundamental role of labor markets in
improving living conditions in Uruguay, the introduction of income transfer schemes targeting
the bottom of the income distribution and improvements in the personal income tax code have
also contributed to reducing poverty. Expanding the coverage of social assistance programs
softened the impact of the crisis on the welfare of the poor. Health care and some other
government transfers were monetized gradually, becoming part of calculated household
income. Additionally, the PANES (Plan de Atención Nacional a la Emergencia Social)
program implemented in 2005–07 and its successor, the Plan de Equidad (Equity Plan),
significantly lowered the incidence and intensity of poverty. PANES was expanded and
reformulated into the program Plan de Equidad, which included tax and health care reforms,
                                                                 18
continued the family allowance $8-16 cash transfers per child among households that did not
exceed the national minimum salary, maintained food cards, expanded the coverage of early
childhood services, and reduced the years of service required to retire (See Box 2). By 2009,
there were 364,000 beneficiaries, covering 76 percent of destitute children and 68 percent of
children living in poverty, and almost all the households living in the poorest quintile.

       Figure 14. Changes in Moderate Poverty ($4/day) by Income Sources, 2003-2012,
       Uruguay and Regional Averages


          100%
                      13%
           90%
           80%        16%
           70%
                      10%
           60%
           50%                                    Labor
           40%       46%                           87%
           30%
           20%
           10%        15%
            0%
                         Uruguay 2003-2012                   LAC 2003-2012                     Southern Cone

                    Male labor employment level     Male average earnings          Female labor employment level
                    Female average earnings         Non - Labor

         Source: Harmonized data from ECH by SEDLAS; non-labor income includes capital gains, private transfers,
         and public transfers.




28.     In Uruguay, household skills level and intensity of use have been the factors that
led to increased labor income among the less well-off, lifting them out of poverty. Changes
in poverty can be attributed to changes in the quantity of assets, the intensity with which the
households use these assets, and the returns obtained from trading them (Attanasio, 1995; Lopez-
Calva and Rodriguez. 2014).6 For a typical household, the most important asset is its human
capital—its members’ labor market potential. Since poverty rates are highest among the least
skilled, most labor income of the poor comes from unskilled and low skilled workers; this is
the main channel by which labor income reduces poverty. In analyzing how labor market
changes have led to falls in poverty rates, it is important to consider households not just in
terms of their poverty status, which can be temporary, but also by their skill level.7 In Uruguay,
the unskilled exhibit the highest poverty rates followed very closely by the low-skilled. Despite
the decline in the poverty rates of the unskilled and low-skilled over the past 10 years, these
groups still constitute the largest share of the poor (see Figure 15). Moreover, the low-skilled
are the largest group in the first two quintiles, composing almost 80 percent (see Figure 16).
Thus, to understand the relation between labor market changes and both poverty reduction and
shared prosperity the analysis should focus on the low-skilled and unskilled and how their
employment has changed in Uruguay.

6
  The asset model also includes household’s exposure to risk and access to transfers as two additional co mponents
affecting household income.
7
  The unskilled are defined as those who did not complete primary schooling (including those with no formal
schooling), the low-skilled as those who only completed primary school, and the skilled as those with at least a
secondary school education.
                                                                19
Box 2. The Social Protection System in Uruguay*

The social protection system in Uruguay includes traditional social security programs such as old age pensions
and contributory unemployment insurance, as well as non-contributory components; health insurance completes
the system.

Contributory (social security) and non-contributory (social assistance) transfers are integrated, financed, and
provided by a single institution, the Banco de Previsión Social (BPS, Social Security Institute). Old-age,
survivor, and disability benefits constitute the bulk of social protection spending (70 to 75 percent), followed by
transfers for unemployment benefits, health insurance, and maternity leave (15 to 18 percent), and family
allowances (5 to 7 percent).

Contributory programs. Uruguay has a mixed pension system composed of two main pillars: (i) a mandatory
pay-as-you-go (PAYG) system with intergenerational solidarity features that is financed by payroll and other
taxes, as well as financial contributions from the Treasury; and (ii) an individual capitalization element
requiring mandatory individual savings in an Administradora de Fondo de Ahorro Previsional (AFAP, Social
Security Fund Administrator). The replacement rate for a worker who retires at 60 years with 30 years of
contributions to the pensions system is 45 percent; this rate increases with retirement age and years of
contribution. Pension coverage for those older than 64 years is about 90 percent. For those who have not
contributed the minimum 30 years, contributory pensions can only be accessed at age 70.

Unemployment insurance covers all formal sector workers, with benefits for six months with a declining
replacement rate over time (66 to 40 percent of the average wage during the six months prior to unemployment).
Recent reforms established added benefits under special circumstances (economic crises, unemployed aged 50
or more).

Non-contributory programs. Since 1999, and particularly with reforms in 2007/8, Uruguay instituted an active
social assistance policy that targets the population without access to formal employment and associated benefits.
Old-age benefits consist of a transfer paid to people 70 years of age and older who fall below the poverty line or
live with a disability. In 2007, an old-age assistance scheme was created for the elderly aged between 65 and 70
years who were not enrolled in a contributory pension program (previously, such individuals lacked access to
non-contributory pensions).

Family allowances, the main conditional cash transfer program in Uruguay, are paid to vulnerable households
with children aged less than 18 years. The transfers are determined according to the number of beneficiaries in
the household, the stage of education in which the children are enrolled, and disability status. Approximately
half a million family allowances are currently delivered, covering 80 percent of households with children in the
three lowest income deciles.

Health Insurance. The 2007 health care reform created a broad insurance system that combines contributory
and non-contributory criteria for eligibility. The law created the Fondo Nacional de Salud (FONASA, National
Health Fund), which is financed by contributions from formal sector workers and the general Treasury. If one
member of a household contributes to social security, all members are eligible and can select either a state
provider or a private sector non-profit provider (MAS, mutual aid society) of their choosing. In households
where no one contributes to social security, only state providers may be used. Although they differ in terms of
waiting times and quality of service, both public and private sectors provide comprehensive health insurance
and access to all levels of medical attention. All insured have access to the same package of benefits. Since the
reform, virtually all Uruguayans have access to some form of health care, with 60 percent affiliated with MAS
and the rest with access to state providers.

* Based on Filgueira and Hernandez, 2013, and Rofman, 2014.




                                                              20
   Figure 15. Poverty Rates and Skill Level for                                                                                                                                                  Figure 16. Skill-Composition Main Earner of Bottom
   Selected Countries (2003 and 2013)                                                                                                                                                            40 Percent Households (2003 and 2013)
     0.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                     100%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13.89%                  9.98%
     0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                      90%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10.23%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80%               10.46%
     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70%
     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60%
     0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50%
     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                          2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40%               75.64%                 79.77%
     0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20%
             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10%
                       Skilled me




                       Skilled me




                       Skilled me




                       Skilled me




                       Skilled me
                               All




                               All




                               All




                               All




                               All
                    Unskilled m.e




                    Unskilled m.e




                    Unskilled m.e




                    Unskilled m.e




                    Unskilled m.e
                   Low skilled me




                   Low skilled me




                   Low skilled me




                   Low skilled me




                   Low skilled me
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2003                    2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Uruguay urban
                   Argentina                              Brazil                                         Chile                     Paraguay                        Uruguay
                     urban                                                                                                                                          urban
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Low skilled me     Skilled me   Unskilled m.e

   Source: SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank), adapted from Poverty and Labor Brief, Working to End Poverty in LAC: The Role
   of Labor Markets..



29.     Increased labor force participation was an important driver of Uruguay’s poverty
reduction, although not the most important one. Uruguay has the highest labor force
participation rates in LAC, but participation of the bottom 40 percent (81 percent) is lower than
that of the top 60 percent (92 percent) see Figure 17. In addition, although labor force
participation increased for both groups between 2003 and 2013 (as opposed to some countries
in LAC, such as Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, and Ecuador), the growth was higher for the top 60
than for the bottom 40 (see Figure 18).


   Figure 17. Labor Force Participation of Bottom                                                                                                                                                Figure 18. Change in Labor Force Participation
   40 and Top 60, 2013                                                                                                                                                                           Rates for Bottom 40 and Top 60 (2003-2013)

             100                                                                                                                                                                                                      15%
              90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10%
              80
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percentage Change




              70                                                                                                                                                                                                       5%
Percentage




              60
              50                                                                                                                                                                                                       0%
              40
              30                                                                                                                                                                                                       -5%
              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -10%
              10
               0                                                                                                                                                                                                      -15%
                                                                                                                                                                                 Uruguay-urban
                                                                                                                                                                       Bolivia
                                                                      Chile




                                                                                                                                                                Peru
                                                                                                                                          Colombia
                                     Guatemala



                                                                              El Salvador
                                                 Dominican Republic
                    LAC




                                                                                                                        Brazil
                                                                                                              Ecuador


                                                                                                                                 Mexico


                                                                                                                                                     Paraguay
                          Honduras




                                                                                            Argentina-urban




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Chile

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Bolivia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Guatemala




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            El Salvador
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ecuador




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dominican Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Honduras
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Paraguay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Argentina-urban




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Uruguay-urban
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Peru




                                                                      Bottom 40                                         Top 60                                                                                                                  Top 60     B40

Source: SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank), adapted from Poverty and Labor Brief, Working to End Poverty in LAC: The Role of
Labor Markets.




                                                                                                                                                                                                 21
30.     Labor force participation in the last 10 years has declined among the youngest,
but has increased among the elderly and among women. Between 2003 and 2013, the
largest reductions in labor force participation occurred among the youth of both genders (those
between 15 and 18 years old). In this age group, average annual participation declined by 2.4
percent for women and 2.6 percent for men (see Figures 19 and 20). While unattached youth—
those who are neither working nor in school (often referred to as “ninis”)—remain a sizeable
group, representing 15 and 17 percent of boys and girls, respectively, in 2013, the number of
older teens still enrolled in school has increased, a positive contribution to Uruguay’s human
capital stock. On the other hand, the average annual increase in female labor force participation
in Uruguay for those older than 18 years was 1 percentage point over the 2003-2013 period.
Conversely, male labor force participation remained about the same in the 10-year period, with
the exception of a slight increase in participation for those 55 years and older.


 Figure 19. Male Labor Force Participation (2003                       Figure 20. Female Labor Force Participation
 and 2013)                                                             (2003 and 2013)
  100                                                                      100

   90                                                                       90

   80                                                                       80

   70                                                                       70

   60                                                                       60

   50                                                                       50

   40                                                                       40

   30                                                                       30

   20                                                                       20

   10                                                                       10

    0                                                                        0
        15 to 18   18 to 25     25 to 55      55 to 65   Older than              15 to 18   18 to 25     25 to 55      55 to 65 Older than
                                                             65                                                                     65
                              Uruguay urban                                                            Uruguay urban

             Men - Sum of 2003        Men - Sum of 2013                            Female - Sum of 2003        Female - Sum of 2013



Source: SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank), adapted from Poverty and Labor Brief, Working to End Poverty in LAC:
The Role of Labor Markets.


31.    Changes in labor supply and human capital accumulation have been relatively
modest and do not explain the significant progress in poverty alleviation in Uruguay in
recent years; increases in the returns to labor have played the more important role.
Human capital accumulation has slowed and the quality of education as well as educational
attainment relative to regional peers have declined (this is discussed further in Chapter III).
Human capital accumulation has therefore not been the main factor behind poverty alleviation.
As explained in more detail in the following sections, shifts in the types of jobs—both in sector
of employment and type of employment—as well as wage increases due to external conditions
and policies such as minimum wages and wage negotiations by labor unions, have all played a
more important role. In particular, wage growth for the low-skilled and unskilled between 2003
and 2013 was substantial, and more rapid than that for higher skilled workers (see Figure 21).
The annual growth rate of low-skilled wages was almost 5 percent, for the unskilled it was
more than 4 percent, and for skilled workers it was 3 percent. Similarly, wages for the medium

                                                                      22
wage sector8 showed the largest increase for the low skilled (see Figure 22). One plausible
explanation, backed by anecdotal evidence, for the sustained growth in labor income is that,
within skill groups, workers are transitioning to higher productivity jobs. Wages could also be
rising within narrowly defined economic sectors as a function of a general increase in worker
productivity (perhaps attendant upon improved infrastructure or technology) or increased labor
demand as a consequence of positive shocks.


     Figure 21. Annualized Wage Growth by Skill                                                        Figure 22. Annualized Wage Growth by Sector and
     Level for Selected Countries (2003 and 2013)                                                      Skill Level (2003 and 2013)
                                        7.00                                                                                 7.00

                                        6.00                                                                                 6.00




                                                                                                        Annual wage growth
                                                                                                                             5.00
                                        5.00
                                                                                                                             4.00
    Annualized growth of hourly wages




                                        4.00
                                                                                                                             3.00
                                        3.00
                                                                                                                             2.00

                                        2.00                                                                                 1.00

                                        1.00                                                                                 0.00




                                                                                                                                                                             Medium wage



                                                                                                                                                                                           Medium-high wage



                                                                                                                                                                                                              High wage
                                                                                                                                      Low wage



                                                                                                                                                      Medium-low wage
                                        0.00

                                   -1.00

                                   -2.00
                                               Argentina Brazil    Chile    Ecuador Paraguay Uruguay                                                                    Uruguay urban
                                                 urban                                        urban
                                                       Unskilled   Low skilled    Skilled                                     Unskilled          Low skilled                 Medium and high skilled

Source: SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank), adapted from Poverty and Labor Brief, Working to End Poverty in LAC: The Role of
Labor Markets. Note: low wage sector includes activities of private households as employers, agriculture, hunting and forestry, wholesale and
retail trade; medium-low wage sectors include construction, manufacturing, hotels and restaurants; medium wage sectors include mining and
quarrying, other community, social and personal service activities, and real estate, renting and business activities; medium-high wage sectors
include health and social work, public administration and defense, transport, storage and communications; and high wage sectors include
education, electricity, gas and water supply, and financial intermediation.




32.     Despite significant variation in growth rates among sectors over the past 10 years,
wage increases across sectors have been fairly homogenous.9 Between 2007-2013 real
wages across most sectors increased (see Figures 23 and 24), not only in specific sectors that
benefitted from rapid growth (such as cereals, meat, auto parts), but also in services
(construction, trade, education). Wage increases were larger for those living in the bottom 40
percent of the distribution, across most sectors of the economy (see Figures 25 and 26),
contributing not only to poverty reduction but also to wage compression and to falling

8
  Low wage sector includes activities of private households as employers, agriculture, hunting, and forestry,
wholesale and retail trade; medium-low wage sectors include construction, manufacturing, hotels, and restaurants;
medium wage sectors include mining and quarrying, other community, social and personal service activities, and
real estate, renting, and business activities; medium-high wage sectors include health and social work, public
administration and defense, transport, storage, and communications; and high wage sectors include education,
electricity, gas and water supply, and financial intermediation.
9
  This indicates that wage increases have not generally followed growth in sectoral productivity. In some sectors,
given the very large reduction in wages as a result of the crisis, wage increases may have merely been catching
up with productivity. It is difficult to clearly ascertain the relationship between wages and productivity in Uruguay
given the lack of sectoral data on productivity. See Chapter III, Section B for a fuller discussion.
                                                                                                       23
     inequality during the period (see Figure 27). Since 2007, the Wage Councils (Consejos de
     Salarios) comprising labor unions, employer representatives, and the central government, have
     taken a more prominent role in the wage negotiations process. Wage Council negotiations have
     led to higher wage increases for workers at the bottom of the income distribution.



     Figure 23. Changes in Hourly Wage                                             Figure 24. Changes in Hourly Wage
     (2007-2013)                                                                   (2007-2013) for the Bottom 40%




     Note: Bubbles represent industries in the non-tradable sector and “X” represents the industries in the tradable sectors. The size of the bubbles
     and Xs represent the relative size of employment in the sectors.
     Source: Own elaboration using the ECH.




     Figure 25. Average Wage Changes in Non-Tradable Sectors, 2007-2013




% of total
employment




     Source: Own elaboration using the ECH.




                                                                           24
Figure 26. Average Wage Changes in Tradable Sectors, 2007-2013




                Figure 27. Recent Years Have Witnessed Wage Compression

                  2.5
                  2.3
                               Hourly Wage: complete tertiary/complete secondary
                  2.1
                  1.9
                  1.7
                  1.5   Hourly Wage: incomplete tertiary/complete secondary
                  1.3
                  1.1
                  0.9
                                    Hourly Wage: incomplete secondary/complete secondary
                  0.7
                  0.5




                Source: ECH based on Education Policy Note.




33.     It is noteworthy that 18-year-olds have joined the labor market at increasingly
higher rates in Uruguay in recent years, and at much faster speeds than in the rest of the
region (see Figure 28). This may be related to the perception of an increasing opportunity cost
to staying in school for the young and relatively unskilled, driven by the combination of a
positive macroeconomic environment and perceptions of low educational quality. This issue is
subsequently addressed in greater detail.

                                                         25
Figure 28. Younger Workers Have Been Integrated Into the Labor Force at High Rates




Source: Own calculation based on household surveys and SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank).
Note: The graphs show the rate of labor market insertion for workers of different cohorts with respect to the number employed when the cohort
was 18 years old. For instance, for the 2001 Uruguay cohort of 18-year olds, the members of the cohort who were employed roughly doubled
by the time the cohort was 26 years old. The y-axis indicates the ratio of the number of employed members of cohort x to the total employed
members of cohort x at 18 years old.



Inequality

34.     Uruguay is one of the most
                                                                  Figure 29. Gini Coefficient, Uruguay, 2003-12
equitable countries in Latin America
                                                                                     50
and the Caribbean. Improvements at the
bottom of the income distribution were
                                                                                     46
reflected in reduced income inequality                                                      45.5
starting in 2007 and this has accelerated
                                                                   Gini coeficient




                                                                                     42
since 2010. Uruguay’s Gini coefficient
remains one of the lowest in the region,
                                                                                     38
falling from 0.45 in 2007 to 0.38 in 2012                                                                                                        38.4
(see Figure 29). This reduction in
                                                                                     34
inequality took place in both the urban
and rural populations and is now lower
                                                                                     30
than pre-crisis levels. Despite its strong                                                2006     2007   2008   2009   2010     2011   2012    2013
standing regionally, and the remarkable
                                                                                           National                            Urban (+5,000 inhab.)
progress that has brought inequality to
                                                                                           Montevideo                          Rural
historically low levels, Uruguay is a
relatively unequal country by OECD
standards (see Figure 30, panel b).                               Source: World Bank calculations based on official income data from the
                                                                  ECH. The income aggregate differs from SEDLAC, which is
                                                                  standardized for comparisons across countries in LAC.



                                                                         26
Figure 30. Gini Coefficient (Uruguay, LAC, and OECD)
 a. Inequality, 2001-12                            b. Income Gini: LAC and the OECD

                       0.60 0.58


                       0.55 0.57
                                                                                                            0.52
     Gini coeficient




                       0.50                                                                                 0.52
                                                    0.47          0.47 0.48
                               0.46 0.47                                               0.47

                       0.45                                                                          0.44
                                                                                                            0.42

                       0.40
                               2001
                                      2002
                                             2003
                                                    2004
                                                           2005
                                                                  2006
                                                                         2007
                                                                                2008
                                                                                       2009
                                                                                              2010
                                                                                                     2011
                              LAC              Uruguay - urban                          Southern Cone       2012



 Source: Based on data of SEDLAC (World Bank and CEDLAS) for Uruguay and the region and OECD Stats for the Organisation for
 Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. Gini index for Uruguay-Urban was calculated using SEDLAC as it is
 standardized and comparable with other countries in the region.



35.     The reduction in inequality is related to declining schooling premia, combined
with progressive fiscal policies and wage increases that have been on average higher for
workers who belong to the bottom 40 percent. There has been a steep decline in returns to
education since the mid-2000s. By 2013 the difference in hourly wages between workers with
complete and incomplete secondary education had fallen to 30 percent. The wage differential
between a complete university education and completed secondary schooling has declined even
more sharply, and stood at about 15 percent in 2013.10 Fiscal policy has also been instrumental.
Based on analysis carried out following the Commitment to Equity methodology, market
income inequality in Uruguay corresponds to a Gini coefficient of 0.527, and is higher than the
net market income Gini, indicating that direct taxes have an equalizing effect. It is worth noting
that direct personal income taxes were introduced in the 2007 fiscal reform (in contrast, a
comparison of post-fiscal income and disposable income suggests that indirect taxes have a
regressive effect in Uruguay). In-kind transfers in education and health have the largest effect
in terms of reducing inequality, as shown when calculating the Gini index with final income,
which declines by 20 percent, from 0.456 to 0.385 (see Figure 31). Uruguay’s fiscal policy has
an important impact on inequality when compared to other countries in the region such as
Mexico and Peru.




10
  Their positive impact on wage equality notwithstanding, falling education premia may have an adverse effect
on the incentive to pursue higher levels of schooling.
                                                                                                                   27
                        Figure 31. Fiscal Policy: Gini Coefficients
          0.6

         0.55

          0.5

         0.45

          0.4

         0.35
                Market Income Net Market      Disposable     Post-Fiscal   Final Income
                                  Income        Income        Income
                           Brazil        Mexico          Peru          Uruguay



        Source: LAC Equity Lab tabulations based on the Commitment to Equity (CEQ)
        project.
        .Note: Led by Nora Lustig, CEQ is a project of the Center for Inter-American Policy
        and Research and the Department of Economics at Tulane University and the Inter-
        American Dialogue. (http://www.commitmentoequity.org/) © The CEQ Compendium
        of Indicators presented here is the property of the Tulane Educational Fund and the
        Inter-American Dialogue.




Equality of Opportunity

36.     Uruguay has attained significant progress in a number of areas in terms of equality
of opportunities. This is the case both in absolute terms and when compared to other countries
in the region. The principle of equality of opportunities rests on the idea that access to basic
goods and services should not depend on initial circumstances. Uruguay has reached high
levels of access to basic services such as electricity, drinking water, sanitation, and basic
education. Moreover, from already high levels, access to basic services has improved further
in recent years. Access to water (see Figure 32) and electricity (see Figure 33) are uniformly
high and regional variations within the country have narrowed significantly over the past
decade, although access to sanitation remains a challenge, with marked variation across regions
and departments. Similarly, Uruguay has done better than Brazil in terms of sanitation and
water (with 99 percent coverage versus 92, and 97 versus 921.73), Peru (with 73 and 71), and
Paraguay (with 70 and 55).




                                                             28
 Figure 32. Access to                      Drinking    Water   by    Figure 33. Access to Electricity by Department,
 Department, 2006-13                                                 2006-13

            Artigas                                                             Artigas
      Montevideo                                                           Cerro Largo
            Florida                                                           San Jose
          San Jose                                                        Montevideo
          Durazno                                                             Durazno
         Rio Negro                                                              Florida
         Paysandu                                                            Rio Negro
       Cerro Largo                                                            Lavalleja
           Soriano                                                           Paysandu
          Lavalleja                                                            Soriano
        Canelones                                                                Rocha
              Salto                                                         Canelones
     Treinta y Tres                                                        Maldonado
             Flores                                                              Rivera
             Rocha                                                               Flores
       Maldonado                                                                  Salto
           Colonia                                                       Treinta y Tres
             Rivera                                                       Tacuarembo
      Tacuarembo                                                               Colonia

                      84%          89%           94%    99%                               88%    90%     92%      94%       96%    98%   100%
                                         Percentage                                                            Percentage

                            Agua_2013     Agua_2006                                        Electricity_2013     Electricity_2006



 Source: ECH.                                                        Source: ECH.




37.     Nevertheless, there remains an important challenge in terms of equality of
opportunity with respect to education. Although dropout rates declined between 2006 and
2013, large inequalities in educational attainment and school quality persist (see Figure 34).
Educational performance remains tightly linked to income and socioeconomic background. As
in other Latin American countries, the impact of income and socioeconomic status on
educational achievement tends to be very high. Uruguay is one of the worst performers in terms
of the impact of socioeconomic background on PISA11 performance, ranking fifth-worst in the
world and third-worst in Latin America (OECD/ECLAC, 2013). In 2010, only 25 percent of
15-17 year-olds in the lowest income quintile completed secondary education, compared to 85
percent of those in the top quintile. A mere 7 percent of 18-20 year olds in the lowest income
quintile completed upper secondary education. Lack of opportunities in the educational system
can contribute to increasing social exclusion and marginalization and reduced employment
opportunities, particularly with respect to better-paying formal sector jobs.

38.     Access to quality education is also unequal, depending on income and the ability
to pay for private education. There is a significant disparity between the scores of Uruguayan
students who attend public school and those who attend private school. In mathematics, for
example, 79 percent of private school students achieved a grade of level 2 or higher—double
the passage rate of public school children, of whom only 35 percent scored 2 or higher. Similar
disparities in achievement were seen in science and reading. Since attending private school is
strongly correlated with parental earnings and educational attainment, this disparity in test

11
  The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) is a worldwide study by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in member and non-member nations of 15-year-old school
pupils’ scholastic performance in mathematics, science, and reading. It was first conducted in 2000 and has since
been repeated every three years.
                                                                    29
scores strongly suggests that the provision of quality schooling in Uruguay is inequitable across
socioeconomic groups. This significantly impacted intergenerational mobility, inequality, and,
potentially, prospects for economic growth.



Figure 34. Dropout Rates by Age and Income Quintile, 2006-2013

         2013            4.0%
                   1.2%
                0.6%
     5




         2006           3.4%
                    0.8%
                0.0%
         2013                 6.7%
                    1.6%
                  0.5%
     4




         2006                             9.5%
                    1.8%
                0.2%
         2013                                        15.5%
                       2.6%
                   0.4%
     3




         2006                                                19.2%
                          3.0%
                 0.2%
         2013                                                    22.1%
                           3.8%
                   0.3%
     2




         2006                                                                27.9%
                                 5.4%
                   0.4%
         2013                                                                           34.3%
                                        7.8%
                   0.5%
     1




         2006                                                                                              43.5%
                                          9.3%
                   0.7%
            0.0%          5.0%      10.0%        15.0%   20.0%       25.0%   30.0%   35.0%      40.0%     45.0%    50.0%

                            Secondary 15-17 years         Secondary 12-14 years      Primary 6-12 years

Source: World Bank, based on ECH.



39.     Opinion surveys reflect a growing concern with crime and violence in Uruguay in
recent years, particularly among urban dwellers, who associate a perceived decline in
personal safety with high youth unemployment, school dropouts, and a lack of
opportunities for an important segment of the young population.12 Further work would be
needed to understand the linkages, if any, between poor educational outcomes, lack of
opportunity, and crime. Nevertheless, some evidence points to correlations, including a
particularly high incarceration rate for minors (1 in every 1963 of the adolescent population is
in prison), where the vast majority of adolescents (93.6 percent) arrested had failed to complete
upper secondary education, and two-thirds of those in the penal system were neither working
nor in school at the time of their arrest (Fundacion Justicia y Derecho and UNICEF, 2010).

40.      Like the young, the population defined as being vulnerable needs particular
attention, both because of the size of this group as well as its susceptibility to shocks.
Simulations indicate that in the event of a severe crisis (similar in size as that of 2001-2) the
per capita income of the vulnerable group would fall by 30 percent on average, sending a
significant number back into poverty (Barriga et al., 2014). Although the overall effect of such
a crisis on poverty would be small, the effect would be felt disproportionately by the young, by
female-headed households, larger households, and those individuals with incomplete
secondary education. Even in the absence of an economic shock, it is important that policies



12
   Uruguay continues to be one of the safest countries in the region, with the number of reported crimes having
fallen since 2005.
                                                                        30
be designed to protect the gains in poverty reduction and shared prosperity, particularly for
those who are most vulnerable. (World Bank, 2014b)

41.     Afrodescendants face higher levels of poverty, unsatisfied basic needs, and
exclusion. Geographically, the departments of Artigas and Rivera in the north of the country,
bordering Brazil, have the largest proportions of afrodescendants in their population, at 17
percent in both cases (see Map 1). Uruguay’s indigenous population is more heavily
represented than average in the departments of Tacuarembo and Salto, where they make up
eight and six percent of the population, respectively. Income poverty rates for both groups are
higher than the national average. The income poverty rate based on the $4/day poverty line
stands at 19.3 percent for afrodescendants, compared to 8.3 percent for the population as a
whole. Close to half of all afrodescendants live in households belonging to the lowest quintile
of the income distribution, characterized by, among other attributes, low educational
attainment. Similarly, nearly one third of the indigenous population belongs to the lowest
income quintile, and poverty among urban Uruguayans of indigenous ancestry is 1.7 times that
of the national average, while extreme poverty is 1.4 times the average.

Map 1. Total Population by Department




42.    While educational attainment, job characteristics such as occupation and
industry, and geographic location contribute to explaining wage differentials between
afro-descendant and non-afro-descendant workers, significant differences in labor

                                              31
income remain.13 Higher poverty rates among the afro-descendant population is mainly
explained by low-paying jobs associated with lower educational levels. On average, non-afro-
descendants have 9.6 years of education whereas afro-descendant workers have 8 years and
returns to schooling are lower for afro-descendants (although this may be biased as a larger
proportion of non-afro-descendants attend private schools.) Wage differentials between the two
groups decline considerably when job characteristics are controlled for, implying that there
may be occupational sorting or segregation. Similarly, wage differentials are larger among men
than among women, and in particular, wage differentials are larger for men in the bottom
deciles of income distribution.14 Housing conditions of afro-descendants are poorer compared
to those of non-Afro-descendants. Although the proportion of the population living in slums in
Uruguay is lower than in neighboring Argentina and Brazil, the Afro-descendant population
who live in slums reaches 12.7 percent, triple that of the white population (4.2 percent),
indicating residential segregation linked to poverty and destitution. Also, the percentages of
Afro-descendant youth who neither work nor study exceeds that of other youth: 18.3 percent
versus 13.5 percent of young people between 14 and 24 years in the two groups do not study,
do not work, and are not looking for a job. Overall, however, quantitative analysis of the
economic and social conditions faced by Uruguay’s ethnic minorities is relatively scarce,
making it difficult to reach robust explanations regarding the causes of exclusion.

43.     In conclusion, although Uruguay has made much progress in reducing poverty
and boosting shared prosperity in the last few years, it still faces challenges related to
vulnerability, youth poverty, and unequal access to quality education. Today, the middle
class has become the largest strata in Uruguay, reaching almost 60 percent of the populace.
This important achievement was mainly a consequence of economic growth fueled by labor
income growth over the last decade (which favored the bottom 40 percent), complemented by
effective fiscal reforms and successful targeted social assistance to the specific groups that
required it, Nonetheless, the vulnerable—a group at risk of slipping back into poverty in the
event of a shock—compose the second largest strata. In addition, poverty is more prevalent
among the children and the youth, a situation that has worsened in the last few years through a
combination of secondary and tertiary school dropouts and growing urban youth
unemployment, and it is not homogenously distributed across regions. More importantly,
although assets have improved in the last few years, it is not clear if gains are strong among
the poorest and among the vulnerable youth as both the quality of education and labor
participation appear to be declining for these groups. This raises important concerns about the
possible emergence of new forms of social exclusion that may make it more difficult to reduce
entrenched pockets of chronic poverty (mainly in urban areas), which may even become self-
perpetuating, jeopardizing the sustainability of poverty reduction and shared prosperity.




13
   The situation of Uruguay’s indigenous population has not been studied to the same extent, and is an area in
need of further analysis.
14
   In-house analysis concludes that the coefficient for ethnic minorities is lower among female workers when wage
equations are estimated separately for the two genders.
                                                       32
B.         The Nature of Growth in Uruguay

Drivers of recent growth

44.     Since 2004, Uruguay’s GDP growth rate has been higher, and sustained over more
years, than at any time in the country’s recent history, propelled by a sharp increase in
productivity and by high investment. Following four years of contraction between 1999 and
2002, and reaching a nadir of -7.7 percent in 2002 with the Argentine crisis, economic growth
has averaged 5.2 percent between 2003 and 2013, well above the country’s potential growth
rate estimated at about 4 percent (see Figure 35). By 2004 the economy was expanding briskly,
with both inflation and unemployment falling (see Annex II). By the end of 2006, Uruguay had
recovered from the 2002 crisis. This was followed by continued strong expansion during 2006-
14, although growth has slowed in more recent years.

45.     Rapid economic growth has been accompanied by significant job creation at all
skill levels, underwriting a significant portion of the achievements in regard to the twin
goals. Unemployment declined to a historically low level (6.5 percent by 2014), in a context
of marked increases in labor force participation15 (see Figure 36). Rising real incomes, and in
particular labor incomes, further fueled growth, bolstering private consumption. In part, rising
labor incomes were the result of broad-based wage negotiations that ensured substantial real
wage increases. The remarkable improvement in economic performance has been supported by
sound macro policies and favorable external conditions characterized by strong external
demand, high commodity prices, and high global liquidity.


 Figure 35. Uruguay GDP Growth, 1961-2013                    Figure 36. Employment and Unemployment
     15
                                                                            63                                                                                       18
                                 1996-98: 6.2%
     10          1985-1994: 4.3%         2003-2013: 5.2%                    61                                                                                       16
           1973-81: 3.7%                                                    59                                                                                       14
      5
                                                               Employment




                                                                            57                                                                                       12

      0                                                                     55                                                                                       10   Unemployment
                                                                            53                                                                                       8
      -5                                                                    51                                                                                       6
                                                                            49                                                                                       4
     -10
                                                                            47                                                                                       2
     -15                                                                    45                                                                                       0
           1961




           2001
           1965
           1969
           1973
           1977
           1981
           1985
           1989
           1993
           1997

           2005
           2009
           2013




                                                                                 1991
                                                                                        1993
                                                                                               1995
                                                                                                      1997
                                                                                                             1999
                                                                                                                    2001
                                                                                                                           2003
                                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                                         2007
                                                                                                                                                2009
                                                                                                                                                       2011
                                                                                                                                                              2013




                                                                                                Employment                               Unemployment
 Source: World Development Indicators, staff calculations.   Source: Instituto Nacional de Estadistica.



46.     Strong macroeconomic management has been crucial for fostering and sustaining
growth. Uruguay has implemented prudent fiscal, exchange rate, and skillful debt management
policies that have enhanced its resilience to external shocks. Prudent fiscal policies and strong

15
  The labor force participation rate in the 2007-2013 period was 7.5 percentage points higher than the historical
average.
                                                             33
growth led to a significant reduction in indebtedness. Gross public sector debt declined to 58.4
percent of GDP by 2014, down from 75 percent in 2006, with net debt falling to 21 percent.
The country has also accumulated sizeable international reserves and its proactive debt
management has markedly improved the country’s debt profile, by reducing rollover, exchange
rate, and interest rate risks. The country has also contracted contingent financing to build
additional financial buffers to respond to potential adverse shocks associated with still
uncertain global economic and financial conditions.

47.    A significant acceleration in TFP growth has been the main driver of growth in
Uruguay, explaining about half of growth since 2007.16 Uruguay has, over the past half
century, lagged its comparators in terms of growth (see Table 2). Poor TFP growth—along
with low factor accumulation, particularly human capital—explains a large part of this
underperformance. Following the crisis, however, patterns shifted, and productivity surged.
While this pattern is shared with a number of Latin American countries, the acceleration of
TFP growth in Uruguay stands out in the region (along with that in Panama).



Table 2. Growth Accounting: Growth Rates of Capital, Labor and TFP, %
               1961-2013                                     2007-2013
               Real    Human Capital Labor TFP                 Real Human                    Capital    Labor      TFP
               GDP     Capital Stock                           GDP Capital                   Stock
                       per                                           per
                       Labor                                         Labor
 Uruguay       2.2     1.0      1.7      1.6      -0.1         5.5     0.9                    4.3         1.5      2.5
 Argentina     2.7     2.2      3.2      1.3      0.3          4.1     1.2                    4.5         0.9      1.9
 Brazil        4.2     3.2      4.9      1.9      0.5          3.1     2.3                    3.9         0.9      0.3
 Chile         4.3     2.6      4.9      1.6      1.0          3.9     1.2                    7.7         0.9      0.8
 Costa Rica    4.8     3.3      6.0      2.5      0.7          3.3     1.1                    5.7         1.5      0.8
 Mexico        4.0     3.6      5.3      2.2      -0.1         1.8     2.0                    3.6         1.3      -0.7
 Panama        5.1     3.4      5.5      2.3      1.0          8.0     1.9                    8.4         1.7      4.1
 Estonia       3.2     1.3      4.3      0.1      1.0          -0.5    0.6                    2.4         -0.2     -1.6
 Hong Kong 6.3         3.0      7.1      1.6      2.0          2.6     1.1                    3.6         0.6      0.7
 SAR, China
 Korea         7.4     3.1      9.5      1.3      2.4          3.2     1.9                    3.9         0.6      0.6
 Singapore     7.6     4.1      8.6      2.2      2.1          4.7     5.1                    5.9         2.8      -0.6

Source: World Bank, Policy Note Overview, 2015.


48.    Capital accumulation, both physical and human, has been another force
propelling growth in the country. Rapid economic growth immediately following the crisis
(2003-2007) was achieved through increases in labor force participation. As more people
joined the labor force and employment creation accelerated (see Figure 36), labor’s
contribution to GDP growth averaged 80 percent, although it levelled off after 2007 and is
today low relative to peers. Since 2007, physical capital stock growth has emerged as a strong
driver of growth as investment ratios rose from historic levels of 15 percent of GDP to 20
percent, reaching a high of 24 percent in 2014.

16
   TFP measurements should be interpreted with care, as they are calculated as a residual, and tend to be highly
correlated with the business cycle. Moreover, they include a number of assumptions that may be problematic. For
instance, the assumption of a constant capital share throughout the period of analysis may not be appropriate in
all contexts; similarly, there is no explicit role for terms of trade shocks, which can be critical in an open economy.

                                                          34
49.      Investment, most of which has been undertaken by the private sector, increased
dramatically over this period. Although a low investment rate has been an Achilles’ heel of
Uruguay’s economy (see Figures 37 and 38), the acceleration in recent years puts its
investment-to-GDP rate, which rose to a record 24 percent of GDP 17 by 2014, on a par with
prevailing investment rates in East Asia. While public investment has increased as the
government has undertaken large projects to address infrastructure needs, private investment
has been the main driver of this rapid increase in the investment ratio, attracted by good
institutions, clear and predictable rules of the game, prudent macroeconomic policies, and
macroeconomic stability, as well as a relatively attractive investment promotion regime. 18


 Figure 37. Saving , Investment, FDI % of GDP                                                                    Figure 38. Comparative            Investment/GDP
                                                                                                                 Ratios, 2006-2014

                        25
                                                                                                                                    35
       Percent of GDP




                        20
                                                                                                                                    30
                        15                                                                                                          25
                        10                                                                                         Percent of GDP   20
                                                                                                                                    15
                        5
                                                                                                                                    10
                        0                                                                                                           5
                             1980
                                    1983
                                           1986
                                                  1989
                                                         1992
                                                                1995
                                                                       1998
                                                                              2001
                                                                                     2004
                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                          2013




                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                              Brazil




                                                                                                                                         Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                               Chile
                                                                                                                                            Ireland




                                                                                                                                              Korea
                                                                                                                                           Panama
                                                                                                                                               Peru
                                                                                                                                           Uruguay




                                                                                                                                         Singapore
                                                                                                                                            Estonia
                                                                                                                                         Argentina

                                                     Gross national savings
                                                     Gross Fixed Investment
                                                     FDI


 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.                                                               Source: Banco Central de Uruguay and World Development
                                                                                                                 Indicators database.




50.     Foreign direct investment (FDI) has played an important role in the acceleration
of Uruguay’s investment and economic growth rates. With a low domestic saving rate, FDI
has filled the resource gap. While FDI has historically been negligible in Uruguay, today the
country is second only to Chile in attracting FDI (relative to GDP). FDI has risen from under
1.5 percent of GDP in 2002, to a peak of 7.6 percent in 2006, and to 5.3 percent ($3 billion) in
2013, attracted by a business climate that is friendly to foreign investors, granting foreign and
domestic investors the same benefits.19 Argentina has been the main source of FDI to Uruguay
over the past decade (particularly since 2006), and is responsible for 27 percent of total FDI


17
   The investment ratio increased by 6 percentage points since 2006 and contributed to about one-third of GDP
growth.
18
   About a quarter of the private investment for the period 2007-2014 ($11.5 billion) was undertaken under the
recent investment promotion policies, Decree 455/007 and Decree 002/012, which complement Law 16,906. The
cumulative investments under the Free Zone regime over the period 2006-2013 stood at close to $4 billion, with
Punta Pereira and UPM accounting for 52 and 26 percent, respectively.
19
   For instance, foreign investors benefit from the same rights and fiscal incentives as local investors, and
investments are not subject to limits on the transfer of profits or repatriation of capital.

                                                                                                      35
inflows (concentrated in construction, agriculture and industry) during the period.20 FDI has
increased the technology absorption and the know-how in selected sectors and has contributed
to a marked increase in productivity in the agro-exporting sector.

51.     As a result of this confluence of prudent macroeconomic management, high TFP
growth, and booming investment and FDI, Uruguay has enjoyed broad-based economic
growth across most sectors in the post-crisis period (see Figure 39). Growth within
subsectors often paints a more telling picture, however, than aggregate sectoral growth. Thus,
while primary activities contributed little to overall growth or employment, with most of the
increase in output attributable to increased labor productivity, a number of subsectors have
enjoyed significant growth as well as TFP increases. During the last decade, for instance, the
agricultural sector has undergone important structural transformations. Average annual
productivity growth in the beef sub-sector increased 1.3 percent when measured as meat
production per cow, while average annual milk productivity increased on average by 3.4
percent, when measured as milk liter/cow (OECD/ECLAC, 2014). Investments have raised the
productivity of milk production to the frontier (5,000 liters/cow/year). Bovine traceability has
helped create a country brand that has secured higher prices on international markets, attracted
FDI, and helped gain access to new markets. There have also been large increases in soybeans
production and remarkable increases in productivity and yields, stimulated by investment,
technology adoption, and innovation. Overall productivity in the agriculture sector accounted
for about half of the sectoral growth over the past decade.

52.     Similarly, while the manufacturing sector expanded at a slower pace than the
overall economy during the boom period, contributing less than 10 percent to overall
growth, there is a large heterogeneity in productivity within the sector and across firms.
One exception to relative stagnation of the sector has been the wood pulp, paper, and paper
products subsector. Growth in this subsector was triple that of total GDP, and the sector’s share
in GDP grew by 1.6 percentage points during the period. Nevertheless its contribution to annual
growth has been modest, as it comes from a small base. The coming on line of the Montes del
Plata cellulose plant in late 2014 will further boost the manufacturing sector and manufacturing
exports. Agro-food subsectors are another growing area within manufacturing. Dairy
processing, for instance, is also at the production frontier—with costs for milk powder in some
of the largest producers, for example, well below that of main competitors. Textiles, clothing,
and leather products on the other hand have contracted at a 5.8 percent annualized rate, with a
marginal negative contribution to growth. Growth in many other manufacturing subsectors has
been weak. Overall, employment in the manufacturing sector stagnated during the boom
period, after recovering from the sharp decline during the crisis. Labor productivity halved to
less than 2 percent during the expansion period relative to recovery period.

53.    Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and commerce have been
sources of dynamic sectoral growth. The ICT sector has been particularly dynamic during
the recent expansion period, accounting for a quarter of growth, and led by important
investments in telecommunications. Employment in the transport, storage, and
communications has the second fastest growth, after construction, expanding on average by 2.4

20
  FDI in construction has focused on the building of the Montes del Plata pulp mill, while luxury residential
construction in Montevideo and Punta del Este is mostly of Argentine origin. FDI in foodstuffs is related to the
presence of the largest global grain processors and traders, such as ADM, Cargill, and Louis Dreyfus, while the
energy sector has received FDI largely for the development of wind farms from the Spanish firm TEYMA.
(Uruguay XXI. National investment and export promotion agency.)
                                                      36
percent annually (Bértola, Isabella, Saavedra (2014). Labor productivity in this sector has
grown at a double-digit pace. Commerce, buoyed by strong domestic demand, has been another
important contributor to growth, although its contribution has decelerated in recent years in
line with a moderate deceleration in private consumption. Similarly, hotels and restaurants’
contribution to growth has dropped to close to 0, affected by weaker tourism demand from
Argentina, which has not been compensated by rising demand for tourism services from other
countries (Brazil accounted for 16.5 percent of tourism revenues in 2014). Meanwhile,
financial intermediation has continued its recovery from the 2002 crisis, albeit at a subdued
rate, with the annual contribution to growth less than half a percentage point. Transport and
associated services have also expanded, linked to strong domestic and external demand,
contributing about a tenth of the growth on average over this period.

54.     Construction saw a modest deceleration during this period despite large projects.
The contribution to growth from construction activity has been subdued, accounting for less
than 5 percent of overall growth. Nevertheless with a high degree of labor intensity, especially
in unskilled labor, its indirect (second round) impact on growth has been larger. Employment
in construction continued to increase at a robust pace, recording the highest growth rate across
sectors (4 percent) while labor productivity was stagnant during the expansion period.
Productivity dynamics in this sector have been disproportionately affected by large projects
linked to foreign investment. This includes the large pulp mills of Botnia and Montes del Plata
as well as the new airport built in Montevideo.


 Figure 39. Sectoral Contributions to Growth                                              Figure 40. Demand Components Contribution to
                                                                                          Growth
     10                                                                                       15
      8

      6                                                                                       10

      4
                                                                                               5
      2

      0
                                                                                               0
     -2

     -4
           2006     2007     2008     2009     2010    2011      2012      2013   2014         -5

          Other                                    Other services
          Transport, storage, and communications   Commerce, restaurants and hotels           -10
          Construction                             Electricity, water and gas                       2006   2007    2008    2009      2010   2011    2012* 2013* 2014*
          Manufacturing                            Primary activities                                Private consumption   Public consumption      Investment
          Growth                                                                                     Exports               Imports                 GDP




55.    Despite strong performance over the past decade, significant per capita income
disparities exist between Uruguay and its counterparts, explained by productivity gaps
and insufficient human capital. In 1960, Uruguay enjoyed a per capita income level 3.3 times
that of a number of selected fast-growing Asian economies;21 today Uruguay’s per capita
income level is at close to 83 percent of the simple average for this group.22 A substantial labor
productivity gap also remains between Uruguay and more developed economies. Although
labor productivity in Uruguay has been among the highest for the region during the 2000s and
has doubled its rate of growth since 2007 relative to the 1990s and early 2000s, Uruguay’s

21
     Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea, Singapore, and Thailand.
22
     Simple average of the GDP per capita expressed in 1990 International GK$ as per Maddison Project database.
                                                                                         37
observed labor productivity is only about 35 percent of that of the U.S. Human capital and TFP
are currently the main drivers of this labor productivity gap. Traditional development
accounting techniques point mainly to TFP as the principal contributor, accounting for about
53 percent of the gap, while physical capital contributes 31 percent and labor 16 percent. When
the quality of human capital and the endogeneity of physical capital accumulation and TFP are
taken into account, human capital emerges as a main factor behind the labor productivity gap23
(OECD/ECLAC 2014; Daude 2012).


Exports are spearheading a new model of integration

56.    Exports are an important part of Uruguay’s successful growth with jobs over the
past decade, reflected in greater competitiveness and diversification. Prior to the crisis, in
2000, trade (exports plus imports) constituted about 34 percent of GDP, with exports at 16
percent. By 2008, exports had nearly doubled, to 31 percent of GDP, while trade stood at 65
percent of GDP (the respective 2013 figures were 26 and 50 percent). This growth in exports
is not the result of a general rising tide of world trade, or the specialization in specific
commodities. Rather, two-thirds of export growth can be attributed to increasing market shares,
achieved by gaining an advantage relative to competitors. Uruguay has doubled its share of
world goods exports to 0.06 percent between 2003 and 2012 (IMF, 2014), although its share in
global markets is much higher in a number of products, including soy, beef, dairy, and rice (see
Figure 43). Uruguay has expanded its presence in world markets more rapidly than Argentina
and Brazil, its main, and much larger, regional trading partners.

57.     There is, however, room for increasing trade integration. Uruguay is less open to
international trade than would be expected given it level of economic development for both
merchandise and services (see Figures 41 and 42). So while 2014 trade as a share of GDP stood
at an estimated 53 percent of GDP, trade in Panama, Chile and Costa Rica was at 75.2, 66.5,
and 58.6 percent, respectively. Uruguay’s openness in commercial services is less than
expected given its level of development (see Figure 42). However, when comparing the two
periods reflected in Figures 41 and 42, Uruguay has narrowed the distance to the predicted
curve. In fact, in contrast to trade in merchandise, Uruguay’s openness to services trade is
higher than that of some regional comparators, such as Argentina, Chile, and Paraguay. Only
Costa Rica and New Zealand outperformed Uruguay in 2013.




23
  As human capital indicators are based on years of schooling, this indicator masks differences in the quality of
education and cognitive skills. Employing differences in PISA scores are a relatively good proxy; they can be
used to adjust formal years of schooling to compute human capital. The endogeneity of physical capital and TFP
refers to the fact that the efficiency with which factors of production are combined depends on the human capital
endowment.
                                                       38
Figure 41. Merchandise Trade as a Share of GDP vs. Income Level

a. 1997-2000                                                             b. 2010-2013




Note: The panels plot the relationship between trade openness and GDP per capita for all countries in the world. Relevant comparators are
labeled. The curve shows the expected trade openness for a given per capita income. The white band represents the 95% confidence
interval. Countries above (below) the confidence interval are said to be more (less) open to international trade than is implied by their level
of economic development.
Source: Own calculations using data from WDI.



Figure 42. Services Trade as a Share of GDP vs. Income Level

a. 1998-2000                                                             b. 2010-2013




Note: The panels plot the relationship between trade openness (in services) and GDP per capita for all countries in the world. Relevant
comparators are labeled. The curve shows the expected trade openness for a given per capita income. The gray band represents the 95%
confidence interval. Countries above (below) the confidence interval are said to be more (less) open to international trade than what their
economic development implies.
Source: Own calculations based on data from WDI.




                                                                     39
58.     Uruguay has managed a structural transformation in its primary sector exports
toward higher value agricultural-based exports. The primary sector, which accounts for
nearly 40 percent of all exports, has been the engine of export growth; and within the primary
sector, agricultural-based exports have grown particularly dynamically to represent almost 60
percent of total merchandise exports (vs. 30 percent in the late 1990s). With a natural
competitive advantage in agricultural-based exports, Uruguay has managed a structural
transformation within the sector, moving toward soy, lumber, beef, and dairy, all of which have
performed strongly (see Figure 43). Innovations (software) that have made cattle 100 percent
traceable have enhanced the quality of exports, helping create a country brand and secure
higher prices in international markets, attracting FDI, and gaining access to new markets.
Cereal and oil seed (soy) exports, which represented less than 4 percent of total merchandise
exports in 1999, surged to over 33 percent of the total in 2013 by virtue of both an increase in
quantity exported and a positive price shock. Lumber exports have grown from a 0.4 percent
share of total goods exports to 6.3 percent over the same period, and dairy has increased from
6 percent to 9 percent. The Montes del Plata pulp mill began production in June 2014. Its
exports are estimated at $300 million in 2014 and are projected to more than double in 2015
(close to 1½ percent of GDP).

59.     Services exports have also performed strongly in recent years, and today account
for one-third of all exports. Non-traditional services exports (i.e., services beyond tourism
and transport) doubled their export value between 2007 and 2011. Conversely, traditionally
important manufacturing goods, such as skins and textiles, leather, and auto parts, have lost
ground. Manufacturing activity has increasingly shifted to sectors that are competitive
internationally, such as wood/wood products and dairy, and activity has consolidated in the
area of chemicals, plastics, rubber, and electronics. As a result, manufacturing goods continue
to be an important export for Uruguay, contributing 29 percent of all exports.


Figure 43. Selected Merchandise Exports, Growth and Global Shares, 2010-2013




Source: Staff estimates based on World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) database.


                                                                  40
60.     The Free Trade Zone (FTZ) model has played an important role in attracting FDI
and boosting exports. In an effort to boost quality employment and increase the links with the
domestic economy, the government has launched a second wave of FTZ that included Global
Services (Aguada Park and WTC) and Specialized Services (Parque de la Ciencias), which are
labor intensive. The Free Trade Zones are now seeking to attract maquila-type investments, to
supply the region and create development poles for the interior of the country. More broadly,
investment promotion in recent years has given incentivized projects that create “quality”
employment and foster research and development, innovation, and labor force training. Special
incentives to small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) are also being implemented. The
government is complementing the FTZ with Special Economic Zones to include specialized
services (health care, audiovisuals, entertainment, etc.) and changes to the minimum
requirements of the national labor force, while also seeking to promote decentralization of
economic activities and the development of disadvantaged areas.

61.     Merchandise export dynamism is a function of a successful focus on product
quality and a consequent move to export higher value agricultural goods to more
diversified markets. Investment has led to an upgrading of production technologies,
productivity, and quality in a number of sectors (see Figure 44), and has opened access to
markets that pay better prices for higher quality goods in a number of products. Activities that
have experienced growth in recent years are relatively intensive in innovation and R&D, have
benefited from the explicit public policy focus on quality promotion, and are characterized by
important linkages to the rest of the economy. Consequently, Uruguay today commands a
quality premium in some exports, suggesting a high level of value addition. For instance,
Uruguay’s price premium over world beef prices has averaged more than $100 per ton of beef
as quality improvements have focused on logistics in the distribution chain, including the
introduction of technology to permit traceability of beef exports to the production unit. This
has enabled access to high price European markets in particular. Traceability technologies have
been expanded to other strategic value chains, including citrus, wine, honey, and poultry.
Another example of innovation is in cattle genomics, with Uruguay being the first country to
use genomics for Hereford cows, allowing the incorporation of new attributes linked to
production but also to human health. Production has also shifted to cereals and oil seeds,
particularly soybeans, as a consequence of seed improvements and increases in agricultural
yields as well as the expansion of cultivated land through the use of improved techniques.
Productivity has played a key role in the shift in livestock production from beef to milk, as the
productivity of beef production has increased on average by 1.3 percent in the last decade,
while milk production productivity has increased by 3.4 percent (OECD/ECLAC 2014;
Bervejillo et al. 2014). Other examples include R&D activities related to the UPM pulp factory
and to rice production, where yields and quality have been improved. Such productivity
improvements have contributed about half of the primary sector’s economic growth over the
past decade (Bervejillo et al. 2014). Reflecting the high investments in upgrading and
production technologies, Uruguay ranks at the top alongside Chile in the publication of
scientific articles related to agriculture and in spending on R&D as a share of the primary
sector’s GDP (2 percent), which is five times larger than the country’s overall R&D investment
as a share of GDP.




                                               41
                        Figure 44. Technological Change in Agriculture, 1980-2010




                     Source: Ministry of Agriculture, based on Bervejillo, et al. 2011. Anuario de OPYPA.



62.      A similar process of increasing sophistication is occurring in parts of the services
sector. Uruguayan software exports have experienced dynamic growth, expanding
significantly more rapidly than total exports, and today represent 1.5 percent of GDP, double
their share in 2004. Exports go to numerous countries in region, with more than 25 percent
going to the US and 10 percent to Europe. The sector is made up of about 350 firms producing
and selling products and services to 55 markets (Betarte, Cancela, and Moleri, 2008). At the
turn of the century, Uruguay briefly became the largest software-exporting country in Latin
America. It still ranks first in the region in terms of per capita exports. Significantly, this is the
first time in Uruguay’s history that knowledge accumulation at the national level has generated
significant exports that are not based on natural resources (IDB, 2012). Other non-traditional
service exports doubled their export value between 2007 and 2011, and in addition to ICT
include professional services such as financial services, consulting, and commercial and
logistic services. (OECD/ECLAC 2014).

63.    Uruguay has also achieved a degree of diversification of markets for its
merchandise exports, with the share of Mercosur declining, while dynamic emerging
economies, particularly China, are rising. While Brazil (at #1) and Argentina (#4) remain
top export destinations for merchandise exports, Uruguay has diversified away from these two
countries, and particularly from Argentina, which today accounts for less than 5 percent of
Uruguayan exports (see Figure 45).24 Mercosur accounted for about 47 percent of total goods
exports during the 1994-2001 period, but this proportion fell by nearly one-third to 33 percent
in 2013. The fall would have been greater (to 28 percent) had it not been for the entry of
Venezuela into Mercosur in 2012. China, the main market for soy, frozen beef, and cellulose
pulp has grown from representing less than 4.5 percent of merchandise exports in 1994-2001

24
  The exports discussed here include merchandise exports from the FTZs (i.e., FTZ exports are distributed among
markets and are not treated as “exports to FTZs”). Internal “exports” to FTZs have grown ten-fold, from 1.6
percent to nearly 16 percent of total exports between 2003 and 2012. FTZs as a whole today are second only to
Brazil as an export destination.
                                                             42
to 17.5 percent today, or in excess of 22 percent if exports from the Free Trade Zones are
attributed based on final destination. In contrast, the importance of the EU and the US has
declined to 11.5 and 4 percent of total exports in 2013, from 19 and 7 percent, respectively, in
1994-2001. Russia and Venezuela have also gained in importance as export destinations.

           Figure 45. Exports by Destination, Pre- and Post-Crisis, % of Total Merchandise Exports
               35%

               30%    28.9%

               25%
                           18.9%                                        20.0%
               20%
                               15.7%                                            17.5%
               15%
                                                                                  11.5%
               10%                  6.7%                                                5.9%
                                        4.5%                                                5.1%    3.1%
                5%                              2.6%                                            3.9%
                                            2.6% 2.2%
                                                           2.0% 1.9%                                   1.8% 1.8% 1.7%
                0%




             Source: staff calculations based on INE and Vaillant and Lalane.


64.     However, there is still untapped potential for expanded trade in traditional and
regional markets and significant scope for greater value addition and sophistication in
Uruguay’s exports. A country-by-country analysis of observed vs. potential exports shows a
proclivity toward trading with new growth poles, mostly at the expense of the United States
(see Table 3). This holds true for both the differentiated and the commodities segments, with
the latter being even more pronounced in intensity and including a substantial under-trading
with Japan. In contrast, the commercial relationship with Europe falls within the gravity-
predicted range in both cases. Uruguay is also trading below its potential with some large
markets in South America and with Canada. In particular, Uruguayan exports to Argentina,
Brazil, and Chile are well below the benchmark. Policy instruments to support destination
diversification and the positioning of Uruguayan products in regional markets could harness
these potential opportunities. Although market access and other obstacles such as non-tariff
barriers may create obstacles in some cases, the potential to expand the export basket of the
country undoubtedly exists. And although product sophistication has increased in some sectors,
overall this has not be captured in measures such as those developed by Hausmann, Hwang,
and Rodrik (2007).25 Uruguay’s exports tend to embody greater sophistication than Chilean
and Paraguayan exports, but they are below the levels achieved by Costa Rica and New Zealand
(a substantially more developed country).

65.     Exports have been an important part of Uruguay’s inclusive growth story through
their link to the country’s rapid job growth following the crisis. The labor content of
exports as a whole more than doubled between the late 1990s and 2011. Today, 30 percent of
jobs depend on external demand, relative to just 15 percent a decade ago. The increase in labor
content of exports took place at all skill levels, but has been especially strong for those workers
with 9-14 years and 15 years of education, (medium and high skill levels, respectively). The
high-skilled labor content of exports increased by a factor of 2.3, while the labor content of

25
     Although this measure has a number of limitations, including not capturing services exports.
                                                                   43
medium-skilled multiplied by a factor of 3. Even for low-skilled workers with less than eight
years of education, labor content of exports rose by 60 percent, although it declined by nearly
one-fifth for the economy as a whole (OECD/ECLAC 2014). More jobs linked to external
demand bring positive consequences and opportunities, but also risks. The benefits are linked
to possible productivity gains as greater contact with sophisticated clients and markets induces
improved practices by local suppliers of exporting firms. However, when jobs, especially low-
skilled and medium-skilled ones, become dependent on external demand, market access
becomes critical. A crucial question for Uruguay is how to continue to integrate globally
through trade in ways that enable and encourage it to move along a path of greater value
addition and productivity, participating in global value chains that provide it with access to the
right markets and may help it to overcome scale disadvantages.

Table 3. Uruguay: Over-Trading and Under-Trading Export Relationships
                  Differentiated                               Differentiated
                                 Commodities                                                                    Commodities
                    Products                                     Products

Mercosur                                                           Rest of America
              Argentina         -3.28              -4.31                        Canada           -1.93                -0.34
                  Brazil        -0.62              -0.70                           Chile         -0.91                -1.34
              Paraguay          0.55               -0.52                           Peru          0.12                 0.22
                                                                                Mexico           0.46                 1.31
Old Growth Poles                                                                 Bolivia         0.61                 -0.80
          United States         -1.56              -1.98                      Colombia           0.63                 -0.76
              Europe-27         -0.14               0.11                       Ecuador           1.13                 -1.24
                  Japan         0.90               -2.61                     Costa Rica          1.32                 -1.27
                                                                                Panama           2.29                 -0.08
 New Growth Poles                                                             Venezuela          2.37                 2.03
                   India        -0.37              -2.03                      Nicaragua          2.74                 -0.88
              Indonesia         0.11               -1.87                     Guatemala           3.74                 -1.87
                  China         0.44                1.20                    El Salvador          4.37                 -1.16
                 Russia         1.08                2.20


Note: The table presents the gravity-predicted coefficients by type of product—commodities vs differentiated—for selected countries,
including regional comparators and key global players termed Growth Poles. A positive (negative) coefficient indicates over (under)
trading and its magnitude reflects the size of the deviation from the predicted value.
Source: Uruguay Trade Outcomes, World Bank 2014, using data from WITS.



66.     To conclude, Uruguay’s growth in the years since the crisis has been more robust
and sustained than has been the case in several decades. Rising investment rates, where FDI
has played an important role, as well as increases in TFP, factor accumulation, and labor
productivity have supported this growth. As a small, open economy, exports have been a key
ingredient in the current expansion, embodying greater product sophistication, value addition,
and competitiveness. Nevertheless, important gaps remain with respect to Uruguay’s peers:
gaps in terms of GDP per capita, productivity, investment levels, and openness. Moreover, as
growth moderates and international conditions become less buoyant, the bottlenecks reflected
in these gaps will become more binding.




                                                                   44
     III.      Sustaining Uruguay’s Inclusive Growth

68.     The emerging challenge for Uruguay is to sustain the economic growth levels
needed to protect and expand the gains in poverty reduction and shared prosperity by
navigating a less supportive external environment and addressing domestic bottlenecks
that have been exposed as a result of rapid economic growth. While the past decade has
been very good to Uruguay, today the global tailwinds that helped to spur demand for the
country’s exports and supported brisk growth of FDI are subsiding and bottlenecks to growth
are emerging domestically. Growth has moderated as the commodity boom has lost steam, the
prospects for continued high international liquidity are uncertain, and economic conditions in
some of the country’s main trading partners have deteriorated. This chapter explores some of
the main challenges and bottlenecks that are beginning to constrain the opportunities for growth
after a decade of rapid progress, viewed through the lens of Uruguay’s two fundamental
characteristics: smallness and openness and its strong social compact.

A.          Implications of Smallness and Openness

68.     Being small and open, Uruguay must continue to improve the competitiveness and
productivity of its economy. Although great strides have been made in this area since the 2002
crisis, which have propelled growth, reduced poverty, and strengthened equity, a number of
concerns are emerging. Addressing these bottlenecks is essential to maintaining improvements
in competitiveness, and in turn to sustaining growth and progress on the twin goals. These
emergent concerns include (a) aspects of macroeconomic management; (b) limitations in firms’
access to finance; (c) inadequate human capital and skills shortages; (d) lagging innovation and
productivity in many sectors; (e) infrastructure bottlenecks; and (f) issues in the management
of the natural resources upon which the country depends heavily. This section will provide an
overview of these emerging concerns.

i. Smallness, Openness, and Macroeconomic Management

69.     Uruguay’s external environment is expected to be more challenging in the coming
years. Commodity prices for some of its major merchandise exports have declined, external
demand is weaker in large part due to the gradual slowdown in China but also as growth in
South American economies -- including Brazil, Argentina and Venezuela -- slows, and as
normalization of monetary policy in advanced economies, and in particular the United State is
anticipated to increase funding costs which can lead to volatility in capital flows to emerging
markets. Diverging monetary policy stances in advanced economies will continue to contribute
to large shifts in major exchange rates, with implications for domestic inflation in Uruguay.
However, lower oil prices are expected to have a positive impact on fiscal accounts and on
economic activity. Overall, the risks to economic performance in Uruguay over the next few
years are therefore mostly on the downside.
70.     Fiscal policy must carefully balance the objective of fostering growth with that of
consolidating macroeconomic stability and creating space to respond to shocks in a
countercyclical manner. As a small, open economy, Uruguay is particularly exposed to events
beyond its borders, and strengthening its fiscal framework would help enhance fiscal risk
management, promote fiscal stabilization through the economic cycle (thus delivering a growth
dividend), and contribute to supporting debt sustainability. Implementing a countercyclical
fiscal policy would help hedge against risks and smooth fluctuations in consumption and

                                              45
output, mitigating the impact of shocks particularly on the poor. Fiscal policy, however, tends
to be pro-cyclical in Uruguay; this is in part a consequence of the high output volatility of the
Uruguayan economy, which makes it difficult to evaluate correctly in real time its cyclical
stance. Counter-cyclical policy implementation is also limited by a relatively high gross debt-
to-GDP ratio and associated debt servicing as well as a high degree of rigidity in fiscal
spending. Fiscal policy has been somewhat expansive recently, with the consolidated public
sector deficit deteriorating to 3.4 percent of GDP in 2014. While there is no near term threat to
fiscal or debt sustainability given the comfortable level of liquid assets at the Central Bank and
the central government, as well as the robust profile of public debt, a stronger fiscal position
would reduce vulnerability to risks while helping to protect crucial spending needs in the event
of a shock. Given emerging bottlenecks to growth at the micro level—discussed below—which
will require increased public expenditure, and the demands of an aging population, pressures
on the fiscal accounts will increase and fiscal consolidation is necessary to help to reduce
vulnerability to downside risks.
71.    In the near term, the needed fiscal adjustment is not likely to be large given the
expected improvements in state-owned enterprises (SOE) balances resulting from the
completion of major investments and falling oil prices. Nevertheless, fiscal consolidation is
more difficult to undertake in a context of slowing growth. Opportunities may exist, however,
in terms of increasing the efficiency of the public sector, since one implication of being a small
country is that that the cost of providing certain public goods and services are relatively higher
because of limited opportunities to reap economies of scale.

72.     The persistence of a relatively high, though stable, rate of inflation in Uruguay is
another topic of importance for overall macroeconomic stability and competitiveness.
Inflation has remained above the Central Bank’s target range of 3-7 percent since 2007, and
shows little signs of converging to the middle of the targeted range despite a contractionary
monetary stance. This reflects a number of factors including robust growth in domestic
demand, persistent inflation linked to backward-looking wage indexation, and rising unit labor
costs in recent years. The persistence of inflation in the context of a growth slowdown may
reduce the latitude for moderating the rise in wages and therefore a smooth adjustment in labor
markets to changing conditions. In addition, above-target inflation creates macroeconomic
uncertainty and adversely affects low income households. The recent fall in oil prices is likely
to help reduce inflationary pressures, depending on how much of the fall in is reflected in
domestic fuel prices and how much is maintained as fiscal savings.

73.     While the country has significant liquidity buffers to help weather an external
shock, the above-target inflation leaves little room for countercyclical monetary policy.
Furthermore, a relatively high degree of financial dollarization, including a relatively large,
though declining, share of foreign currency-denominated loans, risks generating balance sheet
effects in the case of a sharp depreciation, which could affect the real economy and the financial
sector. The importance of finding new ways to insert itself into global trade makes exchange
rate management another major concern for Uruguay.

74.     A potentially important constraint to growth from the macro side relates to the
combination of low saving rates given an expected tightening in international financing
conditions and potential volatility in capital flows. Uruguay is a significant under-saver
relative to international benchmarks, after controlling for the stage of economic development,
terms of trade, natural resource endowment, and other relevant structural factors. Empirical

                                               46
evidence finds that successful growth acceleration episodes have been associated with high
domestic savings (World Bank, 2008). At the same time, due to its investment grade and
abundant capital inflows, its exchange rate will tend toward overvaluation.
75.    Nominal depreciation since the Federal Reserve’s tapering announcement has
helped bring the exchange rate more in line with fundamentals. The peso has depreciated
by close to 30 percent since the US tapering announcement. In the past, Uruguay’s exchange
rate has been subject to large fluctuations over time as a result of the country’s openness to
investment and the resulting exposure to large capital flow movements; these make
macroeconomic management more difficult and costly. As a small, commodity-based open
economy, Uruguay will continue to be subject to large capital fluctuations with periods during
which its currency would tend to appreciate, particularly given short-run incentives related to
the high degree of dollarization of the economy. Prudent monetary and fiscal policies help to
minimize the impact of these fluctuations. Considering instruments such as sovereign wealth
funds and investments in human capital accumulation, innovation and technology absorption
would help Uruguay raise overall economic productivity and cope with the adverse effects of
currency appreciation.

76.     Uruguay’s small, open economy is exposed to spillovers from events in its larger
neighbors, particularly Argentina. The resulting volatility can adversely affect growth and
welfare (particularly that of the poor and vulnerable population). A key question in terms of
resilience is whether Uruguay has managed to decouple its economy from Argentina’s.
Uruguay has important economic connections with Argentina and Brazil through the financial
sector, trade, tourism, and FDI flows, and its economic cycle has historically been highly
synchronized especially with that of Argentina (see Figure 3).

77.    However, Uruguay’s exposure to Argentina, in particular through economic and
financial linkages, has declined markedly since the 2002 crisis, and the country has taken
measures to ring-fence potential spillovers from Argentina that might threaten
macroeconomic stability, growth, and social gains. The correlation coefficient of the cyclical
component of Uruguay’s GDP with the that of Argentina’s GDP has declined in the recent
boom period, although it remains relatively high, in part because of the commodity cycle (down
from 0.8 in 1990s-2002 to 0.6 in 2003-2013). Uruguay has also built large liquidity buffers to
deal with potential spillovers. Thus, in contrast to the notable deceleration in its neighbors,
Uruguay has continued to grow robustly in recent years, perhaps suggesting a moderating
impact of spillovers from the region.
78.      Uruguay has diversified away from Argentina in its exports, and crucially, in
terms of financial linkages. Financial linkages, mainly in the form of non-resident deposits in
the Uruguayan banking system, were an important transmission channel in the 2001-2002
crisis, but their importance has since declined. The share of non-resident deposits to GDP has
declined to about 8 percent, or about 14 percent of total deposits, down from more than 40
percent at their peak. Similarly, Uruguay has diversified its exports away from Argentina,
which today accounts for less than 5 percent of total merchandise exports, down from close to
17 percent in 1999-2000. Argentina remains an important destination for some of Uruguay’s
industrial exports, however, including manufactured goods, machinery and transport
equipment, mineral fuels, and chemical products. Uruguay’s exports to Brazil are dominated
by commodity exports, which are more inelastic and can be more easily reallocated to other
markets, making Uruguay's trade balance less sensitive to changes in Brazil ’s domestic
demand.
                                              47
79.     Nevertheless Argentina remains Uruguay’s main source of FDI and is also by far
the country’s largest source of tourism revenues. Argentine FDI represented 22 percent of
total FDI flows to Uruguay between 2003 and 2013, and its importance has increased in recent
years, suggesting that these flows may be countercyclical relative to the Argentine economy,
rising as economic and investment-related conditions deteriorate. The destination of these
investments has changed over time from the financial sector to the agricultural and construction
sectors. Argentina has also accounted for more than half of all tourist arrivals and tourism
receipts in recent years (e.g., 54.6 percent of tourist receipts in 2014), although this proportion
has declined somewhat since the early 2000s. Brazilian tourists accounted for an additional
17.2 percent of tourist receipts in 2014. An analysis of the income elasticity of tourist spending
in Uruguay by Argentines and Brazilians found that in both cases the elasticity was larger than
one (1.9 in the case of Argentines and 2.7 for Brazilians) and thus likely to decline as economic
conditions in the sending countries worsen (Altman et al., 2012). The relatively less elastic
Argentine demand may be partially explained by the fact that many Argentines own summer
homes in Uruguay.

80.      In addition to managing potential spillovers from its neighbors, Uruguay must also
manage the implications of being a small partner in Mercosur26 in the context of its global
integration vision. Although internal Mercosur trade has grown significantly in absolute
terms, it represents a relatively small percentage of members’ total exports, and its share in
total trade has declined over time, after an initial period of intra-zone trade deepening.
Preferential, unhindered access to Mercosur’s large market could provide much needed
economies of scale to Uruguay. However, gravity models shows that during the 2010-2012
period Uruguay under-traded with Argentina on both commodities and differentiated products
while it under-traded with Brazil in commodities. This in part because of the bloc’s failure to
fulfill its original ambition of establishing a customs union with a common external tariff and
no internal barriers to trade. Tariff and non-tariff barriers within the union continue to exist.
For instance, Argentina in 2011 eliminated automatic licensing on imported goods, including
those from its Mercosur partners, causing an immediate and measurable slowdown in imports.
Recently introduced rules target services imports to Argentina, and require importers to seek
government permission before spending more than $100,000 on foreign services or making
large installment payments for such services. Brazil has sought tariff hikes on goods affecting
trade with a wide range of partners and has retaliated against Argentine actions with measures
of its own. These barriers constrain Uruguay’s preferential access to the Mercosur market and
encourage investments to gravitate to the larger markets. Differences between investment
promotion regimes among the Mercosur countries also influence investors’ decisions of where
to locate their investments.

81.     A challenge for Uruguay as it tries to further diversify its economy and exports is
that, as a result of Mercosur rules, it faces relatively high tariffs on capital goods imports
from countries outside Mercosur. Although Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs on capital
goods imports have declined over time (and are lower than in Argentina or Brazil), they remain
higher than in comparator countries (see Figure 46). This increases the cost of capital goods,
which can reduce technology adoption and productivity with implications more generally for
26
  Mercosur was established in 1991 by Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay with the goal of creating a
seamless single market. Today the combined market (including Venezuela) encompasses more than 250 million
people and accounts for more than three-quarters of the economic activity on the continent—a market that is
approximately 46 times that of Uruguay in terms of GDP and 65 times by population.
                                                    48
Uruguay’s diversification strategy. Tariffs for intermediate imports are also higher in Uruguay
than in comparator countries.

 Figure 46. MFN Tariffs on Capital Goods Imports                                                    Figure 47. Uruguay MFN Tariffs on Capital Goods
                                                                                                    Imports

 14                                                                                                 14


 12                                                                                                 12

 10
                                                                                                    10

  8
                                                                                                     8
  6
                                                                                                     6
  4

  2                                                                                                  4


  0                                                                                                  2
        MFN       MFN       MFN       MFN          MFN         MFN       MFN     MFN     MFN
      Argentina   Brazil    Chile     China      Costa Rica    New      Panama   Peru   Uruguay      0
                                                              Zealand                                    1992 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013


                     Average of Simple Average         Average of Weighted Average                                       Average of Simple Average       Average of Weighted Average



 Note: 2011-2013 average.                                                                           Source: UN, TRAINS.
 Source: UN, TRAINS.


82.     A Mercosur consensus clause requires that all five (Venezuela joined Mercosur in
2012) full members must agree on any major decision, and this includes sensitive issues
such as expanding trade partners and setting tariffs. Consensus has been difficult to reach:
talks to secure a trade agreement with the EU began in 1999 but have not advanced, with
subsidies for European farmers and tariffs on industrial goods being among the stumbling
blocks. Other outstanding issues relate to intellectual property, government procurement,
services, and competitiveness rules. Negotiations on a planned, US-backed Free Trade Area
of the Americas (FTAA) have been similarly stalled.

83.     Uruguay has continued to promote a policy of open regionalism within the
Mercosur framework, and to seek greater flexibility overall, particularly regarding trade
agreements with third countries. The loss of access to the Generalized System of Preferences
as Uruguay graduated to high-income status, as well as the weak economic performance of its
Mercosur trading partners, underlines the need for the second prong of such a strategy. As
shown in the previous section, there still exists significant untapped potential for increasing
Uruguayan exports in traditional and regional markets. Uruguay has looked for additional
opportunities to increase access to its numerous non-Mercosur trading partners. FTZs have also
formed a core part of the effort to diversify markets and exports. Uruguay has focused on
increasing its presence in new markets such as China, Russia, and emerging countries, and has
targeted high-quality and high-price niches in Europe and the US for some of its products.
Another case in point is Mexico, with whom Uruguay already has a free trade agreement
(following the granting of an exception to Mercosur rules) and has encouraged companies from
third-party countries to set up a portion of their production chain in Uruguay. Uruguay has also
pursued closer relations with the Pacific Alliance (whose members include Chile, Colombia,
Mexico, and Peru), with which it currently has observer status. While Mercosur has preferential
trade access to less than 7 per cent of global markets, the economies of the Pacific Alliance on
average have trade pacts with countries representing almost 75 percent of the world economy
(abeceb.com). Expanding exports of non-traditional services could play an important role in
sustaining growth, especially since remoteness plays a much smaller role in the comparative

                                                                                               49
advantage. Subsequently gaining market access through participating in the Trade in Services
Agreement (TISA) effort is crucial to diversifying exports and, ultimately, to creating good
quality jobs.27

84.     The Free Trade Zone regime has provided greater trade flexibility to Uruguay
albeit at a fiscal cost. The free zone regime that has been implemented since 1987 exempts
companies operating in these zones from all national taxes, except from social contributions,
and goods and services may be imported free of import duty or taxes no matter the origin.
Goods produced in these zones may be sold in Uruguay’s customs territory after payment of
all customs duties and taxes.


ii. Access to Finance

85.     Domestic credit to the private sector is low in Uruguay relative to its income level.
Credit to the private sector rose to about 26 percent of GDP in 2013, compared with close to
150 percent in high-income countries (see Figure 48). Access to credit domestically,
particularly long-term credit, may be a constraint to some firms, particularly large ones,
although the evidence is mixed and interviews with firms did not uniformly identify it as a key
constraint. For instance, while access to finance was noted as a major constraint for 16 percent
of Uruguayan firms, only 8.8 percent of firms identified this as the top constraint (World Bank
Enterprise Survey, 2010). However, only 5.7 percent of firms whose exports represented 10
percent or more of sales reported access to finance as a major concern. These firms rely to a
greater extent on bank finance for their working capital (11 percent) and investment (23.4
percent). Own-financing plays an important role in financing investment for Uruguayan
exporters, accounting for 63.9 percent of needs, while supplier credit accounts for 9.4 percent.
The role of supplier credit is more important in Uruguay than in high-income non-OECD
countries, where it finances about 4 percent of investment, and it is an even more important
source for financing working capital, accounting for 20.9 percent.

86.     The role of capital markets in financing investments in Uruguay is negligible for
exporting firms. Long-term financing is dominated by institutional investors, such as pension
funds, insurance companies, and banks (who hold around 85 percent of total issuances). There
has been some increase recently in the issuance of debt by financial trusts (fideicomisos) and
Obligations now account for a growing part of long-term financing of projects and firms.
Moreover, prudential regulations on banks limit the loans to any single borrower to 15 percent
of bank assets (5 percent in the case of Banco Republica Oriental del Uruguay); thus, the
largest firms have to diversify their sources of financing, including borrowing abroad. The
degree of financial development has been empirically shown to have an important impact on
trade flows and economic growth (Manova, 2013).




27
  The Trade in Services Agreement (TISA) is currently being negotiated in Geneva, Switzerland with 51
participants that represent 70 percent of the world ’s trade in services. As of July 2014, participants in the TISA
negotiations included Australia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the European Union, Hong Kong SAR,
China, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Mauritius, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Republic of Korea, Switzerland, Taiwan, China, Turkey, and the United States.
                                                        50
                Figure 48. Financial Development and Income Level




                Source: WDI, World Bank.




87.     Small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) have less access to credit than larger
firms, because of lack of collateral or guarantees and asymmetry of information, among
other constraints. In Uruguay small enterprises finance only 6.6 percent of their investments
with bank loans, with 8.1 percent financed from supplier credit. Like other countries in the
region, Uruguay has taken steps to reduce the credit constraint for SMEs through the use of
private and public credit guarantees schemes (CGS). In 2008 it created the National System of
Guarantees for Enterprises (SIGA).

88.    The overall access to financial services is Uruguay at the household level is also
below that of comparators. In Uruguay only about 10 percent of the poorest 40 percent had
an account at a financial institution in 2011, compared to the LAC average of 24 percent and
49 percent in high-income non-OECD countries. Furthermore only 1.7 percent of the bottom
40 percent and 8.4 percent of the top 60 percent of the population reported that they had a
savings account at a financial institution. The financial inclusion law approved in 2014 is
expected to significantly raise these numbers.

ii. Human Capital, Skills and Education

89.     While Uruguay’s human capital and skills endowment has been the cornerstone
of its ability to innovate in areas such as agriculture, software, and nontraditional
services, skills increasingly appear to be in short supply, and there is a growing labor
endowment gap with respect to some comparators. An increasingly sophisticated export
base is a central pillar of a trade and integration vision based on high productivity and value
addition, and depends on the availability of skilled labor that is able to absorb and adapt
technologies and to innovate. Adequate levels of human capital and skills are also essential to
maintaining progress on jobs and inclusion. But opinion surveys, such as the World Economic
Forum survey and Enterprise Surveys, point to human capital and skills shortfalls. The supply
of high-skilled workers in engineering and technology lags that in other Latin American
economies. A survey conducted by Inter-America Development Bank (2012) found that 16
                                               51
percent of companies that sought to hire were not able to fill all the advertised positions, with
the positions most difficult to fill being semi-qualified and office jobs and professionals and
technical positions. There appears to be a particular shortage of technical, socio-emotional
skills, and non-cognitive abilities (punctuality, motivation, effort, respect, etc.). Paragraph 55
above noted the evidence suggesting that one of the key drivers of Uruguay’s substantial labor
productivity gap with respect to more developed economies is low human capital.
90.     As noted above, Uruguay’s endowment of human capital appears to underlie its
labor productivity gap, affecting the ability to absorb and adopt new technologies. In
addition to its human capital endowment disparity with respect to OECD countries, there is a
considerable disparity in human capital endowment with respect to Asian comparators: In 2010
Uruguay had a 2.2 schooling year disparity vis-à-vis the Republic of Korea for the 55-59 age
cohort, rising to five years for the 20-24 age cohort. Even vis-à-vis its comparators in the
region, human capital appears to be lagging: while Uruguay has a nearly three-year advantage
with respect to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile in the older age group, for the cohort age 20-24 the
disparity with Brazil has closed and it has become negative with respect to Argentina and Chile
(Barro & Lee 2013).

91.     Today the education system does not perform at a level commensurate with a
growth strategy based on high skills, innovation, and productivity. Uruguay enjoys the one
of the highest rates of gross primary enrollment in Latin America (see Table 4), and net
enrollment, at 99.5 percent of primary school age children, is higher than that the OECD
member countries average of 96.8 percent (OECD/ECLAC 2014). But performance in other
areas is less positive. Relative to comparators in the region, secondary school repetition and
drop-out rates are high (see Figures 49 and 50), and quality is lacking throughout the system
as measured by PISA scores. By the age of 18, only slightly more than half of Uruguayan
children—53.9 percent—attend school. This compares poorly with OECD age counterparts
(more than 84 percent). Uruguay has one of the lowest rates of secondary school graduation in
the region; only Brazil, Colombia and Paraguay have higher upper-middle school dropout rates.
At the other end of the spectrum, despite being mandatory, only around 65 percent of 3 year-
old children attend preschool (Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico all outperformed Uruguay). These
trends are exacerbated by high repetition rates. For the first year in primary school, the
repetition rate is 13.7 percent; in the first year of secondary nearly one-third of all students
repeats the year (Filgueira, 2013). Repetition rates have increased continually over the past
seven years in basic secondary school.28 This situation is doubly troubling as public expenditure
on education has more than doubled as percentage of GDP since 2003, although it is still
relatively low at 4.5 percent of GDP (2011).




28
   Several factors have been suggested as underlying Uruguay’s high dropout rates. One is high repetition rates.
Uruguay’s secondary school system was conceived as an elite preparation ground for higher studies, and the
transition from primary to secondary is an abrupt one, with repetition rates rising sharply in the first year of lower
secondary. According to a recent survey, other factors include lack of interest in what is being taught, taking up
employment, pregnancy, and difficulty of subject matter. An additional aspect is the labor market. In recent years,
similar to the situation in other Latin American countries, the returns to education have declined in Uruguay.
Moreover, it is thought that the labor market is currently at full employment, and employment opportunities for
the less skilled at relatively high wages are available in the formal sector. These factors make it increasingly
attractive for some to consider the labor market as a viable alternative to remaining in school.

                                                         52
Table 4. Gross Enrolment Ratios (2003-2012)
                       Pre-primary        Primary                                         Secondary                      Tertiary
                                          (% of primary                                   (% of secondary                (% of tertiary
                       (% of children of
                                          school-age                                      school-age                     school-age
                       pre-school age)
                                          population)                                     population)                    population)

Spain                                     127                          104                           129                         83
Lithuania                                  77                           99                           107                         77
Poland                                     74                           99                            97                         74
Estonia                                    90                           98                           109                         72
Latvia                                     90                          105                            99                         67
Turkey                                     29                          102                            89                         61
Hungary                                    87                          101                           101                         60
Croatia                                     64                          94                            98                         59
Slovakia                                   90                          102                            94                         55

Argentina                                  75                          118                            90                         75
Chile                                     112                          102                            90                         71
Uruguay                                    89                          112                            90                         63
Costa Rica                                 73                          107                           101                         47
Colombia                                   49                          107                            93                         45
Peru                                       77                          105                            91                         43
Panama                                     65                          100                            84                         42
Ecuador                                   150                          114                            87                         39
Dominican Republic                         37                          105                            75                         33
Mexico                                     99                          104                            84                         28
Belize                                     47                          121                            84                         26
Note: Gross enrolment ratio: Total enrolment in a given level of education (pre-primary, primary, secondary or tertiary), regardless of age,
expressed as a percentage of the official school-age population for the same level of education.
Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2013).




                               Figure 49. School Attendance by Age Cohort, 2006–2012

                                     99.6% 99.0%
                        100.0%
                                         99.1% 99.6%            94.7% 95.0%
                         95.0%                                            95.4%
                                                                    93.9%
                         90.0%
                         85.0%
                         80.0%                                                             75.2% 75.5%
                         75.0%                                                                       78.7%
                                                                                               74.9%
                         70.0%
                         65.0%
                         60.0%
                                      Primary 6-12 years       Secondary 12-14 years Secondary 15-17 years
                                                   2006         2008    2010     2012




                                                                    53
       Figure 50. Uruguay Has Lost Its Historical Educational Advantage vis-à-vis LAC Average




        Source: Adapted from Uruguay Education Policy Note.




92.      Educational quality, although high for the LAC region, appears to be
deteriorating relative to other nations and is well below that seen in non-LAC OECD
countries. A World Bank (2014) report notes that in the 2012 PISA exams 48 percent of
Uruguay’s students failed to achieve a score of 2 in science, 49 percent in mathematics, and 39
percent in reading—a score of 2 is considered only a basic ability to apply the material to real
world contexts. Moreover, the quality of education, as measured by the PISA test score, has
declined in recent years in Uruguay, and the country today ranks 55 out of 65 countries that
participate in mathematics for students 15 years old, and in terms of the capacity to solve
problems Uruguay ranks 42 out of the 44 participating countries. Closing the disparities in the
quality of human capital could give a strong impulse to growth. One estimate suggests that
increasing PISA scores by 50 points in 10 years, in conjunction with training workers already
in the labor market, could increase GDP per capita by more than one-third by 2050 (IDB, 2014).

93.    One consequence of elevated school withdrawal is that 17.9 percent of the high-
school age cohort neither study nor work (see Figure 51). In 2013 this represented 94,000
youth, almost all (95 percent) concentrated in urban areas, in keeping with the country’s overall
urban population percentage. This share is somewhat lower than the average for Latin America,
where one in five youth is a nini, but it is significantly higher than the global average in high-
income countries (about 11 percent of the cohort). Furthermore, the distribution varies
markedly within Uruguay, from 22 percent in the northern departments to 14 percent in the
south.

94.     The share of ninis in Uruguay declined steadily between 2000 and 2013 for both
genders. (Elsewhere in the region, the decline in the number of ninis over the last two decades
is entirely accounted for by a reduction of female ninis.) Women account for 60 percent of the
total nini population in Uruguay; of these, 23 percent between 15 and 18 years of age were
married (Figure 53). The latter factor follows the Latin American norm, where the single most
important factor associated with the probability of being a female nini is marriage before age
18, compounded by teenage pregnancy.
                                                              54
Figure 53. Education and Labor Market Status by Age and Gender, 2013

      Male                                           Female




95.       The ninis phenomenon has a strong equity and gender dimension, with
implications for intergenerational social mobility. The incidence of ninis varies greatly across
the income distribution, reaching 40 percent in the bottom decile versus only 1 percent in the
top decile (see Figure 52). Overall, 75 percent of all ninis in Uruguay are from a household in
the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution, making the phenomenon far more biased
toward vulnerable households than in other Latin American countries. These are troubling
statistics as a significant proportion of young people are not accumulating human capital,
whether through formal education or through on-the-job experience. Moreover, given an
emphasis on trade integration based on productivity and value addition, as well as an advanced
demographic transition toward an aging society, Uruguay can hardly afford to forgo the
productive contributions of a fifth of its youth.




                                               55
 Figure 51. Proportion of Ninis (15-24 years of age)                    Figure 52. Share of Youth (15-24 years of age)
 by Gender in Uruguay, 1992–2013                                        Who are Ninis, by Income Decile and Gender in
                                                                        2013
     30
                                                                             45.6
                                                                                                                                                           Men         Women

     25
             22.9                                        21.9                          35.9

     20
             18.1                                           17.9
                                                                          27.3                   26.7
     15                                                     14.0
             13.2
     10                                                                             17.8                   17.3
                                                                                              14.4

                    Men          Total           Women                                                  12.5         12.5
                                                                                                                  11.2
     5                                                                                                                            8.0
                                                                                                                            6.9
                                                                                                                                        4.9
                                                                                                                                              5.5
                                                                                                                                                    4.2
                                                                                                                                                          3.4   3.8
                                                                                                                                                                      2.7
     0                                                                                                                                                                      1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.9
          1992 1997 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2013                       1         2         3      4       5        6       7                    8           9          10
                                                                                                     Household per Capita Income Decile


 Source: World Bank with data from SEDLAC, various years.               Source: de Hoyos, Rogers and Székely (2015) “Out of school and
                                                                        out of work: challenges and solutions around the ninis in Latin
                                                                        America.”



96.    Beyond the consequences for future growth, competitiveness, and the quality of
the labor force, the shortcomings of the education system may jeopardize the
sustainability of achievements in inclusive growth in Uruguay. Sharp differences in
educational attainment between the top and bottom income quintiles contribute to the strong
association between educational achievement and socio-economic status and to low
educational mobility relative to peers. High dropout rates and a large number of youth out of
school and out of work may contribute to the perpetuation of concentrated, chronic poverty.

iii. Innovation and Productivity

97.     Maintaining high productivity growth is critical for sustaining economic growth
in a less favorable external environment. Uruguay has achieved high productivity growth in
recent years but the gap with aspirational comparators remains significant and the country lags
in innovation and R&D,29 key factors for sustaining productivity convergence.30 Sustaining high
productivity growth to support a growth model based on trade integration and participation in
global value chains will require closing the technology and innovation gap; improving
production and marketing processes; cultivating entrepreneurship, adaptability, and
nimbleness; ensuring adequate access to finance; and upgrading institutions and markets.

98.  A multi-pronged strategy to intensify the knowledge content and sophistication of
Uruguay’s traditional primary exports and to increasingly specialize in high-value
modern services exports can bring benefits. In particular, such a strategy might focus on
29
   There is a positive correlation between innovation and productivity. After controlling for relevant variables
such as human capital, the relationship between these variables in OECD countries is positive and statistically
significant.
30
   Some evidence suggests that growth decelerations are essentially explained by productivity growth slowdowns
rather than by a slowdown in physical capital accumulation—with 85 percent of the growth deceleration explained
by a slowdown in the rate of total factor productivity growth. (Eichengreen, Park, and Shin, 2011.)
                                                                   56
sustained growth in value added and sophistication in upstream phases of production in
resource-based agricultural chains, along with a strategy of selectively upgrading toward
downstream phases of the chain and further diversification of the primary products export mix.
It would also entail broadening the portfolio and knowledge-intensity of those export services
that are not constrained by scale or geographical proximity requirements. Identifying and
addressing both the economy-wide and industry-specific policies and regulatory changes that
would enable the implementation of such a global integration strategy remains a critical policy
priority for Uruguay (see Box 3).



 Box 3. Strengthening Uruguay’s Participation in Global Value Chains

 Opportunities for better international integration and insertion into global value chains vary by industry and
 depend on global demand trends, multinational sourcing and localization strategies, and competitive
 dynamics within each segment of the chain, among many other variables. An analysis of some of Uruguay’s
 key industries reveals the following opportunities and policy challenges:

 The forestry and pulp & paper industry in Uruguay is characterized by strong vertical integration (with up to
 50 percent of plantations owned by processing companies), high entry barriers with a minimum capital
 investment of $2.5 billion, long investment and production cycles, and high logistics and transport costs
 (which can amount to half the cost of wood logs delivered to the processing plant). Compliance with
 international sustainability certifications and close-to-the-technological-frontier productivity levels are the
 two critical success factors that have enabled Uruguay to gain a solid foothold in global markets. Pursuing a
 strategy of continual investment in innovation and variety development in partnership with the National
 Institute of Agricultural Research (INIA) will continue to drive productivity and consolidate Uruguay’s
 international positioning as a sustainable, cost-effective producer. Policies to supporting this strategy include
 (i) strengthening the public-private innovation ecosystem and regulatory framework; (ii) striking the right
 balance between the devolution of the licensing powers for forestry plantations to local authorities and the
 need to ensure policy predictability for an industry characterized by high capital investments and decennial
 production cycles; and (iii) investing in transport infrastructure, as high costs adversely affect the
 competitiveness of the industry and the rate of reinvestment by foreign operators.

 The dairy and beef industries in Uruguay benefit from the same set of agricultural innovation and extension
 services and both enjoy internationally competitive production costs and productivity levels. Whereas the
 beef industry has repositioned itself as the sixth largest producer of top-quality beef, which is exported to
 more than 100 countries at significant price premiums, the export mix of the dairy industry is primarily
 constituted of powdered milk and casein, sold as commodities to global industry players for further
 processing. The far-sighted vision of the beef industry (and the National Institute of Beef/INAC) to invest in
 a state-of-the-art public-private traceability system and leverage it for country brand recognition and as a
 value chain-upgrading mechanism largely explains the better positioning of the beef industry. Two factors
 constrain the industry’s effort to replicate the trajectory of the beef industry. First, volatile trade policies in
 neighboring and regional markets include sudden trade policy shifts and non-tariff barriers, which deter firms
 from investing to upgrade toward higher-value dairy consumer products characterized by a short shelf-life
 and just-in-time linkages that require seamless cross-border operations. Exacerbating this are the limitations
 within Mercosur in negotiating bilateral trade agreements to gain access to more profitable albeit distant
 export. Second, the shift toward automation of the dairy production process, which according to firms is in
 response to challenging industrial relations and high labor costs, does not lend itself to the production of
 labor-intensive, high-end dairy consumer products.




                                                        57
Box 3. (Continued)
Software and global business services explain much of the dynamism of the services sector in Uruguay
over the last decade. The software industry is characterized by relatively low capital investment and start-
up costs, a modular and scalable business growth model based on portfolio diversification as the main
strategy of financing continuous innovation, and human capital as the critical asset representing up to 90
percent of operating costs. The initial service partnership with the first wave of FDI in the financial and
distribution sectors has fostered the entry into regional export markets, as these multinational clients have
consolidated their operations throughout Latin America and brought with them their Uruguayan software
services providers. At the same time, Uruguay has been able to ride the wave of global business services
offshoring, attracting key players in the industry. While both industries seem well positioned to contribute
to the overall strategy of further specialization into high-value modern services exports, they would both
benefit from a concerted policy initiative to address the following issues. First, the Program for Animal
Product Traceability launched by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fishing/MAGP in 2003 was
very successful in catalyzing the technological growth of the Uruguayan software industry and,
ultimately, in significantly enhancing the sophistication of the beef export process. Leveraging and
expanding this experience to other export-oriented products in agriculture, agribusiness, health, biotech,
and energy would help boost the export competitiveness of both the software services and resource-based
industries. Second, the initial entry into a new export market by an individual software company requires
a minimum investment of $300,000, a business development effort of one year, and a minimum annual
turnover of $4 million. There is a mismatch between these minimum entry requirements, which can
primarily be met by medium-sized or larger companies, and the focus of government export promotion
programs, which target small enterprises unable to meet these entry requirements. Third, these service
industries have grown their exports despite a lack of bilateral or multilateral free trade agreements.
However, this situation is beginning to erode the cost competitiveness of software exporters, as they are
subject to differential tariff rates (for example, 10 percent in Paraguay, 25 percent in Peru). The
participation of Uruguay in multilateral trade agreements such as the Trade Agreement in Services (TISA)
currently under negotiation would enhance the export competitiveness of Uruguayan service exporters.
Fourth, human capital is the key asset for the sustainability of a knowledge-intensive modern services
industry, and Uruguay has performed well over the past decades in supplying a sizable pool of skilled
workers. However, the strong demand growth for skilled workers by the software and global business
services industries (estimated by the Uruguayan Bureau for Information Technology/CUTI at 500
technical graduates annually) has already outpaced the supply of technical graduates (300 annually) by the
Uruguayan educational system.




                                                      58
                                                                    Figure 54. Uruguay Spends Little on R&D
                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                   ISL
                                                                                                                                                       DNK CHE




                      R&D spending (percent of GDP, average
                                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                              2.5                                                                                  AUT

                                                                                                                                                 FRA SGP
                                                               2                                                                                  BEL  AUS
                                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                  2000-2012)                                                                                            SVN
                                                                                                                                                              NOR
                                                                                                                                                               LUX
                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                     CHN                             IRL
                                                                                                                                        CZE
                                                                                                                                       EST        NZL
                                                                                                                                  RUS PRT ESPITA
                                                                                                                              BRA
                                                                                                                                HUN
                                                               1                                             UKR      MNE       HRV
                                                                                                                      ZAF
                                                                                                IND            TUN          MYS LTU
                                                                                             KEN                       BLR                       HKG
                                                                                                         MAR IRN SRB         TURPOL      GRC
                                                                                                                      BWA            SVK
                                                                                                                                   LVA    MLT
                                                              0.5                    MLI TZA
                                                                                           SEN
                                                                                                                       BGR GABARG
                                                                                                                           ROM                PRI ARE
                                                                                  MOZ                MDA                    CRI     CHL SYC CYP
                                                                                   UGA        PAK GHA             JOR      MUS MEX
                                                                                                          EGY                        URY
                                                                                   TGO
                                                                                     BFA
                                                                                ETH NPL
                                                                                                         BOL MNG
                                                                                                           ARM
                                                                                                             NGA
                                                                                                            GEO MKDTHA AZE PAN
                                                                                                                  DZA           KAZ
                                                                        BDI    ZAR
                                                                              MDG             KGZ VNM     LKA ALB  NAM  COL
                                                                                           TJK          PHL         ECUPER               OMN         KWT
                                                                              GMB         KHM     ZMB
                                                                                            LSO LAONIC       SLV
                                                                                                             CPV
                                                                                                           IDN PRY  JAM
                                                                                                      HND GTM BIH IRQ     VCT         TTO SAU                MAC
                                                               0                                                                                 BRN

                                                                    5         6             7             8              9             10             11             12
                                                                                                  ln (GDP per capita, 2013)




99.     Although Uruguay does relatively well in some aspects central to boosting
productivity and innovation, such as technological readiness (see subsequent Box 4 for
sectoral examples), ranking 46 of 144 countries in the Global Competitiveness rankings, it
lags in others. It ranks at number 86 in innovation (Global Competitiveness Report, 2014-
2015). Economy-wide, Uruguay spends little on innovation (although there is significant
variation by sector):31 today Uruguay spends 0.4 percent of GDP on research and development,
significantly less than OECD countries (2.2 percent) and less than some Latin American
countries with a lower GDP per capita. Although innovation in some value chains is high,
preliminary data indicate that on average, Uruguay lags far behind Asian Tigers and some
middle-income countries in its ability to innovate at the technological frontier, and that it has
fallen farther behind as it has grown richer (World Bank 2014a), in part because its returns to
innovation are relatively low (Nguyen and Jaramillo 2014). Regardless of sector, Uruguay, like
other Latin American countries, makes less intensive use of R&D compared to other
industrialized countries (see Figure 54). Innovation in Uruguay explains less than 10 percent
of TFP growth, compared to more than 40 percent in high-productivity growth countries such
as Finland, Ireland, Korea, and Singapore when they had per capita incomes levels similar to
Uruguay’s. Productivity across and within sectors is heterogeneous, and is linked in part to the
prevailing degree of innovation.

100. Low productivity, together with a lack of technological information and
organizational rigidities, appear to be important deterrents of innovation for about a
third of firms in Uruguay. Other factors that inhibit innovation include the low capacity for
technology absorption of Uruguayan firms relative to those in other countries, partly as a result
of the quality of human capital (years of schooling, quality of education, curricula) as well as
insufficient access to technological services. This insufficient access is more pronounced for
intangible technologies as opposed to technologies embedded in capital. The degree of
innovation varies significantly across sectors, with export-oriented agricultural sub-sectors
such as rice, citrus, dairy, cattle, and forestry innovating more on average. Low productivity

31
  There is a large dispersion in spending on R&D across sectors in Uruguay, averaging 2.6 percent of output
value in informatics, 1.5 percent in animal rearing, 1.3 percent in cereals cultivation, and 0.2 percent in the auto
sector (Aboal et al. 2014).
                                                                                                          59
and scarce innovation may also be linked to insufficient entrepreneurial capabilities of
Uruguayan firms. Uruguay ranks lower on managerial capacity in firms and exhibits a lower
level of private sector financing for research and development compared to Australia, Chile,
Costa Rica, New Zealand, and other comparators.

101. Upgrading institutions and markets is also central to sustaining productivity
growth and spurring innovation. A higher degree of competition in the domestic market can
boost productivity and competitiveness in global markets by ensuring the availability of
competitively-priced inputs to the production process. Limited competition and the lack of a
level playing field can also limit innovation. Competition in Uruguay is still perceived as weak
by global standards and Uruguay ranks 103rd out of 144 countries in the intensity of local
competition and 109th in the effectiveness of its anti-trust policy (WEF, 2014). Limited
competition and an uneven playing field may limit innovation and constrain competitiveness.
Although a new Competition Law entered into force in 2007 and the Commission for the
Promotion and Defense of Competition was established in 2009 as a decentralized body of the
Ministry of Economy and Finance, according to a 2010 study by MEF, only 7 percent of firms
were aware of the new competition policy legislation.

102. The State is involved in many economic activities in Uruguay, and SOEs often play
a dominant role in markets that in other contexts are typically served by the private
sector. There are 13 public enterprises in Uruguay (100 percent public), and most are dominant
in the local market. The major ones include ANCAP (energy), ANTEL (telecommunications),
UTE (electricity), OSE (water and sewerage), and BROU (bank). This large role for the State
is partly explained by a small market size, which in certain cases may lead to the rise of natural
monopolies or to a determination that specific services are part of the public domain because
of their importance (referenda have supported State control of some key utilities). Although
exceptions may be granted to protect specific public policy goals, it is desirable that they be
limited in scope and based upon clearly defined criteria. In the EU, undertakings entrusted with
the provision of “general interest” are exempted from the application of general competition
and State aid rules, but only to the extent that the application of such rules obstructs the
provision of the service. A preliminary assessment using the OECD’s Product Market
Regulation methodology indicates that the degree of State control—public ownership and
direct involvement of the State in the business sector—is higher in Uruguay than in OECD
countries, with regulations that restrict number of firms or ban private investment in certain
sectors, may facilitate anti-competitive practices or discriminate against certain market players,
and allow for discretional application of rules. Among the main identified challenges for public
enterprises are the need to (a) strengthen governance through greater transparency, monitoring,
and accountability, and (b) improve efficiency to increase the quality of service delivery
(World Bank, 2015)

103. Another important aspect in the innovation and productivity discussion is the role
of SMEs; this is particularly important from an inclusion and shared prosperity
perspective. SMEs represent close to one-fifth of all firms in Uruguay. When micro enterprises
are included, the proportion rises to close to 97 percent of all firms (OECD/ECLAC 2012) and
60 percent employment (Inter-American Development Bank, 2012).32 Compared to larger
firms, SMEs face major constraints on efforts to innovate: restrictions on access to domestic
and foreign financing, as well as requests for guarantees and high interest rates. Innovation also


                                               60
requires economies of scale and of scope, adding a further difficulty for SMEs. The result is
that many firms do not grow and new ventures are fewer. The gap between the innovation-
related activity of large and small firms in Uruguay appears to be larger than that in other
countries in the region, at 17 percent, compared to a figure closer to 10 percent in Argentina,
Chile, Colombia, and Costa Rica (OECD/ECLAC, 2012). Despite these constraints, SMEs
bring flexibility to innovation processes thanks to a more malleable organizational structure
that allows them to respond quickly to change. Moreover, private financial institutions in
Uruguay are focused almost solely on large or sophisticated enterprises or upper-middle and
high-income households. Part of the reason for this may be the sector’s high-cost labor
structure. This depresses investments among Uruguayan SMEs and leaves much of the
population to be served by high-cost, non-bank intermediaries that provide only basic services,
with an important impact on equity and shared prosperity. Some evidence also suggests that
innovation-driven growth is inclusive from an employment standpoint, with the strength of
firms’ innovation-driven employment growth being significantly and positively associated
with the share of the firms’ unskilled work force. This supports the propositions that innovation
is a powerful driver of employment growth, and that innovation-driven growth is inclusive in
its creation of unskilled jobs (Dutz et al., 2011).


iv. Infrastructure

104. To enhance competitiveness it is also important to improve connectivity through
strengthened infrastructure (especially transport) and logistics. Given Uruguay’s distance
from the main international trade growth poles, excellent connectivity is key to competitiveness
and exports. Despite significant investments in infrastructure and key successes in the
telecommunications and energy sectors (see Box 4), substantial further investment is required
to close the gaps in transport infrastructure so as to improve access to markets.

105. While exports, and in particular agricultural exports, have increased
exponentially over the past decade, this has not been met with increased investment or
maintenance in transport infrastructure. It is estimated that the volume of merchandise
transported largely on the road network grew by 180 percent between 2000 and 2011.
Projections are for an increase in the demand for transport of between 68 and 135 percent for
Uruguay’s key agricultural exports (wood, grains, milk and dairy products, and beef); see
Figure 55. However, Uruguay suffers from an infrastructure gap that poses a constraint to
continued high growth rates. The quality of road and railroad infrastructure rank 90th and 103rd
out of 144 countries, respectively, in the World Economic Forum’s 2014 Global
Competitiveness Index. The vast bulk of all domestic transport in Uruguay occurs on roads;
rail and riverine transport is marginal, transporting less than 3 percent of all cargo within the
country.

106. Although the density of the road network is high, its uneven quality is a
particularly problematic factor for competitiveness, contributing to high logistics costs
relative to competitors. The deterioration of road network quality appears to have reached a
critical juncture. Increased use, particularly by heavy trucks, has resulted in the progressive
deterioration of the road network in recent years, especially since 2008. By 2013 only 40
percent of the national road network was classified as being in very good or good condition.
Many of the most heavily used corridors for export—the transversal roads crossing the country
west to east—which have not been designed for heavy cargo traffic, are also in the worst state,
                                               61
imposing increasing costs in terms of time and vehicle maintenance on users. For soy, for
instance, it is estimated that logistics costs represent about one-third of the FOB cost in Nueva
Palmira, despite this being a short (less than 250 km) chain, compared to only one quarter of
the FOB cost in Rosario (Argentina) for a similar logistics chain (World Bank, 2015). Another
study concluded that logistics costs in forest products represent more than half of production
value. Addressing cost issues will be important if these are not to act as a brake on Uruguay’s
competitiveness


Figure 55. Grain and Wood Production in Uruguay, 2000-2012
 m3                                                     1000 m3




Source: Logistics Policy Note, World Bank, 2014.




107. Under current financing modes, Uruguay cannot afford its road network and new
financing mechanisms are needed. Recent analyses (Caceres and Farinasso, 2013; Capurro
et al., 2014) have attempted to estimate the financing needed to salvage the quality of the road
network and ensure its continued maintenance. Although public spending on road maintenance
has increased in recent years, it remains insufficient to compensate for the deterioration of the
network. Estimates suggest that annual maintenance expenditure needs to double from the
current 0.5 percent of GDP. In addition to this recurring annual requirement for maintenance,
an investment on the order of 4-4.5 percent of GDP is required to compensate for the
maintenance deficit in the main road network since 2000. Given the current fiscal realities and
the need for fiscal adjustment in the medium term, financing all of these needs through the
budget is simply out of the question. Complementary financing for the maintenance of the road
network may include tolls, user charges, and specific taxes, and Public-Private Partnerships
(PPPs), although each has its limitations. As only about 30 percent of gasoline tax revenues are
allocated to transport and road safety, the possibility of additional budgetary resources to the
sector is a consideration.

108. Rail transport does not represent an alternative to roads as it is largely
uncompetitive, with severely deteriorated infrastructure as a result of numerous years of
lack of maintenance and investment. Broadly, rail transport is likely to only be competitive
for a few route segments. Only half of the rail network is operational and the State Railways
Administration (Administración de Ferrocarriles de Estado/AFE) is highly inefficient and its
efforts at institutional reform are incomplete. The costs of wholesale rehabilitation of the
system appear to be too high given the demand and existence of cheaper alternatives.

                                                   62
109. Another challenge to increasing Uruguay’s global competitiveness and to
integrating into global value chains relates to port infrastructure. Montevideo’s port
performance has improved substantially in recent years, although it is challenged by difficult
land and maritime accesses; maintaining this competitive advantage is a key challenge if
Uruguay wants to consolidate its competitive position in the River Plate Basin. Volumes
passing through the port of Montevideo increased from 588,000 ton equivalent units (TEUs)
in 2009 to 830,000 in 2013, a testament to the port’s technical efficiency (see Figure 56),
representing over half of all merchandise movements through commercial ports in the country
(the port of Nueva Palmira moves most of the remaining cargo).


Figure 56. Port Technical Efficiency in Latin America (containers)




Source: Logistics Policy Note, 2014, based on “World Bank- Benchmarking Container Port Efficiency in LAC.”


110. Looking beyond the transportation of its domestically produced cargo, Uruguay
aims to position itself as a distribution center and logistics hub in the Southern Cone,
building on its central location in the south-eastern South American market; its free-trade-zone
legislation; more competitive transit times to major destinations than Buenos Aires; low port
costs; and the Paraguay-Paraná river connection to inland production areas of Uruguay and
Argentina, as well as Paraguay and Bolivia and interior parts of south-western Brazil. With
logistics and transport services that compare favorably with others in the region and with
middle-income countries generally, Uruguay’s potential as a regional logistics hub depends on
a highly efficient logistics system and low logistics costs. Domestic and trade policies have
played a crucial part in the development of Uruguay’s logistics sector. In particular, trade and
investment policies and policies for trade in services have enabled the provision of logistic
services by national and foreign providers, which have been able to benefit from two special
regimes: the free port and the free zone laws, which have enabled the development of world
class maritime and logistics services and allowed providers to handle goods in transit and to
add value to traded goods beyond transshipment.33



33
   For the longer term, the construction of a deep water port at Rocha has been under discussion for decades,
including feasibility and other studies. The development of a deep water port is in the near term conditional on
the existence of sufficient demand, such as that from a potential development of iron ore mining (the recent fall
in iron ore prices appears to have put negotiations on hold).
                                                                63
Box 4. Energy and Telecoms

         Uruguay is revolutionizing its energy matrix, moving toward wind and biomass, in the search
for reliable and reasonably priced energy. The electricity sector has traditionally been heavily dependent on
hydropower, which has represented anywhere between 40 and 80 percent of the electricity mix in a given year,
depending on water availability. During drought years, supply is complemented with costly thermal electricity
and imports. The result has been a weighted average tariff of 12.27 cents per kWh, among the highest in Latin
America. As Uruguay has reached its hydroelectric potential, large investments by both the public and private
sectors are transforming the electricity matrix to one where about half of electricity will be generated by non-
traditional renewable sources, including Eolic energy and biomass from forest and paper pulp plants residue.
As a result, the cost and volatility of electricity production will decline markedly. As many wind farms begin
production in 2015, the structural vulnerabilities of Uruguay’s electricity system consequent upon hydro
dependence will start declining. Wind energy installed capacity is expected to increase by a factor of 30 by
early 2017 meeting, nearly a third of the country’s electricity needs. Moreover, the regasification plant under
construction, which is expected to come on-line in 2015, will lower the costs of thermal energy; and
investments of $1.6 billion are expected in off-shore hydrocarbon exploration. With this transformation,
Uruguay should achieve energy security and independence even in drought years, and be in a position to
export energy in rainy years. On the social front there has been a universalization of access to electricity in the
country, where almost 98 percent of households—including 97 percent of poor households —have access to the
national electricity grid.
         A similarly positive story can be told for ICT, a sector whose development is central to
promoting increases in productivity in the economy as a whole. Uruguay is an ICT leader in the region
according to a variety of measures. The number of households with computers has grown rapidly since 2004
and today surpasses that of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Colombia and is on a par with Italy. Similarly in
terms of mobile telephony, the number of telephones per 100 persons surpasses that in regional comparators
(with the exception of Argentina, which has a similar figure) as well as a number of OECD countries, such as
the Germany, Spain, and the US. Uruguay also leads regional comparators in the index of ICT development.
Data services stand out globally for their high speed and low price.

 Figure 57. Index of ICT Development                         Figure 58. Broadband Downloading Speeds, Fixed
                                                             and Mobile, 2014 (in mbps)




                                                        64
v. Natural Resource Management

111. Uruguayans’ prosperity has been built to a significant degree upon the country’s
natural resources wealth. A key ingredient for the sustainability of economic growth and
continued progress in improving livelihoods is ensuring the sustainable management of
Uruguay’s natural resources. Uruguay has one of the highest proportions of land suitable for
agricultural production in the world, at 85 percent of its total land area. Tourism, a significant
sector in the economy, depends to a large extent on the quality of Uruguay’s natural resources.
Water resources are also abundant, and aquatic ecosystems are critical given the many
environmental services they provide, including water quality, fisheries, generation, tourism,
and a rich biodiversity. Uruguay’s biodiversity is globally significant thanks to its location in
the confluence of the Amazonian and Chaco domains, comprising savannah, native forests,
wetlands, coastal ecosystems, and their associated wildlife. Resolving resource sustainability
issues is essential for Uruguay as it aspires to brand itself a leader in the sustainable and
integrated management of its soil, water, and biodiversity resources, differentiating itself
through building a reputation as an exporter of clean, green goods and services.

112. As a small country with limited land on which to expand production, Uruguay has
intensified land use and production practices for higher productivity in the agricultural,
livestock, and forestry sectors. Rising international commodity prices have encouraged
significant investments in major agricultural production chains, with intensive use of natural
resources, expansion of the agricultural frontier, and increases in yields. The result has been a
number of key changes in agriculture management, including (a) a rapid increase in arable land,
which has grown at an average annual rate of close to seven percent between 2006 and 2011,
driven by an expansion of cropland; (b) expansion of forest cover, with large investments in
the forestry, wood, and cellulose complex; (c) more intensive fertilizer and pesticide use;
(d) greater reliance on irrigation; and (e) increases in livestock densities.

113. The intensification of production has revealed a number of vulnerabilities. Some
challenges in this area include the expansion of crop (especially soy, whose share of total arable
land increased from 2 percent in 2000 to almost 50 percent by 2011) and forest production into
marginally suitable lands. This has contributed to an increase in the use of agrochemicals, a
higher incidence of environmentally unsustainable mono-cropping, soil erosion, a growing
need for irrigation as well water resources degrade, and reduced biodiversity. The conversion
of natural grasslands, which represent close to 85 percent of agricultural land, into arable land
is approaching its agronomic limits.34

114. In light of these challenges—as well as opportunities—the principle of sustainable
intensification has become central to the government’s strategic priorities. In response,
Uruguay has moved to regulate soil management and associated environmental impacts; two
measures to mitigate potential degradation have been the provision of incentives to promote
sustainable forestry and the implementation of soil management plans in 2011 that oblige a
majority of crop producers to submit annual land use plans along with evidence of resource-
adapted crop rotation. In 2013, this pilot was scaled up and became a requirement for any
farmer cultivating more than 100 hectares. By early 2014, more than 8 percent of the country
was covered by approved soil management plans. These activities are conservatively estimated
to have increased annual soil carbon sequestration by about 2 million tons, valued at $74

34
     Arable land prices have risen rapidly as a result, by more than five-fold since the early 2000s.
                                                           65
million annually. “Landscape approaches” that integrate the management of land, water, and
biodiversity resources, and promote conservation and sustainable use in an equitable manner
have also received increased attention.
115. Agricultural policy has also focused primarily on the provision of public goods
rather than the direct support of individual incomes. One such example is Uruguay’s
consistent focus on product traceability, food safety, and quality standards to ensure the sector’s
sustained, strong, and successful links to export markets. The provision of information required
to make policy and/or entrepreneurial decisions, the internalization of external environmental
costs through stimulating responsible management of soil, and the provision of technology
packages for enhanced resilience through climate-smart agricultural water management are
three key public goods emphasized by public policy.

116. Uruguay is a global leader in advocating for climate-smart agriculture and
agricultural development and in innovating techniques and technologies for sustainable
intensification, providing a global good in this domain. Agriculture is likely to be the sector
most directly and severely affected by climate change. According to General Circulation
Models, land productivity could fall to a level 62 percent below the current levels for
commercial farms and 54 percent below for small family-owned farms by 2020 as a
consequence of weather-related events. Analysis comparing current flood-prone areas in Latin
America with areas likely to receive significantly more rainfall in the future finds that much of
Uruguay’s territory will become more endangered by flooding—an ominous development
given the country’s reliance on agricultural exports.

117. With a low emissions footprint, Uruguay has minimal responsibility for global
warming and unilateral reduction of its own national emissions will make scant difference
in the eventual impact of climate change on its citizens. However, beyond important
altruistic motives, there are also reasons to think that climate-smart agricultural development
through a strategy of reduced emission could position Uruguay to take advantage of market
opportunities and improved competitiveness in an increasingly carbon-conscious global
market, as products that can be branded “low carbon” may command premium prices.
Moreover, some options that reduce emissions have significant additional benefits: better
agricultural practices can improve soil conservation and biodiversity, while sequestering
carbon, reducing emissions from the soil, and collecting methane from waste to generate power
production—thus either generating revenue or reducing spending on energy. (World Bank,
2014).

118. As Uruguay’s emissions mix is dominated by agriculture, the sustainability
metrics for this sector are of critical importance for the mitigation efforts of the country
overall. There are a number of attractive mitigations options available to the Uruguayan
agriculture and forestry sectors that could provide a significant reduction in emissions and an
increase in net sequestration at a relatively low cost, although the private sector is unlikely to
undertake these mitigation strategies in the absence of policy incentives. These key options
include the expansion of commercial forestry, improved livestock diets, changes in natural
grasslands management, and increases in irrigated area. These four key technology
adjustments—which are already beginning to be implemented in Uruguay—would annually
account for at least 13,000 ktCO2e (321 ktCO2e) until 2025. Beyond greenhouse gas (GHG)
mitigation, many of these low carbon interventions are associated with environment services,
enhanced rural livelihoods, and resilience to climate change. For instance, increasing the
                                                66
productivity of grasslands has the potential to contribute significant increases in soil carbon
sequestration while enhancing returns to livestock production and improving rural incomes.
Silvo-pastoral systems can create a more sustainable landscape for livestock production as well
as enhancing biodiversity through the creation of biological corridors.

119. While soil management and conservation through innovative practices have been
a major focus of policy attention, and integrated management of soil, water and
biodiversity is a policy goal, progress in the conservation of water resources has been
slow. Uruguay has abundant water resources (per capita renewable water resource availability
of more than 40,000 m3 compared to a world average of 8,500 m3).35 Nevertheless, in recent
years water availability and quality of important water bodies have significantly deteriorated.
Among the main risks affecting Uruguay’s water resources are (a) the deterioration in the
quality of superficial waters (streams, rivers, lagoons, and reservoirs), (b) loss of biodiversity,
(c) acceleration of urban development in fragile coastal areas, (d) weak governance and
conservation, and (d) aging water storage infrastructure. Poor water resources management can
have significant effects on public health, water access, on livelihoods in tourism-dependent
local economies, as well as on economic activity in all sectors.

120. While Uruguay enjoys almost universal coverage in terms of potable water (at
about 98 percent), the increasing pressure on water resources by agriculture and other
users combined with the weak water integrated resources management practices and lack
of enforcement of updated environmental law threaten to reduce, in both quantity and
quality, peoples’ access to water. In terms of water quality, point source pollution (industrial
and municipal wastewater discharges) and diffuse pollution from agriculture and urban sources
have had a significant impact. According to the 2012 Montevideo water quality annual report,
coliform bacteria, biochemical oxygen demand, sediments, heavy metals, and agrochemical
runoff are affecting many of Uruguay’s drinking water sources. Coastal areas of Montevideo,
Ciudad de la Plata, Maldonado, and Santa Lucia, and international rivers such as the Río
Uruguay, have high concentrations of total solids and heavy metals, among others parameters.
Agricultural production and its intensification are placing stress on Uruguay’s water resources.
The growing use of fertilizers and agrochemicals is leading to the degradation of water quality.
Industrial pollution and municipal wastewater discharges are serious concerns. An example of
the impact of growing contamination of water resource is the case of the Santa Lucia River,
which is the main drinking source for the Montevideo metropolitan area, home to about 60
percent of Uruguayans. The algae bloom episode in 2013 Rio Santa Lucia, which caused bad
taste and odor in the drinking water of roughly 2 million Uruguayans, is a reminder of the
vulnerability of freshwater systems to nutrient pollution. About 80 percent of contamination in
the Santa Lucia derives from diffuse agricultural sources. The most recent incident occurred in
April 2015, when significant algae blooms occurred in the water of the reservoirs contained by
the Presa Severino and Laguna del Sauce dams, affecting the distribution of drinking water to
Montevideo and Punta del Este-Maldonado. The latter is the coastal area that is the most
important economic driver of tourism in the country.



35
  In addition to the agriculture sector’s reliance on consistent water resources availability, Uruguay’s 3.4 million
inhabitants depend on safe water availability and adequate sanitation to reduce health risks associated with
waterborne illness. Moreover, proper domestic and industrial wastewater management is essential not only to
protect human health, but for Uruguay’s aquatic environments, including wetlands (which comprise over 4 percent
of its territory) and the more than 200 bird species that depend on it.
                                                        67
121. Aquatic ecosystems are also important because of the many environmental
services they provide, including a rich biodiversity. Yet extensive drainage, soil erosion,
and agricultural runoff have affected many wetlands, largely through the expansion of rice
cultivation since the 1980s, which included drainage operations and construction of dams to
provide land and water to producers. At the same time, the creation of new protected areas has
been slow. Only about 1 percent of the country enjoys some form of protection, such as a
national park, monument, or protected wetland. In this sense, Uruguay lags several countries
in the region, such as Costa Rica and Colombia, which have made significant public investment
the protection of biodiversity and in creating instruments to ensure long-term conservation of
protected areas. This reinforces the importance of conservation efforts targeted to private
holdings.

122. A key challenge to improving water resources management is enhancing cross-
sectoral coordination among the numerous institutions involved in the use and
management of water resources, and the development of an integrated water resource
management approach. Integrated water resources management and governance in Uruguay
implies the participation of at least 10 agencies in addition to local Municipalities in the
provision of water for drinking supply, irrigation, hydropower, navigation, recreational use,
and environmental use. And while sectoral legislation may appear robust, there are important
gaps in regulation and in enforcement.

123. In the context of a limited policy framework and relatively weak institutional
arrangements for environmental management, the potential of developing oil, gas, and
iron ore extractive industries presents opportunities as well as challenges (see Box 5). The
environmental challenges are substantial because of the absence of the necessary legal
environmental framework for the operation of an oil sector, including in relation to air quality
issues associated with gas flaring, monitoring at very deep waters, high demand for water for
inshore operations (where water sources might be scarce), risk and safety regulations, and the
definition of roles and needed coordination of the many different agencies involved in energy,
mining, land, environmental protection, and waterways.




                                              68
 Box 5. Non-Renewable Resources

 The recent discovery of iron ore and potential offshore oil discoveries could have a significant
 impact on Uruguay’s growth and public finances. The “Valentines” iron ore project is estimated to
 have up to 5 billion tons of high-grade magnetite ore, and initial production is estimated at 18 million
 metric tons per year, gradually rising to double this amount thereafter (OECD 2014). The government
 had estimated that with iron ore prices of $120 per ton, production would have accounted for 4 percent
 of GDP. The IMF (2014) forecast government revenues at $26.3 billion over the 27-year estimated life
 of the project, largely composed of royalties and income tax. The sharp decline in industrial
 commodities prices, however, together with environmental objections have stalled the project.
 According to World Bank projections, iron ore prices are expected to average $64.5 per ton over the
 next five years, which means the value of production has more than halved since the MEF estimates. In
 preparation for non-renewable exploitation, Uruguay passed a new mining law, the Ley de Mineria de
 Gran Porte (Large Scale Mining, or MGP) in September 2013; the law grants significant fiscal benefits
 to mining companies while requiring them to setting aside funds in a special account to be used for
 ensuring that the exploited sites are suitable for other uses, once the exploitation ends. The fiscal regime
 that applies to MGP seeks to calibrate the effective tax rate to the fluctuations in commodity prices,
 decomposing revenues into normal revenues, extraordinary rents, and production costs. According to the
 new law, 30 percent of non-renewable resource revenues will be a direct income transfer to the
 government budget, and 70 percent will be saved in an Intergenerational Investment Sovereign Fund.
 The resources transferred to the budget are earmarked as follows: 60 percent must be invested in
 productive projects, 30 percent goes to the regional development fund, 5 percent is to be spent on
 educational projects in the rural area, and 5 percent is earmarked for strengthening the technical
 capabilities of the institutions in charge of implementing the MGP law.

 Meanwhile, the potential impact of oil exploitation is also significant. During the second round of
 offshore exploration, Uruguay awarded eight exploration and exploitation contracts in the continental
 part of Uruguay in 2012. The successful launch of the second round and the large investments have
 prompted Uruguay to prepare a third round for offshore exploration. The National Administration of
 Fuels, Alcohols, and Cement/ANCAP has confirmed that there may be oil in 20 wells in the areas of
 Salto and Piedra Sola, and if reserves are confirmed this could mean 1769 million recoverable oil
 barrels, the equivalent of 120 years of oil consumption for Uruguay. Advances in oil exploration have
 sparked the start of the second phase of exploration, which means the drilling of four wells over the
 2015-2017 period. If oil is discovered, ANCAP has the right to associate with the exploring oil company
 for up to 50 percent of production. The State would also be entitled to a portion of the profits as well as
 the taxes on profits.




Longer term issues and climate change

124. Climate change poses a significant threat to the well-being of Uruguay’s
population. It exacerbates the volatility and vulnerability inherent in being a small, open
economy. Beyond the impact on agriculture and agri-business sectors, noted above, climate
change threatens all aspects of the country’s economy, including infrastructure (e.g., urban
infrastructure, transport, storage) and livelihoods. The country has suffered from extreme
floods and droughts, increasing in intensity and frequency relative to the historical record, and
inflicting serious damage on the population and the economy (especially through damage to
agricultural infrastructure). Uruguay’s geography renders it particularly vulnerable to climate
                                                       69
change, and the country has faced an unprecedented number of adverse weather events. In the
last decade, floods have represented about half of all extreme events registered by the National
Emergency System. The 2007 floods—the worst recorded in the last half-century—affected
more than 100,000 people, destroyed infrastructure, and led to significant agricultural losses.
Droughts have also become more severe: a drought in 2008-09 resulted in direct losses of more
than $340 million and estimated indirect losses of about $1 billion, equivalent to 2 percent of
GDP (World Bank, 2014b). In part, the exacerbation of the impact of extreme events is also
related to territorial development and urban planning issues, including the expansion into areas
that are subject to flooding. Coastal zones—important for tourism, fisheries, maritime
transport, and urban sites (about 70 percent of the country’s population lives along coastal
regions)—are some of the areas expected to be heavily impacted by climate change.


B.     Challenges to Uruguay’s Social Compact

125. Uruguay’s deeply held social compact faces growing tensions in a number of areas.
An aging society, combined with a premium on equity and a large middle class, creates a strong
demand for high quality and generous public services. This has important implications not only
for fiscal sustainability but also for saving and growth—these, in turn, have potentially
significant implications for the sustainability of the social compact. Uruguay also faces
challenges in terms of social mobility, particularly as it relates to deficiencies in the education
system, challenges that may strain the country’s social fabric and compact. Related concerns
with respect to social mobility are the condition of relatively marginalized groups (particularly
youth), the concentration of seemingly chronic poverty in some population groups, and the
related question of whether Uruguay’s broad social policies are able to address effectively the
challenges of concentrated pockets of poverty and exclusion. Finally, the social compact hinges
on the availability of jobs, particularly high-quality jobs, and good labor conditions. These are
a central tenet of Uruguay’s social compact. The preference for job stability, however, may
restrict the economy’s capacity to adjust flexibly to changing conditions.


i. An Aging Society

126. With its strong social compact, its small and open economy, a distinctive feature
of Uruguayan reality is its aging population. The challenges raised by Uruguay’s
demographic transition are at the macro and at the micro levels. From a macroeconomic
perspective, Uruguay’s medium-term fiscal sustainability will come under pressure from the
demands of an aging population. Uruguay is at an advanced stage in its demographic transition,
and in this respect, is more similar to Eastern European countries than it is to most countries in
LAC. The number of people 65 years or older grew from 8 percent of the total population in
1950 to 14 percent in 2010 and is expected to reach nearly 30 percent by 2100. Conversely, the
15 and under population is shrinking, from 28 percent of the total population in 1950 to
approximately 23 percent in 2010, and it is expected to decline to close to 15 percent by 2100.
The trends can be seen in Figure 59.




                                                70
Figure 59. Uruguay Age Pyramids, 1950, 2000, and 2050




 Source: Ministry of Social Development.




127. Population aging will have a sizable impact on Uruguay’s social security and
health care system. In particular, the health system will be affected as an older population will
require and demand more expensive health services; this impact will also extend to other
sectors, especially pension payments. Nevertheless, while demography will play an important
role in driving public expenditure growth, policy choices can have an even greater effect. Thus
while an aging-only scenario (i.e., where policy remains frozen) suggests a modest increase in
health costs of 0.55 percent by 2025, policy responses will imply different costs. For instance,
analysis suggests that in Uruguay, the impact of aging on health care costs may reach 2 percent
of GDP by 2050, because of growing pressure for expanded and improved health care services.
This pressure is a likely effect of the combination of population aging, the consequent increased
weight of non-communicable diseases, and a high income elasticity of the demand for health
care likely to accompany economic growth during the next several decades. Furthermore,
health care is likely to present a greater challenge to fiscal accounts than pensions (Cotlear,
2011). In part, this is because many countries, as in the case of Uruguay, have already reformed
their pension systems in ways that shift future costs away from government budgets, moving
away from pay-as-you-go systems. On the other hand, projections for the increases in pension
costs for LAC are similar to those faced by the European Union—a mean increase of about 2.4
percent of GDP over the next 40 years. (World Bank, 2013; World Bank 2014b)

128. Beyond the impacts on health care and pensions, however, the fiscal impacts of
aging can be ambiguous. Per capita and aggregate education spending typically decline as the
population ages, pension spending rises almost linearly with the share of the elderly, and per
capita health care spending is broadly U-shaped in terms of age, with spending by the youngest
and oldest significantly higher than the rest. A shrinking working-age population implies a
narrower tax base and reduced public revenues from income taxes; on the other hand, revenues
from consumption taxes may increase as the elderly consume a higher share of their incomes.
A simple model was applied to integrate these different transmission channels to demonstrate
broad fiscal implications of an aging population in Uruguay (see Annex V for a fuller
description). More specifically, the model examines effects of the expected demographic
change over the 2010-50 period on output, fiscal expenditures, and public debt trajectory under
three demographic scenarios. The baseline scenario is the medium variant from the UN
population projections. Two alternative demographic scenarios are a more “pessimistic” low
                                                71
fertility scenario and a more “optimistic” high fertility scenario, again from the UN Population
projections. Public health and pension expenditures are expected increase as a result of aging
in Uruguay. Declining education expenditures are expected to fall short of compensating for
this increase. As a result, the primary fiscal deficit is projected to increase by 1.8 percent of
GDP between 2014 and 2050, from 0.4 to 2.2 percent under the baseline assumptions.
Interestingly, the widening of the deficit is expected to be even larger under the more
“optimistic” high fertility scenario, by 3.5 percent of GDP, over the projection horizon. This is
a function of significantly higher public health care spending for infants, in per capita terms,
and increasing education expenditures. In the low fertility scenario, the primary deficit is
projected to increase by 0.9 percent of GDP. A growing fiscal deficit, together with a slowdown
in GDP growth would be reflected in the debt-to-GDP ratio, controlling for valuation effects
(see Figures 60 and 61).

 Figure 60. Primary Fiscal Deficit Scenarios, 2010-30   Figure 61. Public Debt Scenarios, 2010-30




 Source: World Bank calculations




129. In addition to its effects on the fiscal accounts, the demographic transformation in
Uruguay will have an impact on economic growth and on productivity and
competitiveness. In the longer term without behavioral adaptation by current and future
generations, aging is likely to reduce economic growth as fewer workers support more
dependents per worker. Nevertheless, Uruguay has a window of opportunity of at least a decade
where the number of active workers (and savers) will continue to grow and where policy
reforms may have an important role to play. Improvements in educational outcomes, both in
the average number of years of completed schooling as well as in educational quality can also
help mitigate the impacts of aging on productivity and growth. Moreover, increases in female
labor force participation can contribute to a lengthening of this window of opportunity.
130. Aging should also induce behavioral adjustments in savings and labor force
participation. Uruguay is characterized by a low saving rate, and an aging demographic is
likely to accentuate this. As a small and open economy dependent on high levels of investment
to support trade integration and exports and productivity upgrading, low savings have a direct
impact on growth. And given Uruguay’s large middle class and an aging society, low savings
have serious implications for the sustainability of the social compact as well. Behavioral shifts
such as higher female labor force participation or later retirement, or incentives toward greater
saving vs. insurance in the social security system, may have a role in making this constraint




                                                   72
less binding in the future.36 In particular, an increase in female labor force participation (which
currently broadly parallels that in the United States and LAC)37 has the potential to ease the
impact of the demographic transition in Uruguay. The government’s proposed new program,
the Sistema Integrado Nacional de Cuidados (National Integrated Care System) was conceived
partly as a means to encourage greater female labor force participation by providing child care
as well as elderly and disabled services in order to free women to enter the labor market.38
131. A number of conditions will determine if these adjustments are large enough to
reverse the adverse effects of demographic change. Whether aging is driven by an increase
in longevity or by a decline in fertility has an impact on the size and direction of these
demographic effects. The type of unfunded social security system that exists in the economy
could also influence the net effect of aging. For instance, when aging is mainly driven by
declining fertility rates and the pension system is characterized by defined (fixed)
contributions, it leads to a reduction in benefits per beneficiary, which could spur behavioral
changes toward higher saving during active labor force years, resulting in higher capital per
worker, and higher labor productivity. When aging is driven by increasing longevity, the effects
on savings are ambiguous. Individuals may also choose to work longer, if regulations allow,
implying a larger labor force than in the case where there is no behavioral adaptation (Onder
and Pestieau, 2014).
132. The fiscal implications of a strong social compact, a universal approach to social
services, compounded by the effects of an aging society, can exert pressure on budget
management. This highlights the need for high-quality fiscal management and the importance
of continued fiscal vigilance.

ii. Social Mobility

133. As was discussed earlier, Uruguay performs poorly when compared to the LAC
region in terms of social mobility. Challenges to increasing social mobility can eventually
cause fissures in the social compact. Studies have also found an association between larger
social mobility and entrepreneurship (Carrillo et al. 2014; Castellani and Lora, 2014).
134. Educational achievement in Uruguay is strongly associated with socio-economic
status, as it is in most of the region. In terms of the impact of socio-economic background in
PISA performance, for instance, Uruguay is one of the worst performers in the world. Uruguay
scores poorly on an Educational Mobility Index measuring the impact of socio-economic
background on educational attainment and the potential for educational mobility. Uruguay is
also the only country where, according to this index, educational mobility has declined in the
last five years, and one of the few where it has fallen since the 1990s (Daude, 2013). Other
analyses also point to a decline in social mobility in the country between the 1980s and 2000,
because of the uneven distribution of improvements in education, with a bias against the
disadvantaged (Carrillo et al. 2014). Young people from socio-economically disadvantaged
backgrounds in Uruguay are highly unlikely to complete upper secondary education. In 2010,

36
   Encouraging immigration from neighboring countries may also be an option, as would the return of those
nationals currently living abroad (an estimated 600,000 Uruguayans —more than the 18 percent of the population).
Indeed, return ‘migration’ has grown as economic conditions have improved, with an estimated 110,000 returnees
in 2006). (IOM, www.iom.int/cms/en/sites/iom/home/where-we-work/americas/south-america/uruguay.html)
37
   The labor participation rate for women in Uruguay stood at 56 percent in 2013 (compared to Peru at 68 percent,
Brazil at 59 percent, Colombia and Paraguay at 56 percent, Panama at 49 percent, and Costa Rica at 47 percent).
38
   The program is currently under deliberation by the legislature.
                                                       73
only 25 percent of 15-17 year-olds in the lowest income quintile completed lower secondary
education, as opposed to 85 percent of those in the top quintile. Even fewer, just 7 percent of
18-20 year-olds in the lowest income quintile completed upper secondary school, compared to
57 percent in the top quintile (OECD/ECLAC 2014).

iii. Excluded Groups

135. It is estimated that the chronically poor make up about 8 percent of Uruguay’s
population. A better understanding of who the chronic poor are in Uruguay is needed to inform
and better target policies, including an analysis of the adjustments in the social welfare system
and social compact that are needed to ensure their inclusion. Urban youth and afrodescendants,
constitute the most vulnerable groups in the country. Many live in households that belong to
the lowest quintile, characterized by low educational attainment, low levels of employment,
and high rates of income poverty.

136. Youth poverty, unemployment, and the proportion of young people who neither
work nor study are a substantial concern for Uruguay. While Uruguay has one of the lowest
child and youth poverty rates in Latin America, children and youth face a higher risk of material
deprivation and poverty than the adult population. Unemployment is much more prevalent
among young people. In 2011, 17.4 percent of those aged 14-24 were unemployed, compared
to just 3.8 percent of those over 25, reflecting a difficult transition from education to the labor
market. Increasing urban crime, violence, and incarceration are associated with these trends
and are a major concern for the population and for the stability of Uruguay’s social compact
(OECD/UN-ECLAC, 2014). Crime and violence undermine the formation of social and human
capital; increased levels of crime and victimization destroy social capital by fomenting social
mistrust, weaken societal unity, and contribute to generalized fear and the erosion of
institutions—basic requisites for the collective action needed for development. Moreover, in
terms of growth and fiscal sustainability, Uruguay relies on its youth to support its future
growth and welfare in the future and cannot afford to lose a significant portion of youth,
particularly as the general population ages. The inclusiveness and quality of the education
system are critical factors here.

137. Youth exclusion appears to be differentiated by gender. While boys tend to overlap
school dropout and entrance into the labor market, girls often form a new family earlier than
boys; low-income girls in particular tend to start a new family earlier and bear more children
than their wealthier counterparts, and unlike boys they tend to fall out of, or never enter, the
labor market. Wealthier youth, on the other hand, tend to delay their entrance into the labor
market and parenthood, having invested in education. Data comparison for 1990 and 2009
reveals that girls with limited education are at more of a disadvantage than in the past, with
higher rates of unemployment, while their male counterparts are faring worse in the quality of
jobs they can access but not in terms of unemployment. The effects of exclusion of youth with
low educational attainment appears to have worsened over time, especially for girls (Gelber
and Rossel, 2010).




                                                74
iv. Jobs and Labor Markets

138. The availability of high quality jobs is a central feature of Uruguay’s social
compact. The growth in employment and labor income has been a driver of poverty reduction
over the past decade. Uruguay enjoys one of the lowest unemployment rates among Latin
American countries, and while real average wages declined dramatically with the 2002 crisis,
they have recovered steadily, attaining and surpassing previous levels. Labor demand as well
as has expanded as a result of strong economic growth.

139. The creation of more and better-paid jobs relies on continued economic growth,
but this is challenged by a lack of human capital and skills. Labor shortages are currently
constraining growth in several sectors of activity. Exports are becoming more skill-intensive,
particularly at medium- but also at high-skill levels. A number of bottlenecks exist to
effectively meeting the demand for labor. The transition from school to employment is difficult,
hampered by a shortage of relevant skills and high-quality vocational training. There is a dearth
of programs to train the unemployed and those outside the workforce, or to increase on-the-job
acquisition of skills. Without such improvements, it may be difficult to increase the value-
added content and competitiveness of new economic activities where Uruguay has recently
demonstrated strong performance.

140. Despite its positive performance overall in terms of labor and employment,
Uruguay ranks low in terms of labor-market efficiency, positioned 134th out of 144 in the
World Economic Forum’s labor market ranking (WEF, 2014). The system of wage
negotiations (see Box 6) has been a pillar of the social compact and has contributed to ensuring
that the lowest wage-earners reap the benefits of economic growth. Nevertheless, in its current
form, it tends to complicate efforts to reduce inflation toward the target range, fuels overheating
of the economy, and could present challenges to competitiveness if labor productivity
moderates. Reducing backward-indexation in wage contracts and downward rigidity of real
wages could raise the resilience of labor against adverse shocks. The government has in recent
years proposed mechanisms to restrain the growth of real wages, although there are few signs
of stabilization in wage growth as GDP growth has moderated.

141. The preference for job stability and the form of collective bargaining raises
questions regarding compatibility with sustained economic growth, competitiveness, and
nimbleness and flexibility. Being small, with limited diversification possibilities at any single
point in time, Uruguay needs to be nimble and flexible across time in order to adapt to changing
global and domestic conditions. Yet its strong social compact, a large role for the State in many
sectors, and a high proportion of the workforce covered by collective bargaining may present
challenges to flexibility and nimbleness. Encouraging greater labor flexibility while
maintaining the social compact may require a rethinking of the design of unemployment
insurance or its expansion, enhanced vocational training, and approaches to collective
bargaining that incorporate information on productivity. In this area, poor data on productivity
at a disaggregated sectoral level is a significant constraint to evaluating the relationship
between wages and productivity in Uruguay, and correcting the paucity of information is a
priority. As wages fell precipitously during and immediately following the 2002 crisis, the
large growth in wages since that time may merely represent a positive reversion of wages to
productivity in some sectors. Better data would assist in evaluating whether wages are
compatible with productivity, and thus help policy-makers to ensure that high costs are not an
obstacle to global competitiveness.
                                                75
Box 6. Collective Bargaining in Uruguay
         The rapid growth in wages, combined with the extension of the proportion of workers
covered by collective bargaining, following the 2002 crisis has been a central component of the
improvement in well-being in Uruguay. Moreover, the labor framework is seen as a core part of
Uruguay’s social contract in the search for fair treatment and a sustainable social equilibrium. Collective
bargaining has also promoted the formalization of workers —the number of rural and domestic workers
covered by collective agreements has increased substantially since 2008, reaching almost 100 percent of
these sectors—reducing their income vulnerability.
         Collective wage bargaining has undergone a significant transformation in Uruguay in recent
years. Legislation introduced in 2008 reinforced wage bargaining councils and extended the coverage of
collective agreements. The reported collective bargaining coverage for Uruguay in 2007, at 89 percent as a
proportion of wage and salaried earners, remains considerably higher than that of most countries in the
region, and is similar to coverage in OECD countries. Collective bargaining in Uruguay is undertaken at
the sector level, rather than occurring at the firm level or following a more centralized arrangement. This
has implications for inflation and for alignment with productivity. In sectors with little competitive
pressure, such as non-tradables, workers and employers can agree to pass the cost of higher wages onto the
consumer; more broadly, at the sector level, negotiators do not internalize the effects on inflation and
aggregate employment, as would occur in a more centralized arrangement. Firm-level negotiation allows
firm-specific issues and performance to be taken into account, allowing more flexibility in the event of
shocks. (OECD 2014)




                                                     76
C.      Data and Knowledge Gaps
142. Some important data gaps were identified during the preparation of this report.
Addressing these gaps is necessary to support evidence-based policy-making in a number of
areas that are central to continued growth with poverty reduction and equity.

Data gaps
143. Firm-Level Data. More timely and comprehensive firm-level data is essential to
understanding a range of critical issues, from job creation and innovation, to productivity.
Existing firm-level data covers primarily the manufacturing sector, with only a handful of
services sub-sectors being covered. Given the dominance of services in the economy, this data
gap need to be filled promptly. Panel data would provide insights into a multitude of questions
central to understanding the Uruguayan economy, including the patterns of firm creation,
expansion, and exit; job creation, losses, and stagnation; and the characteristics of exporting
firms, among many others.

144. Productivity Data. Poor data on productivity at a sufficiently disaggregated sector level
is a significant constraint to evaluating the relationship between wages and productivity in
Uruguay, and correcting this paucity of information is a priority. Moreover, within-sector
productivity information is also needed to more fully understand firm dynamics, given the
likely existence, as identified by the literature, of significant dispersion of productivity levels
within sectors. Better data would assist, for instance, in incorporating allowances for
productivity into wage negotiations and in evaluating whether wages are compatible with
productivity, thus helping policy-makers ensure that high costs are not an obstacle to global
competitiveness.

145. Disaggregated Data on Crime and Violence. To the team’s knowledge, data on crime
and violence, including rates of incarceration, disaggregated by ethnicity, spatial location, and
age, are not available. This is an important ingredient to an understanding of the potential
impact of exclusion. It is an important gap given the growing concern with security in urban
Uruguay.

Knowledge gaps
146. Sector- and Firm-Level Analyses. As noted above, data limitations have led to
important knowledge gaps in terms of changes in productivity. This limits understanding of a
number of significant relationships, including shifts in employment opportunities for the poor
and the importance of between-firm vs. within-firm efficiency gains.

147. Characteristics of Excluded Groups. Ethnic minorities’ relative economic disadvantage
is difficult to disentangle from other groups’ inequality of opportunities. This may be a story
of employment and geographic sorting, and is another item to add to knowledge gaps. More
comprehensive knowledge of the household and geographic characteristics, access to services,
educational performance, ethnicity, and gender-related issues of excluded groups is critical.

148. Declining Education Premium. The decline in the premium for completing secondary
or tertiary level education is a puzzle in Uruguay, as it is in other countries in the LAC region.
Filling this knowledge gap may help in identifying appropriate education sector reforms, and
may have an impact on future innovation, productivity, and competitiveness.


                                                77
149. Education, Exclusion, and Crime. Further analytical work is needed to understand the
linkages, if any, between poor educational outcomes, lack of opportunity, and crime.

150. Natural Resources Accounting. Uruguay’s growth has relied to a great extent on its
natural resource endowment, and its future global integration will continue to focus on the
country’s comparative advantages in this area. A central question is whether the intensification
of natural resource use is sustainable. Implementing natural resource accounts would help to
answer this question and to place the sustainability of resource use at the core of economic
decision-making.

151. Integration into Global Value Chains. The SCD undertook an initial investigation of
key opportunities and constraints to Uruguay’s increased integration into global value chains;
further work on this would be an important addition to knowledge. A number of questions may
be addressed: what is the right balance between horizontal (cross-sectoral) and vertical
(sector/value chain-specific) policies for more successful integration into global value chains?
Should policies support specialization or aim for more diversification, or a judicious
combination of both? What are the constraints to enhancing SME integration into global value
chains (e.g., information, financing, intellectual property rights)? Uruguay is near the frontier
in a number of processes such as beef traceability, cattle genomics, and software, yet spillovers
across value chains appear to be limited; how can technologies and processes developed in one
value chain be successfully replicated or adapted in others and what bottlenecks to this exist in
Uruguay?




                                               78
IV.    Tensions and Prioritization

152. Uruguay’s decade of dynamic and inclusive growth reflects the strengths of its
social compact and its ability to translate rapid economic growth into gains for the less
well-off segments of its population. Similarly, robust economic management and business-
and investment-friendly policies have combined with buoyant global conditions to boost trade,
diversify markets, and encourage the export of new goods and services. However, as described
above, bottlenecks have emerged as economic growth has surpassed its potential, and as
poverty and unemployment have been reduced to historic lows. Global conditions are also less
favorable today, with softer commodity prices, lower demand, and the likelihood of reduced
international liquidity in the coming years. In Uruguay’s immediate neighborhood, Argentina
and Brazil are experiencing economic slowdowns. For Uruguay this translates into the
likelihood of lower economic growth in the medium term. GDP growth in 2014 is estimated at
slightly over 3 percent, and projections are for a further slowdown in 2015 and 2016. In light
of more constrained domestic, regional and global economic conditions, a central concern
facing policy-makers today is the sustainability of Uruguay’s substantial achievements in the
reduction of poverty and inequality. With waning economic growth, sustaining a social
compact built upon near-universal social benefits and a strong social welfare system becomes
more onerous. As economic conditions become more constrained, tensions—which may not
have been apparent in more affluent times—materialize.

A.     Tensions

153. This section begins by highlighting some of the key tensions facing Uruguay in the
coming years. Many of these tensions may emerge in the near term, if economic growth slows
more substantially than anticipated; some may only emerge in the medium or longer term, as
is likely the case of the impacts of aging, for instance. These tensions and tradeoffs will help
to organize the subsequent discussion of priority areas for sustaining progress on the twin goals.

154. Youth exclusion in an aging society is a challenge. Uruguay’s social protection
system has meant that public resources have flowed disproportionately to the elderly. Yet it is
precisely today’s children and youth—a significant proportion of whom may not be in a
position to contribute productively to the labor force and to productivity and growth—who will
have to shoulder a growing elderly dependency ratio. While Uruguay’s aging process is not the
most rapid in the region, it is the most advanced. And although there remains a window of
opportunity of about a decade in which the working-age population will continue to grow,
beyond this window it will begin to shrink. Uruguay can ill-afford to forego the full productive
participation of a significant proportion of its youth. Policies have begun to correct the bias in
public programs, with new programs introduced to focus on children’s needs. Nevertheless,
while a reformed education and training system that is inclusive and assures high quality will
be central to resolving the tension between the needs of the young and those of the elderly,
relatively little has been implemented in this respect to date.

155. Wages, productivity, and competitiveness become more prominent issues in a
challenging economic environment. Uruguay’s strong social compact prizes decent working
conditions, strong labor protection and a generous welfare system. This has been reflected in a
rapid formalization of employment and in strong wage growth, particularly among the bottom
40 percent of the income distribution. Wages of the bottom 40 percent of the income
distribution have grown more rapidly than wages in the economy as a whole, and as illustrated
                                               79
in Figures 23 and 24, this wage growth has been quite uniform and virtually universal across
sectors (2007-2013). Centralized wage negotiations have explicitly emphasized wage increases
for the lower wage groups. With labor income being the main factor behind poverty reduction
over the past decade, the contribution of these efforts to Uruguay’s social achievements is
undeniable. Yet it is also clear that average wage growth across sectors has not reflected
sectoral growth, particularly in more recent years, with the likely implication that wages, at
least in some sectors, are out of step with productivity. Incorporating allowances for
productivity (where data exists) into wage negotiations has not been possible, and most firms
have been reluctant to share productivity data with their employees. With a booming economy
and expanding employment, a wedge between productivity and wages has not been a
significant issue. Wages had plummeted during the 2002 crisis, and efficiency gains from the
reallocation of labor across sectors in a growing economy were substantial.

156. Today, despite slowing growth, there still appears to be very little slack in a labor
market, with many commentators assessing the economy to be at full employment. This
is borne out by interviews with firms who report significant difficulties in hiring at all skill
levels. While it is not clear that rising wages represent a brake on competitiveness at present,
some firms do mention labor costs—as well as onerous labor regulations—as a constraint. The
importance of any wedge that may exist between productivity and real wages depends on
occupation and sector, and data disaggregated to a sufficient degree is not available to ascertain
the extent of the problem. Going forward, however, in an environment of lower growth and
little employment expansion, if not contraction, the impact on competitiveness may become
significant. The wage negotiation process will increasingly need to take into account
productivity changes if competiveness is not to be lost.

157. A large role for the State potentially impacts efficiency and competitiveness. Small
countries tend to have relatively large public sectors, and Uruguay is no exception. The “fixed
costs” associated with service provision are spread over a smaller population and economy.
Small market size may make it difficult to accommodate more than one or two service
providers, creating natural monopolies. The public sector in Uruguay accounts for about 14
percent of total employment, a higher proportion than that in many larger countries. State
Owned Enterprises, all of which are wholly owned by the government, represent 2.3 percent
of total employment and their expenditures amount to nearly 14 percent of GDP (World Bank
2014b). They are the sole providers of a number of essential goods and services. In this case
the implications of smallness—and a large public sector—appear to coincide with the high trust
in government embedded in the social compact. Unlike the situation elsewhere, there does not
appear to be a generalized dissatisfaction with state of public services—with the possible
important exception of education. Nevertheless, frictions may arise between the importance of
the State in the provision of economic goods and services and the need for a level playing field
for economic agents, whether public or private, in order to enhance the competitiveness of the
Uruguayan economy as a whole.

158. Increased competition in the domestic market can have a strong impact on
international competitiveness. Competition enables productivity growth by shifting market
share toward more efficient producers, allocating factors of production to the most competitive
sectors, and induces firms to become more efficient in order to survive. As most firms acquire
inputs in local markets, if these inputs are not produced efficiently or priced competitively,
exporting firms may be less competitive than foreign rivals. There is an evident tradeoff
between a large economic role for the State and the importance of competitiveness to
                                               80
Uruguay’s economic growth model. Given the country’s social compact as well as the
limitations imposed by small market size, one avenue to ensure improved outcomes and greater
efficiency may be through a focus on corporate governance challenges within the State,
particularly public enterprises. A recent analysis finds that Uruguay performs below the
regional average in the Corporate Governance Transparency Index (World Bank 2015). Some
areas for improvement found by the analysis include the need to reinforce transparency and
control mechanisms in public enterprises, including access to and dissemination of
information, as well as the importance of defining a regulatory framework and a Corporate
Governance code for public enterprise performance.

159. Balancing a high reliance on the intensive exploitation of natural resources with
sustainable natural resources management and efforts to brand Uruguay as a clean and
green exporter to niche markets is critical. Uruguay’s reliance on its natural resource base
for the bulk of its exports makes ensuring the sustainable management of soil, water, air, and
biodiversity wealth key to future growth and livelihoods. Sustainable intensification of
resource use is a government priority and is being implemented in some areas, and the low
carbon economy has been a source of significant innovation and productivity for the country.
Pressures nevertheless remain, including in terms of land conversion to permanent crops, soil
erosion, water availability and quality, biodiversity protection, and coastal zone erosion.

160. Fiscal consolidation and vigilance in the presence of structurally large spending
pressures will become more challenging. A strong social compact and a large middle class
with a preference for generous social benefits generate a continual demand for high levels of
public spending. These spending pressures are magnified by the large role that the State
undertakes in providing economic services and infrastructure. Macroeconomic management
has been prudent over the past decade and debt levels have been substantially reduced and debt
profiles dramatically improved. Nonetheless, in periods of prolonged growth slowdown and
fiscal pressures, there may be pressures to increase public debt. This inherent tension between
fiscal restraint and social demands highlights the importance of high-quality fiscal management
and continual fiscal vigilance in the future.

B.     Priority Areas for Achieving the Twin Goals

161. The prioritization exercise is built upon analytical evidence, which has relied on
benchmarking whenever data allow, and is validated by expert advice. Prioritization
adhered to the following process. First, analytical evidence: although there are gaps, the
existing literature on Uruguay is extensive and provides a solid foundation of analytical
evidence on which to build the prioritization process. Gaps in a few areas were addressed by
commissioning new analysis (including additional work on the potential fiscal impacts of
aging, a closer look at the poverty and employment characteristics among ethnic minorities,
employment and wage evolution by sector, and a first inquiry into potential opportunities and
obstacles for Uruguay to further integrate into global value chains). Second, consultations: the
evidence base was complemented with consultations with the World Bank Group’s Country
Team as well as in-country consultations (in December 2014 and April 2015). Third,
validation: the storyline and results were validated with the public and private sectors as well
as with independent analysts in Uruguay. Analysis of growth determinants in Uruguay
supplemented these validations (see Box 7). Fourth, timeframe: Uruguay faces both short- and
long-term constraints, and the timeframe was taken into consideration in selecting priorities.
For instance, while aging is a central issue for Uruguay, a window of opportunity of a decade
                                              81
or more exists in which the country can implement needed measures and reforms, although
some of these may need to be considered today because of a long gestation period; similarly,
an overhaul of many aspects of the education system is essential although the impact of such
measures will only be perceived in the long run. Understanding that most available
prioritization strategies are imperfect, the team has tried to structure the prioritization in a
methodical way, as reflected in Table 5.


 Box 7. Determinants of Growth in Uruguay

 As a framework to validate priority areas, the SCD examined the determinants of growth analysis to
 identify areas where further reforms and changes are warranted. The determinants of growth were
 grouped into three general categories: (i) structural factors (secondary enrollment rate as a proxy of human
 capital; credit to the private sector as a share of GDP as a proxy for financial development and trade
 openness; main telephone lines as a proxy for infrastructure, government consumption, and institutions;
 (ii), stabilization policies (as captured by inflation, real exchange rate, and occurrence of banking crises);
 and (iii) external conditions (terms of trade changes and export prices). The empirical analysis uses
 dynamic panel data regressions (five-year non-overlapping averages). The model does a relatively good job
 of predicting per capita growth between 1996 and 2000 and the 2006-2010 (“late 2000s”) periods,
 explaining more than 70 percent of the actual growth in real GDP per capita at PPP.

 According to these results, during the 2000s structural reforms help explain close to 20 percent of the
 actual growth in per capita GDP (expressed in PPP). A closer look at the main structural determinants
 reveals that increased trade openness played a key role in supporting growth, while the decline in size of the
 government as proxied by the share of government consumption in GDP also had a positive contribution to
 growth of similar magnitude. Meanwhile the base model suggests that contributions from improvements in
 human capital as proxied by secondary enrollment rates had a small impact on growth over this period.
 However, if average years of schooling is used as the proxy for human capital, the impact on growth
 increases when compared with the base model. Furthermore, empirical analysis by Hanusheck and
 Woessman (2012) using cross-sectional data suggests that emphasis on the quality of education could have
 a significant impact on growth. Meanwhile, slow financial development appears to have undermined
 growth. The analysis also highlights the importance of stabilization. The stabilization policies have also had
 a positive impact on growth, as did external conditions (See Annex II)

 Improving access to finance and reducing inflation could strengthen growth . Using a growth
 regression model (Araujo et al. 2014) we produce counterfactual GDP per capita estimates for the scenarios
 in which Uruguay closes the gap with the top 10th percentile performer in LAC on various structural and
 policy dimensions. This would raise GDP per capita by 9.3 percent in five years – or about 1.6 percent per
 year. Similarly further reducing inflation to the top 10th percentile performer in the LAC region would
 deliver growth dividends of 4 percent over a five-year period.




162. The SCD proposes two priorities to address the most binding constraints and thus
enhance Uruguay’s capacity to sustain its significant achievements: (a) sustaining the
social compact by strengthening inclusion and equality of opportunity and (b) sustaining
growth with productivity and competitiveness. If Uruguay is to continue to advance toward
the Bank’s twin goals, it needs to undertake structural and institutional reforms while sustaining
macroeconomic stability in order to relax constraints to inclusive growth that in some areas are
becoming binding. To ensure the sustainability of its achievements in poverty reduction and
shared prosperity, Uruguay needs to reach the excluded and ensure equality of opportunity, and
                                                       82
continue to grow based on increasing competitiveness and productivity to support its social
compact. A crucial component of this growth is the preservation of high levels of employment
and high-quality jobs; these have been at the core of poverty reduction and advances in equity.

163. Sustaining the social compact by strengthening inclusion and equality of opportunity.
Despite Uruguay’s low rates of income poverty and generally high degree of social inclusion,
the young are disproportionately represented among the poor and the unemployed. Within
about a decade Uruguay’s working population will begin to shrink due to the country’s
advanced demographic transition. The labor force will need to be more skilled and more
productive as the elderly dependency ratio rises. The role of a reformed educational system is
key in this respect. Addressing childhood poverty and tackling youth exclusion are the two key
priorities.


       a. Address childhood poverty. There is a growing realization that resources have been
          skewed toward programs for the older generations (pensions, health) at the expense
          of the young, and there has been a proliferation of programs focusing on the needs
          of children and youth. The new government’s flagship program, Sistema Nacional
          Integrado de Cuidados, now under discussion in the legislature, includes a
          significant focus on providing early childhood (0-3 years) education and related
          interventions targeted to improving household and family conditions. The impact
          of such programs on women’s ability to participate in the labor force, augmenting
          their incomes, is a significant complementary aspect of such programs. Guarding
          against fragmentation of programs will be important, as well as a focus on
          monitoring and evaluation of services and outcomes.

       b. Tackle youth exclusion by reducing school dropout rates (middle school and high
          school). Large inequalities in educational attainment and school quality persist and
          are linked to income and socio-economic background. Reforms to the education
          system are key to addressing these problems. Educational quality needs to improve
          and be more relevant to the job market. Curricular shortcomings and a difficult
          transition between primary and secondary school are other problems that discourage
          students from staying in school. A tight labor market and declining educational
          premia further underscore the deficiencies of an antiquated schooling system as the
          opportunity cost of remaining in school rises. While Uruguay boasts a number of
          programs targeting at-risk youth (Compromiso educativo, Transito, CERCANÍAS),
          there is a high degree of fragmentation into small-scale programs, overlapping
          objectives, and weak articulation with the educational system or with labor markets.


164. Sustaining growth with productivity and competitiveness. Given Uruguay’s effective,
redistributive and generous social protection system, an aging society and significant
investment needs, economic growth is essential to supporting the social compact. The priorities
identified below are in turn important to sustaining economic growth and to ensuring the
availability of resources essential to poverty reduction and the promotion of shared prosperity.
Priorities in this area are: investing in human capital, upgrading technical skills, boosting
innovation, improving connectivity and logistics, enhancing integration into the global
economy and further promoting natural resources management.

                                              83
a. Invest in human capital. Uruguay’s human capital endowment is a cornerstone of
   its ability to foster the development of an increasingly sophisticated export base.
   Adequate education and skills are also essential to maintaining progress on jobs and
   inclusion. But the advantage that Uruguay had attained with respect to other
   countries in Latin America in terms of universal primary school and increased years
   of education has vanished as the rest caught up as progress in Uruguay stalled.
   Moreover, skills shortages are emerging in several high-productivity sectors. The
   inadequate endowment of human capital appears to underlie the labor productivity
   gap with aspirational peers, affecting the ability to absorb and adopt new
   technologies. A central priority for long-term economic growth is the reform of
   education toward a system that can take part in promoting a skill-intensive,
   innovation- and productivity-based growth model. A broad educational reform—
   encompassing efforts to make secondary education universal, improve quality and
   equity, modernize and review the curricula, enhance teacher training and education,
   and improve the system of teacher assignments to schools—has been a priority in
   Uruguay for some time and is a central concern of the current government and
   would have impacts in the longer term.
b. Upgrade technical skills. Apart from boosting cognitive as well as social skill
   development of Uruguay’s youth by reforming the secondary school system, the
   country will also need to upgrade technical skills, which are core to its high
   productivity-focused development model. Here, assessing the model of technical
   and vocational skill building, including its prominence within the wider education
   system, will be important. Evidence from other countries suggests that the close
   integration of technical skill building with attaining work experience renders the
   most positive results in terms of improving technical competencies and positive job
   and productivity outcomes. Importantly, technical skill building should not
   compromise the emphasis in secondary school on the formation of broad cognitive
   and flexible skills, which are central for job success in today’s demanding labor
   market. In addition to this, it will be important to focus on skill formation of the
   existing labor force to address skill shortages and mismatch.
c. Boost innovation. Uruguay lags with respect to comparators in terms of innovation
   and research and development, key factors in sustaining productivity convergence.
   Sustaining a high productivity growth model based on trade integration will require
   closing the technology and innovation gap, improving production and marketing
   processes as well as firm managerial capacity, cultivating entrepreneurship and
   adaptability, ensuring adequate access to finance, as well as upgrading institutions
   and markets. From and inclusion and shared prosperity perspective, the
   participation of SMEs in innovation and productivity upgrading will be important,
   as they account for the bulk of employment but face major constraints to innovation.
d. Improve connectivity and logistics through infrastructure upgrading. With the
   boom in exports over recent years, the demand on Uruguay’s roads has significantly
   outstripped the resources invested in the network’s maintenance. The poor quality
   of a significant portion of the network is leading to increased user costs in terms of
   time and vehicle maintenance, to the detriment of competitiveness and the
   sustainability of Uruguay’s growth model. In addition to the impact of transport
   costs on firm profitability and competitiveness, the poor state of road infrastructure
   undermines Uruguay’s efforts to emerge as a logistics and transport services hub
                                       84
   for the region. The importance of the sector to the continued competitiveness of
   Uruguay’s goods and services exports makes this a priority area. The key binding
   constraint is the availability of financial resources. Insufficient budgetary resources
   have been allocated to road maintenance and rehabilitation over the past 15 years
   as expenditure priorities have targeted other sectors. And while private resources
   may be able to contribute to filling the resource gap, traditional infrastructure
   finance through the budget will remain important—and will need to expand—
   because of the limited revenue-raising potential of many of the segments central to
   agricultural traffic. Although some road segments may be economically important,
   private financing may not be viable without public subsidies. Decisions in this
   regard would be facilitated by improvements in investment budgeting, and in the
   selection and evaluation of investment projects. Additional analysis may also
   needed in terms of evaluating potential revenues from taxes, user fees, and so forth.
   Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) may be a promising instrument in some cases,
   and are being pursued by government to fill the infrastructure financing gap. The
   definition of a deep portfolio of projects is needed to signal the seriousness of
   government policy toward PPPs; long-term certainty regarding public investment
   resources is also needed to tap private sector interest. Government should carefully
   analyze the scope for a PPP instrument in instances where revenue-generating
   capacity is limited relative to capital investment needs, given the likely need for
   public subsidies in such cases. Any financial structure should aim to reduce capital
   costs and service levels to control subsidy costs.
e. Enhance integration into the global economy. Uruguay needs to continue
   diversifying its exports and destinations by seeking international market access and
   progress in trade facilitation. Identifying and addressing both the economy-wide
   and industry-specific policies and regulatory changes that would enable the
   implementation of a global integration strategy remains a critical policy priority.
   Uruguay’s path toward greater integration into regional and global value chains and
   a more favorable repositioning of its products and services mix within these will
   require a multipronged strategy that envisages the intensification of the knowledge
   content and sophistication of its traditional resource-based primary exports and a
   further specialization into high-value modern services exports that are not
   constrained by lack of economies of scale or distance.

f. Promote green growth and natural resource management, with special emphasis
   on water resources. The availability of high-quality water resources plays a central
   role in providing environmental and economic services across fisheries, tourism,
   biodiversity, agricultural and industrial uses, power generation, and public health.
   However, the myriad pressures on water resources arising from booming economic
   activity, fragmented institutional oversight, and weak enforcement of regulations
   make adequate water resources management a priority for Uruguay. The main
   challenge is the deterioration in the quality of superficial waters (streams, rivers,
   lagoons, and reservoirs) because of increasing pressure on water resources from
   both point source (industrial and municipal discharges) as well as diffuse pollution
   (agricultural and urban sources.
   While significant progress in defining a new legal and institutional framework has
   been made, including approval of the Water Law centered on the principles of
                                       85
integrated water resources management, risk management, and stakeholder
participation, and the creation of regional and local water resource management
committees and the production of policy documents (including a National Response
to Climate Change Plan), there has been relatively limited implementation of these
actions. A major challenge to effective implementation is the sheer number of
institutions—10 in all—that are responsible for different regulations that impact the
water sector. There is a need to foster better coordination and articulation of actions
among the different institutions involved in water management in Uruguay. Better
coordination is also necessary in ensuring the implementation of legal provisions,
including (a) the water use fee, a provision to ensure societal contribution to the
conservation of water resources, and (b) the application of the principle of user and
polluter payments through water pricing systems so as to align incentives and costs.
Collection of the water fee is not being enforced, however, resulting in a lack of
financial resources to water agencies. Addressing these issues would enhance
efforts to ensure the availability of high-quality water resources in the face of rising
demand.




                                    86
Table 5. Prioritization


Fundamental               Key challenge                Sustainability         Policy tradeoffs           Poverty and shared      Priority/prerequisite
characteristic                                         analysis                                          prosperity filter
 I. Smallness,        -
    openness, natural
    resource reliance
                          Managing vulnerability to    Macroeconomic          Need for fiscal            Fiscal consolidation    Maintain prudent
                          external shocks: As a        stability is a         consolidation, while       in a progressive        macroeconomic
                          small, open economy          prerequisite for       there are increasing       manner, shielding the   policies and rebuild
                          Uruguay is                   sustained growth.      spending needs in          poor.                   fiscal space by
                          disproportionately exposed                          education and                                      improving the
                          to external shocks, which    With above-target      infrastructure.                                    efficiency of public
                          have adverse effects on      inflation and high     Backward-looking wage                              spending, public
                          economic activity, fiscal    degree of              indexation related to                              financial
                          balances, and on the poor    dollarization there    high degree of inflation                           management, public
                          and the bottom 40%.          is little room for     inertia.                                           investment decision-
                                                       countercyclical                                                           making, and
                                                       monetary policy.                                                          corporate governance
                                                                                                                                 of SOEs.
                                                       Increasing
                                                       competitiveness is                                                        International
                                                       essential to further   Wages, productivity,       Augmenting skills       economic integration
                          Inclusive growth in a less   integrate into the     and competitiveness:       and labor               and global value
                          supportive external          world economy.         Wages that are linked to   productivity,           chains insertion
                          environment: Global and                             productivity are           especially for the      through the
                          regional economic activity                          necessary for ensuring     bottom 40%.             intensification of the
                          has weakened, reducing                              efficient allocation of                            knowledge content
                          tails winds for Uruguay.                            resources.                                         and sophistication of
                          Weaker economic activity                                                                               traditional resource-
                          will slow employment                                                                                   based primary
                          creation and put pressure                                                                              exports, and
                          on fiscal resources,                                                                                   specialization into
                          including social transfers                                                                             high-value, modern
                          to the poor.                                                                                           services exports.


                                                                                87
Trade openness provides     Connectivity is key                                  Improving
opportunities for Uruguay   for competitiveness.                                 connectivity through
to diversify its economy.                                                        infrastructure
                                                                                 upgrading and
                                                                                 logistics
                                                                                 enhancements:
                                                                                 Upgrading road
                                                                                 infrastructure.
                                                      Education and skill
                                                      formation: Given the
                            Adequate human            need for fiscal            Education and skill
                            capital endowment         consolidation,             formation: Investing
                            and supply of             prioritization of          in skills to address
                            relevant skills are       expenditure is important   skill shortages and
                            key to sustaining                                    help reduce the
                            growth.                                              mismatch between
                                                                                 skill supply and
                                                                                 demand, improving
                                                                                 collaboration among
                                                                                 the government,
                                                                                 training institutes,
                                                                                 and private sector.
                                                                                 Invest in pre-primary
                                                                                 education and
                                                                                 secondary education
                                                                                 and increase equality
                            To sustain                                           of opportunity.
                            productivity growth
                            it is critical to close                              Foster innovation by
                            the technology and                                   increasing
                            innovation gap,                                      technological
                            improving                                            absorption capacity,
                            production and                                       stimulating R&D
                            marketing                                            spending, and
                            processes as well as                                 boosting
                            firm managerial                                      entrepreneurship.
                            capacity, and

                                                        88
                                                           cultivating
                                                           entrepreneurship
                                                           and adaptability.




                                                           Low domestic
                                                           saving and
                                                           intermediation
                                                           adversely impact
                                                           investment.           A large role for the State
                                                                                 and the importance of
                                                           Access to financing   the State in the provision
                                                           for SMEs.             of economic goods and        Enhancing corporate    Ensure transparency,
                             The State plays an                                  services needs to be         governance of SOEs     accountability, and
                             important role as an                                consistent with a level      and improving their    efficiency of SOEs.
                             economic agent in sectors                           playing field for            services, especially
                             that are key for                                    economic agents.             for the bottom 40%.
                             competitiveness and have
                             a large fiscal impact.
                                                                                 Balancing a high
                                                                                 reliance on the intensive
                                                                                 exploitation of natural
                                                                                 resources with
                                                                                 sustainable natural
                                                                                 resources management,
                                                           Environmental         and efforts to brand
                                                           degradation and       Uruguay as a clean and                              Green growth model
Revealed comparative         The rapid increase in         inefficient use of    green exporter to niche                             with a low carbon
advantage in agricultural-   agricultural-based exports    natural resources     markets.                                            growth strategy
based exports.               through the intensification   could harm                                                                (energy, transport,
                             of the use of land and        Uruguay’s                                                                 waste, and
                             water resources over the      comparative                                                               agriculture).
                             last decade affects           advantage and
                             environmental

                                                                                   89
                            sustainability of these        reduce longer-term
                            resources.                     economic potential.

                                                           Uruguay is close to
                                                           the production
                                                           frontier of
                                                           agribusiness and
                                                           may not sustain
                                                           similar productivity
                                                           gains as seen over                                                       Climate change
                            Climate change poses risks     the past decade                                                          mitigation and
                            to Uruguay’s main export       without significant                                                      adaptation through
                            base (agriculture) as well     technological                                                            continued innovation,
                            as to its fiscal accounts.     change.                                                                  knowledge, and
                                                                                                                                    actual carbon
                                                                                                                                    reduction.
    II.     Social  -
            Compact

Strong social compact has   Changing global                Poverty and            Youth exclusion in an      How to sustain         Addressing childhood
put emphasis on reducing    environment and slowing        inequality have        aging society: Uruguay’s   elderly welfare        poverty.
poverty and inequality,     growth are likely to reduce    declined, yet          social protection system   benefits under a
thereby allowing Uruguay    the space and economic         challenges remain      has meant that public      scenario of high       Tackling youth
to create an inclusive      means for inclusive social     to avoid vulnerable    resources have flowed      levels of school       exclusion by reducing
society.                    policies.                      populations falling    disproportionately on      dropouts and           school dropout rates.
                                                           back into poverty,     the elderly. Yet today     increasing youth
                            Aging population is likely     and for dramatically   child poverty, youth       poverty.
                            to put pressures on fiscal     reducing child and     school drop-outs, and
                            balances, through              youth poverty.         the proportion of young
                            increased pensions and                                people who neither work                           Taking advantage of
                            health care costs.             Chronic poverty        nor study are a            How to increase        specific sector growth
                                                           unresponsive to        substantial concern for    female labor force     to benefit
                            Preference for job stability   broad social system    the country.               participation and      redistribution and
                            may reduce flexibility in      interventions.                                    encourage behavioral   wage increases
                            labor markets and slow                                                           changes.               without jeopardizing
                            diversification.                                                                                        future growth.


                                                                                    90
High youth poverty,        How to enhance
unemployment, and          equality of
exclusion.                 opportunities for
                           afro-descendants and
Declining social           ethnic minorities.
mobility and poor
relative
performance.

High inequality in
educational
attainment and
strong association
between
socioeconomic
status and
educational
indicators.


Resilience of labor
demand to shocks
may be affected by
regulation.




                      91
References

Aboal, D., P. Angelelli, G. Crespi, A. Lopez and M. Vairo. 2015. Innovación en Uruguay, Informe
Final. CINVE, BID, CENIT.

Aboal, D., P. Cobas, C. Paolino, F. Rovira. 2014. Clasificación de las Exportaciones Uruguayas
por Contenido Tecnológico. CINVE, Documento de Trabajo DT 02/2014.

Adler, G. and S. Sosa. 2012. “Intra-Regional Spillovers in South America: Is Brazil Systemic After
All?” IMF Working Paper WP/12/145/.

Aedo, C. and I. Walker, 2012. Skills for the 21st Century in Latin America and the Caribbean.
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Altman, S. et al. 2012. Demanda de Turismo Argentina y Brasileña en Uruguay. Instituto de
Economia, DT 12/12. Montevideo, Uruguay.

Amarante, V., M. Buchel, C. Oliveri, and I. Perazzo. 2011. “Distributive Impacts of Alternative
Tax Structures: The Case of Uruguay.” Paper prepared for the project Fiscal Schemes for Inclusive
Development. New York: UNDP.

Amarante, V. and A. Vigorito. 2012. “The Expansion of Non-Contributory Transfers in Uruguay
in Recent Years.” Policy Research Brief No. 29, International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth.

Angelelli, P. et al. 2015. Competitividad e Innovación: Implicancias Para Uruguay. Banco
InterAmericano de Desarrollo.

Araujo, J., M. Brueckner, M. Clavijo, E. Vostroknutova, and K. Wacker. 2014. Beyond
commodities : the growth challenge of Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World
Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/12/24349586/benchmarking-
determinants-economic-growth-latin-america-caribbean

Attanasio, Orazio P., 1995. "The intertemporal allocation of consumption: theory and evidence,"
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Elsevier, vol. 42(1), pages 39-56, June.

Azevedo, J. P., G. Inchauste, and V. Sanfelice. 2012. “Decomposing the Decline in Income
Inequality in Latin America.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6715.

Azevedo, J., M. Nguyen, and V. Sanfelice. 2012b. “Shapley Decomposition by Components of a
Welfare Aggregate.” Policy Research Working Paper 6414, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Barro, R., J. Lee, and Jong Wha. 2013. "A new data set of educational attainment in the world,
1950â“2010," Journal of Development Economics, Elsevier, vol. 104(C), pages 184-198.

Barros, R., F. Ferreira, J. Molinas and J. Saavedra. 2006. Measuring Inequality of Opportunities
in Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank, Washington, DC.



                                               92
Bassi, M., M. Busso, Sergio Urzúa, and J. S. Muñoz, 2013. “Is the Glass Half Empty of Half Full?:
school enrollment, graduation and drop-out rates in Latin America,” IDB Working Paper Series
No. IDB-WP-492, Inter-American Development Bank.

Beltrami, Mónica. 1998. “Encuesta continua de hogares—módulo de raza—principales
resultados.” Montevideo: Instituto Nacional de Estadística.

Bertola, L, F. Isabella and C. Saavedra. 2014. El Ciclo Economico de Uruguay, 1998-2012.
Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de la Republica, Documento On Line No. 33.

Bervejillo, J., J. Alston and K. Tumber. 2012. “The Benefits form Public Agricultural Research in
Uruguay.” The Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 56. Pp. 475-497.

Betarte, G., H. Cancela, and J. Moleri. 2008. Informe final de la consultoría sobre tecnologías de
la información y comunicación en el marco del Plan Estratégico Nacional en Ciencia, Tecnología
e Innovación, Montevideo, Uruguay: Gabinete Ministerial de la Innovación, Equipo Operativo :
ANNI.

Bruns, B. and J. Luque. 2015. “Great Teachers: How to Raise Student Learning in Latin America
and the Caribbean.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Bucheli, M. and W. Cabella. 2007. “El perfil demográfico y socioeconómico de la población
uruguaya según su ascendencia racial.” Informe temático. Montevideo: Instituto Nacional de
Estadística.

-------------------- and R. Porzecanski (2011) “Racial Inequality in the Uruguayan Labor Market:
An Analysis of Wage Differentials between Afro-Descendants and Whites,” Latin American
Politics and Society, 53 (2), pp. 113-150.

-------------------- and G. Sanroman (2010) “Decomposing the Gaps between Afro-descendants
Along the Wage Distribution,” documento de trabajo, departamento de Economia, Facultad de
Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de la Republica, Documento 14/10, October.

Busso, M., M. Cicowiez, and L. Gasparini. 2005. Ethnicity and the Millennium Development
Goals. Bogotá: UNDP/CEPAL/IDB/World Bank.

Busso M., Madrigal L., and C. Pagés. 2013. Productivity and resource misallocation in Latin
America, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics.

Caceres, L. and F. Farinasso. [2013]. Infraestructura Vial del Uruguay.

Capurro, A. et al. 2014. “Necesidades de inversion en infraestructura vial en Uruguay.” Centro de
Estudios Económicos de la Industria de la Construcción (CEEIC). Montevideo.

Carrillo, P., N. Gandelman and V. Robano. (2014), “Sticky Floors and Glass Ceilings in Latin
America”, Journal of Economic Inequality, Vol. 1, No. 23.


                                               93
Castellani, F. and E. Lora. 2014. “Is Entrepreneurship a Channel of Social Mobility in Latin
America?” Lain American Journal of Economics, Vol. 51. N0. 2 (Nov. 2014): 179-194.

Cotlear, D. ed. 2011. “Population Aging: Is Latin America Ready? ” Directions in Development:
Human Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Datt, G., and M. Ravallion. 1992. “Growth and Redistribution Components of Changes in Poverty
Measures: A Decomposition with Applications to Brazil and India in the 1980s.” Journal of
Development Economics 38 (2): 275–95.

Daude, C. (2012), “Development Accounting: Lessons for Latin America”, OECD Development
Centre Working Papers, No. 313, OECD Publishing, Paris.

Daude, C. (2013). “Educación, Clases Medias y Movilidad Social en América Latina”,
Pensamiento Económico, Vol. 10, pp. 29-48,
www.pensamientoiberoamericano.org/xnumeros/10/pdf/pensamientoIberoamericano-196.pdf.

De Hoyos, R., H. Rogers, and M. Székely, M. 2015. “Out of school and out of work: challenges
and solutions around the ninis in Latin America,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Dominguez, M. et al. 2013. “Un Motor a Diferentes Velocidades: Un Análisis del Capital Humano
y su Composición en los Ultimos 20 años.” Documento de Trabajo Cinve. Montevideo.

Dutz, M., I. Kessides, S. O’Connell, and R. Willing. 2011. “Competition and Innovation-driven
Inclusive Growth.” Policy Research Working Paper 5852. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Eichengreen, B., D. Park and K. Shin. 2012. "When Fast-Growing Economies Slow Down:
International Evidence and Implications for China," Asian Economic Papers, MIT Press, vol.
11(1), pages 42-87, February.

Fernandez-Aria and C. Daude. 2010. “On the Role of Productivity and Factor Accumulation in
Economic Development in Latin America and the Caribbean.” IDB Working Paper.

Ferreira, F. H. G., J. Messina, J. Rigolini, L. F. López-Calva, M. A. Lugo, and R. Vakis. 2013.
“Economic Mobility and the Rise of the Latin American Middle Class. ” Washington, DC: World
Bank.

Filgueira, F., “Una Aproximación Diagnóstica al Sistema Educativo”, Mimeo, Montevideo, 2013.

Filgueira, F. and D. Hernandez. 2013. Social Protection Systems in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Uruguay. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago de
Chile

Filgueira, F., M. Pasturino, R. Opertti, and R. Vilaró. 2014. “La Educación Prioridad de País:
Aportes a la Construcción de una Educación Genuinamente Inclusiva,” Fundación 2030,
Montevideo, 2014.


                                              94
Foxley, A. 2010. “Regional Trade Blocks: The Way to the Future?”, Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. Washington D.C..

Fundacion Jussicia y Derecho and UNICEF. 2010. Justicia Penal Juvenil. Montevideo, Uruguay.

Gelber, D. and C. Rossel. 2012. “Structural Origins of Today’s Youth Poverty and Inequality in
Youth Transitions: the Emblematic Case of Uruguay.” Global Education Magazine.

Giuliani, E. et al. 2005. “Upgrading in Global Value Chains: Lessons from Latin American
Clusters.” World Development, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 549–573.

Haddad, M., J. Lim, L. Munro, C. Saborowski, and B. Shepherd. 2011. “Volatility, Export
Diversification and Policy.” Managing Openness, 135-144.

Hanushek, E. A., and L. Woessmann. 2012. “Schooling, Educational Achievement, and the Latin
American Growth Puzzle.” Journal of Development Economics 99 (2): 497–512.

Hausmann, R., J. Hwang, and D. Rodrik. (2007). “What you export matters.” Journal of Economic
Growth, 12(1), 1-25.

International Labour Organization, 2014. “Reduction of informal employment in Uruguay:
policies and outcomes.” Notes on Formalization, Programme for the Promotion of Formalization
in Latin America and the Caribbean.

International Monetary Fund, 2014. Selected Issues. IMF Country Report No. 14/7.

INE (National Institute of Statistics, Uruguay). 2013. “Estimación de la Pobreza por el Método de
Ingreso.” Montevideo: Uruguay.

Inter-American Development Bank. 2009. “Nota Técnica de Educación,” Noviembre, 2009,
mimeo.

Inter-American Development Bank, 2012. http://www.iadb.org/en/news/news-releases/2012-09-
20/partial-credit-guarantee-to-uruguays-microfin,10115.html

Inter-American Development Bank, 2014. “Rethinking Productive Development Sound Policies
and Institutions for Economic Transformation.”

Kumhof, M. Laxton, D. 2013. “Simple fiscal policy rules for small open economies”. Journal of
international Economics.

Lederman, D, et al. 2014. Latin American Entrepreneurs: Many Firms but Little Innovation. World
Bank, Washington, DC.

Llambi, C. et al. 2014. Estudio de Demanda y Oferta de Capacitación en el Sector Logístico.
Centro de Investigaciones Económicas (Cinve), Montevideo.

López-Calva, L., and C. Rodríguez Castelán. 2014. “Pro-Growth Equity: A Policy Framework for
the Twin Goals.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                                               95
Manova, K. 2013. “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade.” Review
of Economic Studies (2013) 80, p.711-744.

Nguyen, H. and P. Jaramillo. 2014. “Institutions and firms' return to innovation: evidence from the
World Bank enterprise survey,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6918.

Onder, H. and P. Pestieau. 2014. “Is Aging Bad for the Economy? Maybe.” Economic Premise.
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), “The High Cost of Low
Education Performance,” Paris, 2010.

Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), “PISA 2012 Results: Creative
Problem Solving.” Paris, 2013.

OECD/ECLAC (2012), Latin American Economic Outlook 2013: SME Policies for Structural
Change, OECD Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/leo-2013-en.OECD/ECLAC. 2013.
Latin American Economic Outlook 2013. SME Policies for Structural Change.

OECD/ECLAC. 2014. Multi-dimensional Review of Uruguay: Volume 1: Initial Assessment,
OECD Development Pathways, OECD Publishing.

Orlando, M. B. and C. Díaz-Bonilla, 2010. “Igualdad de Oportunidades: Logros y Desafíos en
Uruguay.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Paes de Barros, F. Ferreira, J. Molinas, and J. Saavedra. 2009. “Measuring Inequality of
Opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Perera, M. and C. Llambí. 2014. “ Incidence Analyis in the Labour market Regarding the Evolution
of Income Inequality in Uruguay During 2001-2012”, mimeo.

Rabellotti, R. and C. Pietrobelli. 2014. “Upgrading to Compete: Global Value Chains, Clusters,
and SMEs in Latin America.” Inter-American Development Bank. Washington, DC.

Rofman, R. 2014. Hacia un Uruguay más Equitativo: Los desafíos del Sistema de Protección
Social. World Bank, Buenos Aires.

Rofman, R. and Carranza, E. Carranza. 2005. “Social Security Coverage in Latin America.” Social
Protection Discussion Paper Series # 0523. The World Bank, Washington DC.

Sosa, S. 2010. “The Influence of “Big Brothers:” How Important are Regional Factors for
Uruguay?” IMF Working Paper WP/10/60.

US      Department    of     State     2014,   Uruguay      Investment      Climate     Statement.
http://www.state.gov/e/eb/rls/othr/ics/2014/228536.htm.

World Bank. 2008. “The Growth Report: Strategies for sustained and inclusive growth, ”
Commission on Growth and Development, Washington, DC.
                                                96
World Bank. 2012. The Labor Market Story behind Latin America’s Transformation. Washington,
DC.

World Bank. 2013. Uruguay Public Expenditure Review: Mitigating Fiscal Risks. Washington,
DC.

World Bank. 2014. Low Emissions Growth Options for Uruguay: Towards a Sustainable Low-
Carbon Economy. Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2014a. “Social Gains in the Balance: A Fiscal Policy Challenge for Latin America
and the Caribbean.” Washington, DC: LCSPP Poverty and Labor Brief, No. 6.

World Bank, 2014b. Uruguay Policy Notes. Mimeo.

World Bank, 2015. Uruguay Policy Notes “Reunion de Dialogo,” IDB-World Bank-CAF.

World Bank. 2015a. Argentina- Paraguay-Uruguay: Logística de la Soja. Report No: 97224-LAC

World Bank Enterprise Survey. 2010. http://www.enterprisesurveys.org.

World Economic Forum. 2014. Global Competitiveness Report.

World Trade Organization. 2012. Uruguay Trade Policy Review.




                                             97
Annex I. Engagement and Planning

Consultations, team budget, and timeline

Team
1.     The team was co-led by Zeinab Partow (Sr. Economist, GMFDR), Alan Fuchs (Economist,
GPVDR), and Cristina Savescu (Country Economist, GMFDR). Zafer Mustafaoglu (Program
Leader) provided overall coordination. In addition, the following people provided substantive
inputs and guidance: Jesko Hentschel (Country Director), Augusto de la Torre (LAC Chief
Economist), Daniel Lederman (Lead Economist, LCRCE), Frank Sader (Principal Strategy
Officer), and Louise J. Cord (Practice Manager). Program leaders Zafer Mustafoglu, Julian
Lampietti, Michele Gragnolati, Rafael Rofman, and Javier Suarez were essential to guiding the
team in identifying key constraints and concerns in their respective sectors. Luis Felipe López-
Calva, Lead Economist; Peter Siegenthaler, Lead Economist; Norbert Matthias Fiess, Principal
Economist; and David Rosenblatt, Economic Adviser were peer reviewers.
2.     The full list of extended team members consulted in the preparation of this SCD and who
have contributed their time, expertise, and affiliations appear below.

Table A1.1 Team
 CMU/Global Practice/Cross Cutting Solution   Team Member
 Area/IFC
 Agriculture                                  Holger Kray

 Education                                    Diego Ambasz, Rafael de Hoyos Navarro

 Governance                                   Daniel Alvarez

 IFC                                          Frank Sader, Alex Cantor

 Poverty                                      Carlos Rodríguez-Castelan, Maria Ana Lugo

 Social Protection and Labor                  Rafael Rofman, Anil Onal (Aging)

 Trade and Competitiveness                    Alberto Criscuolo, Luis Rubalcaba,       Graciela
                                              Miralles Murciego, Jose Daniel Reyes
 Transport and ICT                            Gregoire Gauthier, Daniel Benitez

 Urban, Rural and Social Development          Catalina Marulanda, Sarah Keener, Joan Hoffman,
                                              Santiago Scialabba
 Energy                                       Lucia Spinelli

 Water                                        Remi Trier, Carmen Yee-Batista

 Environment                                  Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor

 Uruguay Country Office                       Ruxandra Burdescu, Valeria Bolla

 CMU team                                     Program Leaders plus Sabine Hader, Yanina Budkin,
                                              Eugenia Marinova




                                              98
Engagement with country team

3.      The team has followed an inclusive process in the development of the report and the
elaboration of the diagnostics. Several rounds of bilateral consultations with sectoral teams were
held to focus on key issues and knowledge gaps to be filled prior to the elaboration of the overall
storyline. This was complemented with a country team brainstorming meeting to validate the
storyline. The team also met with the Chief Economist’s Office to discuss the storyline, entry
points to understanding Uruguay, as well as the analytic underpinning of the SCD. Several
meetings to review in detail the concept note and decision draft were held with the CMU.

Engagement with counterparts in Uruguay

4.      The SCD preparation was accompanied by a consultation process in Uruguay to ensure that
all stakeholders provided inputs to the deliberations. Missions were conducted in December 2014
and April 2015, in which the SCD team held meetings with counterparts in Uruguay from the
Government, private sector, academia, think tanks, and unions to elicit their views on the growth
pattern of Uruguay and its performance in various dimensions over the past decade as well as to
validate the storyline being developed.

Timeline and Budget

Table A1.2. Timeline
 SCD Activity                                                                  Estimated Date
 1st Brainstorming session with Country Team: Identifying key hypotheses       November 11, 2014
 Uruguay Mission: Fact finding                                                 December 7-12, 2014
 2nd Brainstorming session with Country Team: Review and revise storyline      January 21, 2015
 3rd Brainstorming session with Country Team: Review and revise storyline      February 5, 2015
 Consultation with LAC Chief Economist                                         February 10, 2015
 Consultation with GPs                                                         February 26, 2015
 CMU Review                                                                    March 3, 2015
 Concept Note Review- ROC                                                      March 16, 2015
 Uruguay Mission: Filling the Knowledge Gap and commissioning studies
 Country Consultations: Ground truth with stakeholders, Government and Civil   April 27-30, 2015
 Society
 CMU and Country Team Consultations (Decision round)                           May 2015
 ROC Review                                                                    End-May
 Completion                                                                    June 2015




                                                  99
Annex II. Selected Macroeconomic Indicators and Growth Determinants

Selected Macroeconomic Indicators

                                                 2002           Average           Average              2013           2014 (est)
                                                               2003-2006         2007-2013
 Real GDP growth, %                                  -7.7             4.3               5.6                 5.1               3.5
 GDP per capita growth, %                            -7.6             4.2               5.3                 4.7               3.1
 GDP per capita, US$                              4,256.0         4,685.0          11,877.0            16,722.0          16,592.0
 Unemployment rate*                                  17.0            13.4               7.7                 6.7               6.9
 Inflation, CPI, % yoy, eop                          25.9             7.3               7.9                 8.5               8.3
 REER index (2010=100)**                            109.4           162.3             107.9                91.0              96.0
 Exports of G&S, % growth                            -6.7            14.8               4.9                 0.2               1.9
 Imports of G&S, % growth                           -20.8            12.9               9.2                 3.5               0.5
 Current account balance, % of                        2.7            -0.6              -3.2                -4.9              -4.4
 GDP
 FDI, net inflows, current                          180.0             755.4            2185.0            3027.0            2710.0
 million US$
 GDP, billion US$                                     13.7              15.7              40.4              57.5              57.5
* Urban areas (population > 5000).
** decrease = appreciation.
Sources: Banco Central del Uruguay, Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas, World Development Indicators.



Determinants of Growth in Uruguay

1.      As a framework to validate priority areas, the SCD examined the determinants of
growth analysis to identify areas where further reforms and changes are warranted. The
determinants of growth were grouped into three general categories: (a) structural factors
(secondary enrollment rate as a proxy of human capital; credit to the private sector as a share of
GDP as a proxy for financial development and trade openness; main telephone lines as a proxy for
infrastructure, government consumption, and institutions ; (b), stabilization policies (as captured
by inflation, real exchange rate, and occurrence of banking crises); and (c) external conditions
(terms of trade changes and export prices). The empirical analysis uses dynamic panel data
regressions (five-year non-overlapping averages). The model does a relatively good job of
predicting per capita growth between 1996 and 2000 and the 2006-2010 (“late 2000s”) periods,
explaining more than 75 percent of the actual growth in real GDP per capita at PPP.

2.     During the 2000s structural reforms help explain close to 20 percent of the actual
growth in per capita GDP (expressed in PPP). A closer look at the main structural determinants
reveals that increased trade openness and infrastructure played a key role in supporting growth,
while the decline in size of the government as proxied by the share of government consumption in
GDP also had a positive contribution to growth of similar magnitude. Meanwhile the base model
suggests that contributions from improvements in human capital as proxied by secondary
enrollment rates had a small impact on growth over this period. However, if average years of
schooling is used as the proxy for human capital, the impact on growth increases when compared
with the base model. Furthermore, empirical analysis by Hanusheck and Woessman (2012) using
cross-sectional data suggests that emphasis on the quality of education could have a significant
impact on growth. Meanwhile, slow financial development appears to have undermined growth.
The analysis also highlights the importance of stabilization in supporting growth and the positive
impulse to growth from external factors.


                                                                   100
Table A2.1 Growth effects of structural, stabilization and external factors in Uruguay

                                                             Predicted effect, Annualized
                                                 parameter      The 2000s      Early 2010s
Persistence                                            0.781          0.62             3.93
Structural                                                            0.29             0.03
Schooling (Secondary enrollment rates)                 0.018          0.00            -0.01
Credit to the Private sector (% of GDP)                0.074         -0.31             0.05
Government consumption (% of GDP)                     -0.262          0.17            -0.41
Infrastructure proxy (Main lines per 100 people)       0.141          0.21             0.08
Institutions (polity2)                                -0.003          0.00             0.00
Trade openness                                         0.082          0.22             0.31
Stabilization                                                         0.15            -0.29
lnflation                                             -0.011          0.01             0.00
Real Exchange Rate                                    -0.064          0.14            -0.29
Banking crisis                                        -0.040          0.00             0.00
External factors                                                      0.26             0.03
Commodity export price                                10.482          0.23            -0.32
Terms of trade                                         0.118          0.03             0.35
Predicted per capita GDP at PPP                                       1.32             3.70

Source: Own calculations, adapted from Araujo et al. 2014.




 Figure A2.1 Actual and predicted changes in GDP                                              Figure A2.2 Growth determinants
 per capita at PPP

             The 2000s                                                    Late 2000s-2013
                                                                                                                     The 2000s
    7




                                  7




                                                                                                  1.5
                                      Annualized GDP p.c. growth (in %)
    6




                                  6




                                                                                                        1
    5




                                  5




                                                                                                  .5
    4




                                  4
    3




                                  3




                                                                                                        0
    2




                                  2




                                                                                                  -.5
    1




                                  1




                                                                                                                        persistence
                                                                                                                        structural
    0




                                  0




                                                                                                                        stabilization
                         actual                                 predicted                                               external




 Source: Staff calculations based on Araujo et al.                                            Source: Staff calculations based on Araujo et al.
 2014                                                                                         2014




                                                                                            101
Annex III. Note on Ethnic Minorities and Exclusion in Uruguay

1. General Context
1.      Academic research and empirical analyses of the economic and social characteristics of
ethnic minorities in Uruguay (Afro-descendants and indigenous groups) are not abundant. As
pointed out by Bucheli and Porzecanski (2010), this may be the result of an idea, prevalent for
many years in Uruguay, that the country was an integrated society, that interracial integration was
free of conflict, and that the observable inequalities between groups were to be attributed less to
issues of ethnic descent than to class and income differences. Additionally, until the mid-1990s
ethnic data was not collected in official statistics (the first indicators on ethnicity were collected in
the 1996-97 Household Surveys/ECH), preventing researchers and scholars from inquiring about
ethnic issues through this medium. It had been even suggested that including such items in the
National Census and Surveys could increase discrimination and social inequality, as this would
“create high rejection rates or force the population to classify in socially meaningless and
scientifically invalid categories” (Rodriguez, 2006).

2.      In recent years, however, there has been an increase in research on social issues specifically
related to ethnic minorities, especially regarding the population of African descent. This was
probably encouraged by the growing activism of the Afro-Uruguayan minority, and further
stimulated by multilateral organizations and local political actors.

3.      References to cultural minority and multicultural society have become more common in
public discourse during recent years in Uruguay. This is revealed in some concrete initiatives at
the political and institutional levels: for instance, Law 19122, which encourages affirmative action
to promote the incorporation of more people of African descent in the labor market (in particular
in executive roles) and their inclusion in higher education, was passed in 2013. Other examples
are the creation of Unidad Temática para los Afrodescendientes within the Montevideo local
administration, and the Secretaría de la Mujer Afrodescendiente within the Ministry of Social
Development (MIDES).

4.      Specific knowledge on issues related to ethnic minorities has improved substantially since
data on ethnic origins was incorporated into official statistics, both through items included in the
National Census of 2011 and through the systematic availability of such indicators in the
Continuous Household Survey (Encuesta Continua de Hogares/ECH) since 2006. The availability
of official data enabled examination of a wide variety of information disaggregated by ethnic
groups.

5.     The indicators reviewed in this report consistently show that while most of the population
of African descent generally have acceptable levels of human development—as highlighted by
UNDP (UNDP, 2008), 70 percent of the black population has acceptable levels of human
development in relation to the country level of development—indicators of income and other
economic, social, and cultural assets are systematically less satisfactory for the Afro-descendant
population and, according to some available measurements, also for the population of indigenous
descent.

6.     The main studies and empirical research on ethnic inequalities conducted in Uruguay focus
on unequal opportunities in education and the labor market available for people of African descent
(Bucheli and Cabella, 2007; Bucheli and Porzecanski, 2008; Gonzalez and Sanroman, 2010). The
                                                  102
focus on these issues is partly explained by the availability of ECH data, which provide
considerable robust information on structures of income and the labor market. Studies on
subjective perceptions of discrimination also exist, but they are mainly based on qualitative
research techniques, and therefore their insights and findings cannot validly implicate the entire
population (Rudolf et al., 2008; Arocena et al., 2007; Rudolf et al., 2004; Tenembaum Hughes,
2011).

7.      The interest in issues related to Uruguayans of African descent has not been duplicated
with equal strength in the field of studies on indigenous populations. The growth and consolidation
of Afro-Uruguayan identity and cultural movements39 have not occurred among the population of
indigenous background, and although there are some civil society organizations promoting
recognition of indigenous identity and rights,40 their visibility is low and they have achieved little
impact in academia and the media. The cultural and political weakness of these efforts may have
resulted in fewer incentives for people of indigenous descent to self-identify as such. Low self-
identification in turn results in lower visibility in official statistics for indigenous people (as ethnic
data is collected through self-declaration items). Weaker cultural identity, therefore, may result in
lower incentive for academic research and in turn reinforce the prevalent idea that “in Uruguay
there are no substantively and geographically distinguishable indigenous communities [...] local
indios were gradually disappearing as a result of wars, extermination campaigns, disease and
forced assimilation processes” (Bracco, 2004).

8.      This note is an overview of the situation of Afro-descendants and indigenous minorities in
Uruguay, based mainly on information provided by the last census available (Censo Nacional
2011) and on ECH data. In the case of the Afro-descendant minority, some data is extended on the
basis of available academic literature.

2. Description of general social indicators
2.1. Population size and distribution

9.     According to the 2011 National Census, 7.8 percent of people living in Uruguay declared
“Afro or Black” descent, while 4.9 percent reported having “Indigenous” ancestry. Ethnic
backgrounds indicators are collected through self-declaration items, and the items are elicited in
the same way in the Census and the ECH, via responses to the following questions:

- ¿Cree tener ascendencia ...? (Opciones: Afro o Negra/ Asiática o Amarilla/ Blanca/ Indígena/
Otra)
- ¿Cuál considera principal de las declaradas?

10.    Thus, a person can declare one or more ancestries, and in cases of multiple descents a
person may declare a principal one. This analysis is based on people who have declared African
or Indian descent as their main or only descent.41 Following this approach, the size of the ethnic
groups in Uruguay is shown Table A3.1, which also includes data from 2012 ECH.
39
   For references on Afro-decendant cultural movements, see Machado, 2007.
40
   For instance, CONACHA (Consejo de la Nación Charrúa), which participated in the 2015 meeting of the regional
Cátedra Indígena Intercultural (CII), supported by the Uruguayan Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
41
   Even though some scholars consider that the use of aggregate categories ‘Main descent’ + ‘Secondary descent’
raises visibility for excluded minorities, the use of ‘Main descent’ only is more helpful in indicating inequalities among
groups, as the main category “refleja con mayor fidelidad la apariencia física desde el punto de vista racial. En la

                                                          103
Table A3.1 Population by Ethnic Descent %
                         White                   Indigenous      Afro             Other           Total
  General Population 2011
                         90.7                    2.4             4.8              2.1             100
  Census
  General Population ECH
                         94.4                    1.4             4.1              0.1             100
  2012
  Head of Household
                         94.1                    1.8             4                0.01            100
  ECH 2012



11.     Additionally, it should be noted that both in the census and household survey measures
there is only one respondent by household, and that informant assigns descents to the rest of the
household members (and thus the concept of self-identification is not that strict).

12.     The geographical distribution of households of African descent is heterogeneous (see Map
3.1). The proportion of Afro-descendant population is larger in the departments of the northern
Brazilian border (17.1 percent in Artigas and 17.3 percent in Rivera). There are also significant
Afro-descendant minorities in Cerro Largo (10.9 percent), Tacuarembó and Salto (both 9.9
percent), and Montevideo (9.1 percent).42




Map A3.1 Population of Departments, by Ethnicity




medida que la discriminación se ejerce sobre la construcción de estereotipos sociales basados en la estigmatización de
determinados rasgos fenotípicos, los análisis basados en la ascendencia principal permiten visibilizar mejor los
mecanismos de la discriminación y sus resultados en términos de desigualdad racia l” (Cabella et al., 2013, p. 13).
42
   It has been argued that in the departments of Artigas, Rivera, Cerro Largo, Salto and Tacuarembó the strong
influence of the Uruguay-Brazil border culture, together with the larger size of the Afro-descendant population, may
explain a greater willingness of people to recognize and declare that descent (Cabella et al., 2013, p.20).
                                                        104
13.    In turn, in Montevideo, the capital city that concentrates around 40 percent of the total
population of the country, the distribution of Afro-descendants is concentrated in the most
vulnerable neighborhoods of the urban periphery. Whereas the Afro-descendant population is less
than 5 percent in the coastal districts, where the medium- and high-income population lives, it is
around 20 percent in the “poverty belt” districts of the capital, suggesting problems of residential
segregation and, plausibly, disadvantages in access to urban services.


Map A3.2 Distribution of Population with at Least One Unsatisfied Basic Need, by Ethnicity




                                                   105
Map A3.3 Distribution of Population with at Least Three Unsatisfied Basic Needs, by Ethnicity




2.2. Population pyramids and fertility
14.    The population pyramid of Afro-descendants has a visibly younger structure than that of
the general population. It does not reflect the typical rectangular shape of the aging general
population: the population aged 65 years or more represents 14.4 percent within the non-Afro-
descendant population and 8.1 percent within the Afro-descendant population, according to Census
2011, while the group aged 0 to14 years-old represents, for the same sub-populations, 21.6 percent
and 25.2 percent, respectively. The evolution of population pyramids by descent has been
compared (Cabella and Bucheli, 2007; Cabella, 2008), and it has been shown that their shapes
remained relatively stable between the first measures collected 1996-1997 and the mid-2000 ECH
data.

15.      Whereas overall fertility rate in Uruguay is low in all segments of the population, there are
evident disparities in this indicator. Economic status, educational attainment, and region of
residence impact on the age of onset of fertility and on the number of children per woman (Varela
et al., 2008; Amarante and Perazzo, 2008). Among the Afro-descendant population, as Cabella et
al. (2013) pointed out Afro-descendant women have an earlier entry into reproductive life,
“registrándose concentración de la edad al primer hijo entre los 15 y 19 años y una fecundidad
más elevada que la de las mujeres blancas, acumulando al final de su vida fértil un hijo más en
promedio” (Bucheli and Cabella, 2007). From the age group of 30s, the disparity in fertility
declines, and there is a similar number of mothers among women from different ethnic
backgrounds. As suggested by Vigorito et al. (UNDP, 2010, pp.98-100), there are cost differentials
between women and men with regard to family formation: while the initiation of the parenthood
cycle does not substantially alter the potential income for men, it does so in the case of women,
                                                   106
generating relatively higher costs in terms of their present and future economic autonomy.43 Thus,
the early fertility of Afro-descendant women implicates employment and education disparities, in
the sense that it might be the origin of gender inequalities that overlap with ethnic ones.

16.    The Census 2011 data also reveals a decline in the number of younger children (0-4 years
old) within the general population. However, the decline was more marked among the Afro-
descendant population. The reasons for this difference have been discussed, since it is not
consistent with the reported higher fertility rate among Afro-descendant women. It has been
hypothesized that the ethnic origins of children might be underreported, but more research is
needed on this issue (see Cabella 2013, pp. 26 and 27).

17.    Table A3.2 displays some characteristics of households whose head of household (main
income earner) declares his or her White, Afro, or Indigenous main descent. The comparison
shows some significant disparities, revealing the greater weight of children and dependents among
households composed of those of African descent in particular.


Table A3.2 Characteristics of Household by Ethnic Descent (population = heads of households)
                                 White             Indigenous            Afro
 Average household size          2.9               3.2                   3.5
 N Children                      0.8               1.0                   1.3
 One-person household            20.2              17.3                  15.0
 One-parent household            16.5              22.2                  24.1
 Nuclear family household        40.0              40.3                  46.1
Source: ECH, 2012


2.3. Poverty
18.     Poverty and destitution rates are higher among the Afro-descendant population. This is
mainly explained by the insertion in the labor market of Afro-descendants of both genders through
low- income jobs, because of lower education levels. Additionally, it might be possible to explain
disparities on the basis of racial segregation (Bucheli et al., 2008 and 2010).

19.    Table A3.3 shows the distribution of population by deciles of per capita household income
by ethnic group. The greater participation of Afro-descendants (and to a lesser extent indigenous
people) in the lower deciles of income is evident: income deciles 1-4 comprise two-thirds of the
Afro-Uruguayan population, revealing important degrees of vulnerability. Table A3.4 shows the
proportions of households whose head of household is below the official poverty line, by ethnicity
and gender, showing once again the greater vulnerability of the Afro-descendant population.




43
  According to the study by Vigorito and colleagues on the youth of the Southern Cone, these disadvantages for young
women are a result of a lower probability of getting a job, as well as the adverse impact on the earnings of the presence
of children, suggesting that young mothers who work are located in the lower strata of the labor market and earn lower
wages, because of lower availability and lack of flexible schedule.
                                                          107
Table A3.3 Population by Per Capita Household Income Deciles, by Ethnic Descent
 Income Deciles           Afro              Indigenous         White
 1                        22.6              16.4               9.6
 2                        18.3              15.2               9.7
 3                        14.2              10.9               9.9
 4                        11.5              11.0               10.1
 5                        9.5               9.0                10.1
 6                        6.9               8.9                10.1
 7                        5.8               10.4               10.3
 8                        5.6               7.8                10.3
 9                        3.7               7.0                10.3
 10                       2.0               3.4                9.5
Source: ECH, 2012.



Table A3.4 Percentage of Household Where Head of Household is below the Poverty Line, by Ethnic Descent
and Gender
         Afro               Indigenous      White

 Male      Female       Male     Female      Male        Female

 28.8      19.5         22.3     14.9        8.9         6.8

Source: ECH, 2012.


20.    It is logical to hypothesize that such over-representation of ethnic minorities (in particular
those of main Afro descent) within vulnerable segments of society correlates to many of the
observable disparities in assets other than income (e.g., lower educational capital or lower access
to housing and urban services). But the relative scarcity of specific quantitative research on these
minorities, beyond the officially available data, hinders the deepening of suitable and robust
explanations. Empirical exercises such as the construction of specific multidimensional poverty
indexes for the Afro-descendant population, or the estimation of human development indices
disaggregated by ethnicity, could contribute to a better understanding of the ways ethnic
discrimination works in Uruguay.

2.4. Housing
21.     Consistent with higher vulnerability to poverty, the housing conditions of people of African
descent are systematically less advantageous than those of the non-Afro-descendant population.
Although the proportion of the population living in slums in Uruguay (about 5 percent) is lower
than in neighboring countries such as Argentina or Brazil (Amarante and Caffera, 2003), the Afro-
descendant population who live in slums is three times that of the White population (12.7 percent
vs. 4.2 percent), indicating residential segregation linked to poverty and destitution.

22.    The Afro-descendant population also has a lower proportion of homeowners (53.2 percent
of Afro-descendant households own their homes, versus 59.2 percent of the White population,
according to 20102 ECH data). A 2013 study conducted by UNDP analyzes the type of housing in
which the Uruguayan population lives, dividing them into four quality categories determined by
the type of building materials. The study showed that 41.1 percent of the Afro-descendant
population lived in dwellings of good quality, versus 56.6 percent of non-Afro-descendant
population; for housing of fair quality, the percentages found reported 58.5 percent and 43.2
percent, respectively. The percentages of people living in poor or very poor quality housing were
very low for all ethnicities.
                                                   108
23.     Some qualitative studies have shown interesting issues related to the Afro-descendant
cultural identity and urban distribution in Uruguay. While peripheral neighborhoods in
departments other than Montevideo tend to stress the exclusion of vulnerable ethnic groups,
interviews in Montevideo declared that, sometimes, the predominantly Afro-descendant
neighborhood becomes a space of belonging and of own cultural strengthening: “for some of the
participants, attending events like the llamadas or moving to Palermo neighborhood meant to
discover that there were many more peers; they generated excitement, surprise and curiosity. In
contrast, other participants see this ‘living among equals’ as natural, being born and being raised
in a neighborhood with a high proportion of population of the same descent” (Rudolf et al., 2008,
pp. 115-6). It would be interesting to further research linkages between neighborhoods with
preponderant ethnic minorities, and the tensions between residential segregation (expressed in
informal barriers to renting in certain neighborhoods, for example) and cultural and political
processes where neighbors of similar ethnic descent facilitate visibility and increase opportunities
for individual and collective demands.

2.5. Indicators with insufficient information available

24.    Although stated in news stories or mentioned by ethnic minority informants in qualitative
studies (Rudolf et al., 2008; PNUD, 2010), institutional violence against the Afro-descendant
segment is not clearly quantified. The information available from the National Census of Prisoners
of 2010 does not include data on ethnic descent.

25.     Another indicator for which there has been little in-depth research is on ethnic inequalities
in access to health care. Consistent with a higher proportion of low-income households, Afro-
Uruguayans household use public health services to a greater extent than the rest of the population,
as shown in Table A3.5. The Table also show data for lack of access to formal social security,
related in turn to less probability of accessing improved health services such as mutualistas or
private health insurance.


Table A3.5 Informality (no access to social security) and Public Health Care (no access to
mutualistas or private health services)
                                   White               Indigenous        Afro
 Informality                       10.8                14.7              18.1
 Public Heath care                 35.7                52.3              60.4
Source: ECH, 2012.


26.     The qualitative study on perceptions of discrimination conducted by Rudolf et al.
colleagues (2008) notes that the respondents highlight health as an area in which they are not
usually victims of discrimination. However, it would be necessary to deepen the inquiries in this
area to gain a better understanding of the relations of ethnic minorities and health systems.

3. Persistent disparities in education and employment

3.1. Disparities in education

27.   The main available studies on ethnic minorities in Uruguay (mostly focused on the Afro-
descendant minority, as already noted) agree that inequalities in educational indicators and

                                                     109
integration into the labor market are the main factors that explain the relatively higher vulnerability
of this segment of the population.

28.     The Afro-descendant population shows worse educational indicators than the non-Afro-
descendant population, especially in the age group that should attend secondary education. While
access to basic primary education is virtually universal in the country, and public schools cover
the entire territory, children and adolescents of Afro descent have lower levels of school retention
in the upper grades of elementary school, and lower levels of access and higher dropout rates in
the basic cycle of secondary education. Of course, this causes weaker Afro youth presence in the
tertiary and university studies. Graph A3.1 shows attendance at formal educational institutions by
age, for the population up to 25 years. The Graph is telling with respect to the low capacity of
middle schools to retain adolescents in general, but especially regarding the Afro-descendant
population, as well as the very poor Afro-descendant participation in higher education.


Graph A3.1 Formal Education Attendance by Age
                                                            Asistencia escolar por años simples
 100.0

     90.0

     80.0

     70.0

     60.0

     50.0                                                                                                                                 Afro

                                                                                                                                          Blancos
     40.0

     30.0

     20.0

     10.0

      0.0
            4 años 5 años 6 años 7 años 8 años 9 años    10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20   21   22   23   24   25
                                                        años años años años años años años años años años años años años años años años

Source: National Census 2011.


29.    It should be noted that the disparities in early childhood education are mainly related to
regional inequalities, as the lack of public (and therefore free) early education schools in peripheral
and remote areas limits access of the lower income deciles disproportionately.

30.     Primary level is the maximum educational achievement for more than half of adult Afro-
descendants, while that rate drops to 4 in 10 among the non-Afro-descendant population, according
to Census data 2011.44 This may result in reducing the educational aspirations of the younger
members of disadvantaged households. As suggested by Lopez-Calva et al. (2009), there is a
significant relationship between educational attainment by parents and educational aspirations that
parents have for their children and, as well as between the educational aspirations of young people
and their social interaction with people who have high levels of education. Thus, incentives for
better educational performance are potentially weakened in poor educational environments and in
situations of residential segregation.

44
   Additionally, illiteracy rates are higher among the Afro-descendant population, but that condition is fundamentally
linked to the people in the older age ranges.
                                                                                     110
31.     Lower school retention of children and youth of African descent fosters persistent
disparities in the number of years of education—which in turn has a direct impact on the ability of
individuals to generate income and achieve autonomy. Graph A3.2 shows the disparity in the
number of years of study among Afro and Whites between 2006 and 2012, reflecting the
persistence of educational advantage for the latter group, even during years of economic expansion
and decline in poverty and inequality rates in Uruguay.


Graph A3.2 Educational Disparities in Years, Afro/White Population




Source: ECH.


32.     Considering only the population between the ages of 7 and 18, the disparity in educational
shown by the ECH 2012 data is 0.93 years, while considering the adult population aged 18-45, the
disparity is 0.81 years, suggesting causes for the persistence of adverse effects of lower educational
returns directly attributable to formal qualification.

33.     Specific educational indicators such as limited education of Afro-descendant children also
show disadvantages for this ethnic minority. Table A3.6 shows the percentage of children with
educational lags in different age ranges. Data show that the lag among Afro children is higher,
even among children from households above the poverty line, suggesting they have problems in
access to quality education beyond the net effect of income vulnerability. The magnitude of the
lags, as expected, increases among children who reach secondary school ages, indicating a major
bottleneck in the equality of opportunities offered by the education system.

Table A3.6 Educational lags (lagging by 2 or more years relative to age)
 Children 7 to 11 years old
                                    White                             Afro
 Poor                               9.1                               8.2
 Not poor                           3.3                               3.7
 Children 12-15 years old
                                    White                             Afro
 Poor                               37.9                              47.0
 Not poor                           16.0                              30.7
Source: ECH 2012.
Note: One of the consequences of poor retention of an education system is the existence of a significant segment of the population of young people
who neither work nor study. The percentages of Afro-descent youth who neither work nor study exceeds that of non-African descent: 18.3% versus
                                                                      111
13.5% of young people between 14 and 24 years in both groups do not study, do not work, and are not looking for a job. Considering those who do
not study and do not work but who are looking for work, the percentages rise to 25.6% for Afro youth and 18.7% for non-Afro youth, according to
data collected in the ECH.


34.     As previously noted, there is greater ethnic inclusiveness in the education system in the
early years of schooling; however, this is also the age and venue where children of Afro descent
typically first experience discrimination (UNDP, 2008). As children progress through the
education system, meeting fewer peers of African descent can accentuate feelings of isolation and
low self-esteem, which in turn might reinforce learning difficulties and thus encourage school
failure and dropout.


3.2. Disparities in employment

35.     The participation of the Afro-descendants in the labor market is disadvantageous in terms
of the low qualifications required for the jobs they occupy, the lower level of social protection,
and higher level of informality—all of which implicate the consequent lower incomes. Table A3.7
shows some features of the labor market by ethnic origin.


          Table A3.7 Labor Market by Ethnic Descent
                                      White                                Indigenous                  Afro
             Unemployed               10.7                                 13.4                        13.9
             Economically active
                                      61.9                                 68.3                        67.5
             population
             Informality              21.5                                 26.3                        32.8
             Public sector            15.6                                 14.7                        13.2
             Employees                70.3                                 70.0                        72.9
          Source: ECH, 2012.


36.    Several studies on occupational segregation in Uruguay explore the differences in income
between the workforce of Afro descent and non-Afro descent. Studies show that returns to
education are markedly lower among the black population, especially among men (Bucheli et al.,
2008, and Bucheli et al., 2010). According to the authors, Afro-descendants are paid less in all
positions of the wage distribution, and the disparity increases from the median onward. The
analysis shows that the profitability of one additional year of schooling is lower for Afro-
descendants, particularly in higher levels of education, reinforcing the incentives for leaving the
formal education system.

37.     In their detailed study about Racial Inequality in the Uruguayan Labor Market (2008),
Bucheli and Porcecanski outline five relevant conclusions based on empirical analysis of ECH
data:
(i). Discrimination seems to be a plausible explanation of the racial wage disparity in Uruguay.
(ii). The control for job characteristics such as occupation and industry reveal occupational
segregation (that is, Afro-descendants tend to be in lower paid occupations).
(iii) Racial discrimination seems to be stronger for men than women.
(iv) Conditional expected wages for men of African descent only (“blacks”) is lower than that of
“mixed” Afro-descendants. This suggests that darker skin may result in more acute discrimination
in the labor market—however, this is not observed for female workers.
(v). Differences in education are the most powerful explanation for the ethnic disparity, suggesting
that Uruguay is in urgent need of policies of equal opportunities for access to quality education.

                                                                    112
However, if returns to education are in effect lower for Afro-descendants, non-discrimination
measures need to be taken in the labor market specifically.




                                            113
Annex IV. Ethnic Minorities and Labor Markets in Uruguay

1.      Previous analyses have found statistically significant and economically meaningful
differences between white and Afro-descendent Uruguayan workers (Beltrami 1998; Bucheli and
Cabella 2007, based on the Household Surveys of 1996-97 and 2006; and Foster 2001, which
further analyzes the 1996-97 survey).

2.      Wage differentials between Afro-descendent and white workers in Uruguay are large. In
particular, the ratio of Afro-descendant to white mean hourly wages is 0.72 and 0.78 for men and
women, respectively, and these differences are statistically significant at the 0.001 percent level 45
(Bucheli and Porzecanski, 2011). In fact, Afro-descendants have been historically unable to fully
climb the social ladder, and slavery may have had enduring social effects that are still in place
(Frega et al. 2008).

3.      Bucheli and Porzecanski (2011) further examine these differences using econometric
methods. Data from pooled samples of white and Afro-descendants collected in Household
Surveys from 2006 allow the authors to estimate Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) wage equations
separately for genders of workers. The authors find that the wage disparity between white and
Afro-descendants is partly explained by ethnicity, but the importance of ethnicity declines as job
occupation and industry are accounted for. This result would suggest that ethnicity and industry
sorting may be correlated. Interestingly, the wage disparity is the largest for workers at the bottom
of the wage distribution, that is, ethnicity matters most for poorer and less educated workers than
for those at the top of the wage distribution.

4.     When only full time urban male workers aged 25-59 surveyed during 2006 to 2009 are
included in the analysis, Bucheli and Sanroman (2010) find that Afro-descendant workers are
younger on average and less educated than their white counterparts. The mean difference in
educational attainment is more than one year. This disparity in educational attainment also varies
with the distribution of wages: among poorer workers, the disparity in education is smaller (whites
and non-whites are similarly educated) whereas among richer workers, the disparity is larger
(whites and non-whites exhibit a disparity in education of four years on average). The authors thus
conclude, based on their econometric estimations, that Afro-descendant workers are paid less
across all the wage distribution than white workers. The authors find that education explains
between 40-60 percent of this disparity.




45
   This disparity is, however, narrower than for other Latin American countries (Busso et al. 2005). However, Uruguay
is the country with lowest levels of inequality and lowest poverty rates (Bucheli and Porzecanski, 2011).
                                                        114
II. Data Analysis Using Household Surveys, 2006-2013

Inequality

25th, 50th, and 75th Percentiles of the Per Capita Income Distribution by Ethnicity




5.     Both total household labor income and number of household members explain differences
in income at different levels of the per capita income distribution.

25th, 50th, and 75th Percentiles of the Total Household Labor Income Distribution by Ethnicity




Other Indicators of Welfare by Ethnicity (percentages)
 Indicator                  White                        Indigenous                   Afro-descendent
 Owns dwelling              42.17                        49.22                        41.46
 Number of exclusive        95.44                        92.84                        90.66
 rooms in dwelling the
 household can use is more
 than 1
 Water connection           96.73                        95.15                        92.91
 Toilet                     90.58                        84.42                        77.99
 Electricity                98.50                        96.91                        96.12
 Owns refrigerator          94.83                        90.72                        87.01
 Dedicated place to wash    64.27                        54.30                        44.10
 clothes in dwelling
 Owns computer              40.10                        32.61                        24.65


                                                      115
Poverty Lines by Ethnicity

Poverty rate measured by per capita income below $2.5 and $4 dollars/day (PPP) by ethnicity (%)
                                 2006




Note: Each column measures the percentage of individuals whose per capita family income, measured in PPP local currency, is below the $2.5/day
threshold (red line), and below the $4/day threshold (blue line), out of all individuals of the same ethnicity. Per capita family income is constant
across household (hogar) members. Data have been weighted according to survey sampling.

                                 2013




Note: Each column measures the percentage of individuals whose per capita family income, measured in PPP local currency, is below the $2/day
threshold (red line), and below the $4/day threshold (blue line), out of all individuals of the same ethnicity. Per capita family income is constant
across household (hogar) members. Data have been weighted according to survey sampling.


Time Trend of Poverty Rate Measured by Per Capita Family Income below $4 a day (PPP) by Ethnicity (%)




Note: Each line measures the percentage of individuals whose per capita family income, measured in PPP local currency is below the $4/day
threshold, out of all individuals of the same ethnicity. Per capita family income is constant across household (hogar) members. Data have been
weighted according to survey sampling.

                                                                       116
Number of Children Younger than 18 Living in Household by Ethnicity (Total Number of Households)

                               Whites                   Indigenous              Afro-descendants
                               No.           Percent    No.         Percent     No.         Percent
                    0           419,494         57.56     8,433        51.41     18,512        43.94
                    1           138,672         19.03     3,405        20.76      8,606        20.43
                    2           106,920         14.67     2,646        16.13      7,471        17.73
                    3             40,710         5.59     1,105          6.74     3,913          9.29
                    4             13,808         1.89         460         2.8     2,039          4.84
                    5                5,524       0.76         190        1.16         838        1.99
                    6                2,159        0.3          91        0.55         424        1.01
                    7                 903        0.12          42        0.26         197        0.47
                    8                 446        0.06          18        0.11          84         0.2
                    9 or
                    more              214        0.02          14        0.09          45         0.1
                    Total       728,850          100     16,404          100     42,129          100



II.2 Labor Market Analysis

6.      A first point to examine is the distribution of the labor force, or Economically Active
Population (EAP). A first look at the EAP by ethnicity shows that there are differences in
employment status across ethnicities in Uruguay. In particular, employees represent a larger
proportion of the labor force among white individuals than among ethnic minorities. Looking at
employees is a proxy for better employment conditions and therefore it is the first evidence that
white individuals may enjoy overall better employment conditions than their counterparts who
identify themselves as indigenous or black, although the causal relationships behind this cannot be
ascertained without further analysis.46

Economically Active Population - Whites




46
     In this document, non-white means either indigenous or Afro-descendant as self-reported in Household Surveys.
                                                          117
Economically Active Population - Minorities




Note: Sample only includes Economically Active Population. N Whites=641,849; N non-Whites=58,772. Employees + other employment status =
Employed. Employed + unemployed = Economically Active Population. Non-whites correspond to categories self-reported as “Indigenous,” “Afro-
descendent,” or “Other.”




7.      There are differences in labor income across ethnicities, too. The wage of white workers
(those who derive positive income) is larger than the wage of their non-white counterparts, and the
wage distribution of wages for white individuals is shifted to the right of the wage distribution of
the individuals who are non-white. Therefore, at lower levels of wages, there are more non-whites
but at the highest levels of the distribution (higher wages), the proportion of whites is larger.


Wages Distribution by Ethnicity




Note: Sample only includes “Employed” individuals.


Labor Market Outcomes and Socioeconomic Determinants of Labor Market Outcomes by Ethnicity (means)
 Variable                White                   Indigenous               Afro-descendant

 Hours worked                       41.86                             40.71                              40.81
 Length of tenure in
                                    9.32                              8.15                               6.80
 current job
 Recent migrant (%)                 12.25                             12.24                              12.82
 Maximum level of
 education
 Elementary (%)                     21.41                             22.01                              29.84

                                                                   118
 High school (%)                    9.90                             6.98                           4.57
 College (%)                        9.69                             6.36                           2.18
Note: Sample only includes Economically Active Population.




Occupation by Ethnicity
   ISIC Rev. 3.1                                   Whites                   Indigenous               Afro-descendents
                                                   No.           Percent    No.          Percent     No.          Percent
   Agriculture, hunting, and forestry                82,622        13.99       1,865        13.56       5,079        13.49
   Fishing                                               1,387       0.23          48        0.35           156       0.41
   Mining and quarrying                                  1,074       0.18          47        0.34           121       0.32
   Manufacturing                                     75,103        12.71       1,757        12.78       4,786        12.71
   Electricity, gas, and water supply                    5,408       0.92         109        0.79           281       0.75
   Construction                                      37,014          6.27      1,105         8.04       3,546         9.42
   Retail                                           108,111          18.3      2,321        16.88       6,652        17.66
   Hotels and restaurants                            16,296          2.76         403        2.93           990       2.63
   Transport, storage                                31,615          5.35         551        4.01       1,576         4.18
   Financial intermediation                              8,984       1.52         133        0.97           237       0.63
   Real estate                                       35,732          6.05         676        4.92       1,524         4.05
   Public administration                             37,627          6.37         857        6.23       2,608         6.92
   Education                                         33,766          5.72         776        5.64       1,165         3.09
   Health and social work                            39,886          6.75         920        6.69       1,922           5.1
   Other service activities                          27,487          4.65         694        5.05       1,881         4.99
   Private households as employers                   48,202          8.16      1,477        10.74       5,126        13.61
   Extraterritorial organizations                         438        0.07          11        0.08            11       0.03
   Total                                            590,752          100     13,750           100     37,661           100


Mean Labor Income by Ethnicity and Maximum Degree Attained (PPP $)
                     White                   Indigenous                                        Afro-descendant
 Elementary          390.1537                326.5133                                          303.4437
 High School         733.3662                580.9837                                          523.1283
 College             1351.839                1021.05                                           1058.204
Note: Sample includes only employed individuals.


To dig deeper into differences in employment conditions, it is possible to examine whether there
are statistically significant differences between white and non-white employed individuals.

Labor Market Outcomes of Employed Individuals by Ethnicity
 Outcome variable        White Employed Mean       Non-White Employed                               p-statistic
                         (se)                      Mean
                                                   (se)

 Total labor income (PPP            604.397                          397.042                        0.000
 dollars)                           (1.981)                          (4.384)
 Worker has right to                0.685                            0.553                          0.000
 retirement                         (0.000)                          (0.002)
 Health insurance provided          0.650                            0.544                          0.000
 through job                        (0.000)                          (0.002)


                                                                  119
Determinants of Labor Market Outcomes of Employed Individuals by Ethnicity
 Variable                 White Employed Mean      Non-White Employed                                           p-statistic
                          (se)                     Mean
                                                   (se)

 Educational attainment               9.580                                8.030                                0.000
 (years)                              (0.005)                              (0.014)
 Age                                  41.255                               39.602                               0.000
                                      (0.018)                              (0.060)
 Male                                 0.561                                0.585                                0.000
                                      (0.000)                              (0.002)

Effect of Ethnicity and Other Socio-Economic Characteristics on (Log) Hourly Wage (Ordinary Least Squares
Regression)
 Dep. Variable: Log Hourly Wage Males                                   Females

 Educational attainment (years)                    0.101                                            0.098
                                                   (0.003)***                                       (0.001)***
 White [see Table Note below]                      0.315                                            0.218
                                                   (0.045)***                                       (0.034)***
 Age                                               0.09                                             0.093
                                                   (0.002)***                                       (0.004)***
 Age squared                                       -0.000                                           -0.000
                                                   (0.000)***                                       (0.000)***
 Married                                           0.092                                            0.035
                                                   (0.010)***                                       (0.008)**

 Mean of dep. variable                             3.923                                            3.838
 R2                                                0.9688                                           0.9678
 N                                                 345,231                                          261,697
Note: Standard errors clustered at the region level in parentheses. Sample only includes Employed individuals. Industry of occupation, region, and
survey year indicators included but not shown. White is a dummy variable that takes on a value of 1 if individual self-reports being white; and 0 if
indigenous or afro-descendent. * indicates 10% statistical significance; ** indicates 5% statistical significance, *** indicates 1% statistical
significance. Consistent with previous evidence, there are wage differentials between white and non-white workers in Uruguay. The “white
premium” is statistically significant and economically important. Male white workers earn 31% more per hour worked, holding constant their age,
marital status, industry of occupation, and educational attainment. Even though the mean hourly wage per hour is lower for females compared to
males, the “white premium” is lower for women (21%), and is also significant at all statistical levels.


References

Beltrami, Mónica. 1998. Encuesta continua de hogares—modulo de raza—principales resultados.
Report. Montevideo: Instituto Nacional de Estadística.

Bucheli, Marisa, and Wanda Cabella. 2007. El perfil demográfico y socioeconómico de la
población uruguaya según su ascendencia racial. Informe temático. Montevideo: Instituto
Nacional de Estadística.

--------------------, and R. Porzecanski (2011) “Racial Inequality in the Uruguayan Labor Market:
An Analysis of Wage Differentials between Afro-Descendants and Whites,” Latin American
Politics and Society, 53 (2), pp. 113-150.

--------------------, and G. Sanroman (2010) “Decomposing the Gaps between Afro-descendents
Along the Wage Distribution,” documento de trabajo, departamento de Economia, Facultad de
Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de la Republica, Documento 14/10, October.


                                                                       120
Busso, Matias, Martin Cicowiez, and Leonardo Gasparini. 2005. Ethnicity and the Millennium
Development Goals. Bogotá: UNDP/CEPAL/IDB/World Bank.


Foster, Jill. 2001. El racismo y la reproducción de la pobreza entre los afro-uruguayos. CLAEH:
Serie Investigaciones 69: 5–58.

Frega, Ana, Karla Chagas, Oscar Montaño, and Natalia Stalla. 2008. Breve historia de los
afrodescendientes en el Uruguay. In Población afrodescendiente y desigualdades etnico-raciales
en Uruguay, ed. Lucía Scuro. Montevideo: PNUD. 5–102.

Gonzalez, C. and G. Sanroman (2010) “Movilidad Intergeneracional y Raza en Uruguay,”
documento de trabajo, departamento de Economia, Facultad de Ciencias Sociales, Universidad de
la Republica, Documento 13/10, October.




                                             121
Annex V. Broad Fiscal Implications of an Aging Population in Uruguay

1.      Uruguay is well advanced in the process of demographic change. As economies
transition from high fertility rates and short life expectancies to low fertility and mortality rates,
the age structure of their population changes. The share of elderly population increases while the
working-age population declines, increasing the median age of the population. In Uruguay, this
process of demographic transformation began early in the 20th century. As fertility rates declined
and life expectancies increased, the median age of the population increased to 33.7 years in 2010
(see Figure A5.1), the highest in Latin America. The process has been longer and smoother in
Uruguay than in many other Latin American countries, and is more similar to those observed in
the advanced European economies.

 Figure A5.1 Median Age, 1950-2100                                                   Figure A5.2 Total Fertility Rate, 1950-2100
                                     50                                                                                                7




                                                                                                Total fertility (children per woman)
                                     45                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                                       5
                                     40
   Median age




                                                                                                                                       4
                                     35
                                                                                                                                       3
                                     30
                                                                                                                                       2
                                     25                                                                                                1
                                     20                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                               1950-1955
                                                                                                                                               1960-1965
                                                                                                                                               1970-1975
                                                                                                                                               1980-1985
                                                                                                                                               1990-1995
                                                                                                                                               2000-2005
                                                                                                                                               2010-2015
                                                                                                                                               2020-2025
                                                                                                                                               2030-2035
                                                                                                                                               2040-2045
                                                                                                                                               2050-2055
                                                                                                                                               2060-2065
                                                                                                                                               2070-2075
                                                                                                                                               2080-2085
                                                                                                                                               2090-2095
                                     15
                                          1950
                                          1960
                                          1970
                                          1980
                                          1990
                                          2000
                                          2010
                                          2020
                                          2030
                                          2040
                                          2050
                                          2060
                                          2070
                                          2080
                                          2090
                                          2100




                                     Uruguay        Latin America    Brazil                                                            Uruguay    Latin America   Brazil
                                     Chile          Argentina                                                                          Chile      Argentina



 Figure A5.3 Life Expectancy at Age 15, 1950-2100                                    Figure A5.4 Infant Mortality, 1950-2100
                                     80                                                                                                160
                                                                                         Infant deaths per 1,000 live birth




                                                                                                                                       140
                                     75
         Life expectancy at age 15




                                                                                                                                       120
                                     70                                                                                                100
                                     65                                                                                                80
                                     60                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                       40
                                     55
                                                                                                                                       20
                                     50                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                               1950-1955
                                                                                                                                               1960-1965
                                                                                                                                               1970-1975
                                                                                                                                               1980-1985
                                                                                                                                               1990-1995
                                                                                                                                               2000-2005
                                                                                                                                               2010-2015
                                                                                                                                               2020-2025
                                                                                                                                               2030-2035
                                                                                                                                               2040-2045
                                                                                                                                               2050-2055
                                                                                                                                               2060-2065
                                                                                                                                               2070-2075
                                                                                                                                               2080-2085
                                                                                                                                               2090-2095




                                     45
                                          1950-1955
                                          1960-1965
                                          1970-1975
                                          1980-1985
                                          1990-1995
                                          2000-2005
                                          2010-2015
                                          2020-2025
                                          2030-2035
                                          2040-2045
                                          2050-2055
                                          2060-2065
                                          2070-2075
                                          2080-2085
                                          2090-2095




                                                                                                                                       Uruguay    Latin America   Brazil
                                          Uruguay    Latin America        Brazil                                                       Chile      Argentina

 Source: UN World Population Prospects 2012 Revision.


2.      Uruguay’s demographic transformation is not yet complete and has lingering macro-
fiscal implications. Declining fertility and mortality rates (see figures A5.2-4) had already reduced
the share of the working-age population in Uruguay to 62.7 percent of the total population in 2000
(see Figure A5.5) After a brief period of growth, the share of working-age population is projected
to further decline as life expectancies increase, from 64.4 percent in 2020 to 61.5 percent in 2050

                                                                                   122
and 55.4 percent in 2100 (see Figure A5.5). This will have substantial implications on economic
for economic growth and public finances.

 Figure A5.5 Working-age Population, 1950-2100                                    Figure A5.6 Population Aged 50-64, 1950-2100
                                         70
  Working-age population (aged 15-64),




                                                                                  Population aged 50-64, percent of
                                         65                                                                           17
            percent of total




                                         60




                                                                                                total
                                                                                                                      12
                                         55


                                         50                                                                           7




                                                                                                                           1950
                                                                                                                           1960
                                                                                                                           1970
                                                                                                                           1980
                                                                                                                           1990
                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                           2020
                                                                                                                           2030
                                                                                                                           2040
                                                                                                                           2050
                                                                                                                           2060
                                                                                                                           2070
                                                                                                                           2080
                                                                                                                           2090
                                                                                                                           2100
                                              1950
                                              1960
                                              1970
                                              1980
                                              1990
                                              2000
                                              2010
                                              2020
                                              2030
                                              2040
                                              2050
                                              2060
                                              2070
                                              2080
                                              2090
                                              2100
                                         Uruguay   Latin America   Brazil                                              Uruguay   Latin America   Brazil
                                         Chile     Argentina                                                           Chile     Argentina
 Source: UN Population Prospects 2012 Revision.


3.     Demographic change is highly likely to affect labor productivity. However, the effects
are ambiguous. Typically, an older labor supply is associated with lower physical and cognitive
productivity but higher productivity in the jobs that require advanced management,
communication, and conflict resolution skills. Aging may also generate behavioral responses in
the form of increased savings to provide for old age; this phenomenon is commonly referred to as
the “second demographic dividend” and is typically associated with an increase in the share of the
population aged 50-64. This age cohort has been increasing in Uruguay since 2000 and this trend
is expected to continue until 2050 (see Figure A5.6).

4.      An aging population will put pressure on public finances. A rising share of the elderly
increases demand for public services such as pensions, health, and long-term care. Per capita health
care expenditures, for instance, are broadly U-shaped with respect to age groups, with spending
on the youngest and oldest significantly higher than the rest. Pension expenditures rise almost
linearly with the share of the elderly, while revenues decline as the labor force shrinks. By contrast,
both per capita and aggregate education expenditures typically decline as the population ages. The
effects on fiscal revenues are more ambiguous. A shrinking working-age population implies a
narrower tax base, and hence reduced revenues from income taxes. On the other hand, revenues
from consumption taxes may increase as the elderly consume a higher share of their income.

5.      A simple model can integrate these different transmission channels to demonstrate
the broad fiscal implications of an aging population in Uruguay. More specifically, the model
examines effects of the expected demographic change over the 2010-50 period on output, fiscal
expenditures, and public debt trajectory under three demographic scenarios. The baseline scenario
is the medium variant from the UN population projections. Two alternative demographic scenarios
are a more “pessimistic” low fertility scenario and a more “optimistic” high fertility scenario, again
from the UN Population projections. The share of population aged 65 and over is expected increase
from 13.9 percent of total population in 2010 to 21.5 percent in 2050, a 7.6 percentage point
increase, under the baseline scenario. The more “pessimistic” low-fertility scenario projects a
larger increase, by 11 percentage points, while the more “optimistic” high-fertility scenario
anticipates a smaller increase over the same period, by only 4.8 percentage points. By contrast, the


                                                                            123
largest projected decline in the share of working-age population is under the high-fertility scenario
over the 2010-50 horizon (see Figures A5.7-8).

 Figure A5.7 Old-Age Population, 2010-50                                            Figure A5.8 Working-Age Population, 2010-50
                                     30
                                                                                                                              69




                                                                                        Working-age population (ages 15-64,
     Old-age population (ages 65+,




                                     28
      percent of total population)




                                     26                                                                                       67




                                                                                           percent of total population)
                                     24                                                                                       65
                                     22
                                     20                                                                                       63
                                     18                                                                                       61
                                     16                                                                                       59
                                     14
                                     12                                                                                       57
                                     10                                                                                       55
                                          2010
                                          2013
                                          2016
                                          2019
                                          2022
                                          2025
                                          2028
                                          2031
                                          2034
                                          2037
                                          2040
                                          2043
                                          2046
                                          2049




                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                   2013
                                                                                                                                   2016
                                                                                                                                   2019
                                                                                                                                   2022
                                                                                                                                   2025
                                                                                                                                   2028
                                                                                                                                   2031
                                                                                                                                   2034
                                                                                                                                   2037
                                                                                                                                   2040
                                                                                                                                   2043
                                                                                                                                   2046
                                                                                                                                   2049
                                      Baseline   Low fertility   High fertility                                                Baseline   Low fertility   High fertility

 Source: UN Population Prospects 2012 Revision.


Output Implications of an Aging Population in Uruguay

6.      An aging population is assumed to affect the growth of the Uruguay economy mainly
through reduced employment. A shrinking working-age population would translate into a
declining labor force under two assumptions (see Figure A5.9): (a) labor force participation rates
are lower for the older-age workers than for the rest; and (b) labor force participation rates remain
constant throughout the projection period by broad age groups and gender. The second assumption
reflects the ILO’s constant labor force participation assumption. To derive employment projections
from the labor force, the unemployment rate is assumed to increase gradually from 6.5 percent in
2014 to 7.2 percent in 2018 and remain at this level. Historical unemployment rates are used for
2010-14. Calculated as such, employment is projected to increase until 2037 and decline slightly
afterwards under the baseline demographic scenario. Under the low fertility scenario, employment
increases until 2030, whereas employment continues to increase throughout the projection period
according to the high fertility scenario. Employment levels under the two alternative demographic
scenarios are ±10 percent of that under the baseline scenario (see Figure A5.10).

7.      Labor productivity growth is assumed to continue to increase until 2020 and then
decelerate only slightly. In the absence of a thorough analysis of the determinants of productivity,
the trend growth in total factor productivity (TFP) between 1970 and 2010 is assumed to continue
until 2020 and then level off at the US TFP growth over the same period. Since the analysis is
concerned with the long run, labor productivity growth is assumed to be driven by TFP growth
and growth of human capital per worker. The latter is assumed to slow over the projection horizon,
which would lead to a slight deceleration in labor productivity growth (see Figure A5.11).
Historical total factor productivity, human capital per worker, and labor share of income data are
from the Penn World Table, version 8.0.




                                                                                  124
 Figure A5.9 Labor Force, 2010-50                                                                                                                Figure A5.10 Employment, 2010-50
              Labor force (aged 15 and over, in   2100                                                                                                                                    1900




                                                                                                                                                       Employment (aged 15 and over, in
                                                  2000                                                                                                                                    1850
                                                                                                                                                                                          1800
                                                  1900                                                                                                                                    1750
                         thousands)




                                                                                                                                                                thousands)
                                                  1800                                                                                                                                    1700
                                                  1700                                                                                                                                    1650
                                                                                                                                                                                          1600
                                                  1600                                                                                                                                    1550
                                                  1500                                                                                                                                    1500
                                                             2010
                                                             2013
                                                             2016
                                                             2019
                                                             2022
                                                             2025
                                                             2028
                                                             2031
                                                             2034
                                                             2037
                                                             2040
                                                             2043
                                                             2046
                                                             2049




                                                                                                                                                                                                 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2013
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2022
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2025
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2028
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2031
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2034
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2037
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2040
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2043
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2046
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2049
                                                  Baseline                        Low fertility                       High fertility                                                       Baseline    Low fertility     High fertility

 Source: World Bank calculations based on UN Population Prospects 2012 Revision and ILO.


                                                                                                                                                 Figure A5.12 Real GDP Index, 2010-50
 Figure A5.11 Labor Productivity Growth, 2012-50                                                                                                                                   400



                                                                                                                                                       Real GDP index (2010=100)
                                            3.2                                                                                                                                    350
   Growth in real GDP per worker




                                                  3                                                                                                                                300
                                                                                                                                                                                   250
                                            2.8
             (percent)




                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                            2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                   150
                                            2.4                                                                                                                                    100
                                                                                                                                                                                            2010
                                                                                                                                                                                            2013
                                                                                                                                                                                            2016
                                                                                                                                                                                            2019
                                                                                                                                                                                            2022
                                                                                                                                                                                            2025
                                                                                                                                                                                            2028
                                                                                                                                                                                            2031
                                                                                                                                                                                            2034
                                                                                                                                                                                            2037
                                                                                                                                                                                            2040
                                                                                                                                                                                            2043
                                                                                                                                                                                            2046
                                                                                                                                                                                            2049
                                            2.2

                                                  2                                                                                                                                       Baseline    Low fertility    High fertility
                                                      2012
                                                             2015
                                                                    2018
                                                                           2021
                                                                                  2024
                                                                                         2027
                                                                                                2030
                                                                                                       2033
                                                                                                              2036
                                                                                                                     2039
                                                                                                                            2042
                                                                                                                                   2045
                                                                                                                                          2048




 Source: World Bank calculations based on Penn World Table, version 8.0; UN Population Prospects 2012 Revision; and ILO.




8.       Output under the two alternative scenarios is expected to be ± percent of that
under the baseline scenario. Output growth can be decomposed into contributions from labor
productivity growth, change in the employment rate, and population growth as described in Box 1
(see Figures A5.13-16). The changing demographic structure in Uruguay, under the baseline
scenario, is expected to reduce the overall employment rate throughout the projection period, with
adverse effect on growth. This effect is more pronounced under the low fertility scenario. By
contrast, under the high fertility scenario, the adverse effect on growth declines over time as
younger cohorts enter the labor force. Under the baseline scenario, population growth is expected
to have a positive but declining contribution over the 2010-50 period. The adverse effects of
population growth on overall economic growth is observed significantly earlier under the low
fertility scenario, whereas the effects are positive under the high fertility scenario over the
projection horizon. Under all three demographic scenarios, labor productivity growth is assumed
to have a positive and significant contribution to growth.




                                                                                                                                                 125
Figure A5.13 Real GDP Growth, 2011-50                                                                                                        Figure A5.14 Contribution to Real GDP Growth
                                                                                                                                             (Baseline), 2011-50
                                  4                                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                 Contribution to real GDP growth,
                                                                                                                                                                                     3.5
                               3.5                                                                                                                                                     3
    Real GDP growth, percent




                                  3                                                                                                                                                  2.5




                                                                                                                                                        percentage points
                               2.5                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                  2                                                                                                                                                    1
                               1.5                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                    -0.5
                               0.5                                                                                                                                                    -1
                                  0                                                                                                                                                 -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                           2011
                                                                                                                                                                                           2014
                                                                                                                                                                                           2017
                                                                                                                                                                                           2020
                                                                                                                                                                                           2023
                                                                                                                                                                                           2026
                                                                                                                                                                                           2029
                                                                                                                                                                                           2032
                                                                                                                                                                                           2035
                                                                                                                                                                                           2038
                                                                                                                                                                                           2041
                                                                                                                                                                                           2044
                                                                                                                                                                                           2047
                                                                                                                                                                                           2050
                                         2011
                                                2014
                                                       2017
                                                              2020
                                                                     2023
                                                                            2026
                                                                                   2029
                                                                                          2032
                                                                                                 2035
                                                                                                        2038
                                                                                                               2041
                                                                                                                      2044
                                                                                                                             2047
                                                                                                                                    2050
Figure A5.15 Contribution to Real GDP Growth                                                                                                 Figure A5.16 Contribution to Real GDP Growth
(Low Fertility), 2011-50                                                                                                                     (High Fertility), 2011-50
                                          4                                                                                                                                         4


                                                                                                                                                 Contribution to real GDP growth,
                                        3.5
    Contribution to real GDP growth,




                                          3                                                                                                                                         3
                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                        percentage points
           percentage points




                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                          2
                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                          1
                                        0.5                                                                                                                                         0
                                          0
                                       -0.5                                                                                                                                         -1
                                         -1
                                       -1.5                                                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                                                         2011
                                                                                                                                                                                         2014
                                                                                                                                                                                         2017
                                                                                                                                                                                         2020
                                                                                                                                                                                         2023
                                                                                                                                                                                         2026
                                                                                                                                                                                         2029
                                                                                                                                                                                         2032
                                                                                                                                                                                         2035
                                                                                                                                                                                         2038
                                                                                                                                                                                         2041
                                                                                                                                                                                         2044
                                                                                                                                                                                         2047
                                                                                                                                                                                         2050
                                                2011
                                                2014
                                                2017
                                                2020
                                                2023
                                                2026
                                                2029
                                                2032
                                                2035
                                                2038
                                                2041
                                                2044
                                                2047
                                                2050




Source: World Bank calculations based on Penn World Table, version 8.0; UN Population Prospects 2012 Revision; and ILO.




                                                                                                                                           126
Fiscal Implications of an Aging Population in Uruguay


9.     Non-interest fiscal revenues are assumed to remain constant as a share of GDP after
2014. Between 2010 and 2014, historical data are used. Inherent to the constant revenue
assumption is the assumption of unitary elasticity of revenues with respect to income. This
assumption might be relaxed in a subsequent analysis, depending on the type of tax systems. In
the case progressive income taxes, for instance, tax revenues are elastic with respect to income.
The effects of a changing demographic structure on the tax base is not considered.

10.     Three types of fiscal expenditures are assumed to have an age profile: health
expenditures, pension outlays, and education expenditures. For each of these expenditure
categories, an age profile is derived in the form of public expenditures as a share GDP by broad
age groups. These age profiles are assumed to remain the same throughout the projection period.
As a result, changes at the aggregate levels reflected a changing demographic structure. The age-
related fiscal expenditure projections are also based on the implicit assumption that they have
unitary elasticity with respect to income. Boxes 2 through 4 provide the details for age-related
expenditure projections. The rest of the expenditures are assumed to remain constant as a share of
GDP.

11.    Public health and pension expenditures are expected increase as a result of an aging
population in Uruguay. Declining education expenditures are expected to fall short of
compensating for this increase.

12.     As a result, the primary fiscal deficit is projected to increase by 1.8 percentage points
of GDP between 2014 and 2050, from 0.4 to 2.2 percent under the baseline assumptions.
Interestingly, the widening of the deficit is expected to be even larger under the more “optimistic”
high fertility scenario, by 3.5 percentage points of GDP, over the projection horizon. This is a

                                                127
consequence of significantly higher public health care spending for infants, in per capita terms,
and increasing education expenditures. In the low fertility scenario, the primary deficit is projected
to increase by 0.9 percentage points of GDP. An increasing fiscal deficit, together with a slowdown
in GDP growth, would implicate the debt-to-GDP ratio, controlling for valuation effects.

 Figure A5.17 Primary Fiscal Deficit, 2010-50                 Figure A5.18 Public Debt, 2010-50




 Source: World Bank calculations based on IMF (2015).




                                                        128
129
130
131
