                                            Document of
                                           The World Bank


                                    FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY



                                                            Report No. 116630-MR




                           ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA

                 TURNING CHALLENGES INTO OPPORTUNITIES FOR
                            ENDING POVERTY AND PROMOTING
                                  SHARED PROSPERITY


                       SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC (SCD)
                                              Summary



                                             May, 2017




International Development Association
Country Department AFCW3
Africa Region

International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department

Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) was led by Bronwyn Grieve (TTL), Wael Mansour (co-
TTL) and Paolo Zacchia (co-TTL) with a core team comprised of World Bank Group staff across the
main operational global practices, as presented in the table below. The SCD was prepared under the
guidance of Louise Cord, Gaston Sorgho, Laurent Msellati, Chiara Bronchi, Renaud Seligmann, Lars
Christian Moller and Faheen Allibhoy. Administrative support was provided by Anta Loum Lo and
Fatima Cherif. The team acknowledges the invaluable contributions provided by Aneliya Muller,
consultant, in researching and preparing the SCD package.
Valuable comments and advice were received from the following peer reviewers: Ali Zafar (Senior
economist); Omowunmi Ladipo (Operations Advisor); Marc Tobias Schiffbauer (Senior Economist),
Helene Grandvoinnet (Senior Public Sector Specialist), Serdar Yilmaz (Lead Public Sector
Management Specialist), Jasmin Chakeri (Program Leader) and Luis-Felipe Lopez-Calva (Lead
Economist).
The core team relied significantly on the expertise of partners and stakeholders in Mauritania, who have
contributed throughout the SCD preparation process in a collaborative manner. We are very grateful
for their generosity in providing us with substantive inputs, knowledge, and advice. We would like to
particularly acknowledge the contribution of the Government of Mauritania’s focal point for the SCD,
Mr Hassan Zein, Adviser to the Prime Minister.



 GLOBAL PRACTICE /
                                     TEAM MEMBER
 AREA OF EXPERTISE
 Agriculture and Fisheries           Christian Berger, Brahim Sal, Remi Kini, Berengere Prince,
 CMU                                 Paolo Zacchia (co-TTL), Sophie Naudeau, Eric Lancelot
 Education                           Mohamed Tolba
 Energy & Extractives                Morten Larsen, Nina Inamahoro
 Environment & Natural               Dahlia Lotayef, Kazi Fateha Ahmed, Mimako Kobayashi, Peter
 Resources                           Kristensen, Alexandre Hugo Laure
 Finance & Market                    Cedric Mousset
 Fragility, Conflict & Violence,
                                     Maria-Beatriz Orlando
 Gender
                                     Bronwyn Grieve, (TTL), El Hadramy Oubeid, Kjetil Hansen,
 Governance
                                     Moustapha Ould El Bechir
 Health, Nutrition and Population    Moulay Driss Zine Eddine El Idrissi, Mohamed Vadel Taleb Hassan
 Macroeconomic and Fiscal
                                     Wael Mansour (co-TTL)
 Management
 Poverty                             Paolo Verme, Rose Mungai
 Social Protection and Labor         Aline Coudouel, Mattias Lefebvre, Hebba Elgazar
 Social, Urban, Rural &              Paolo Avner, Andre Teyssier, Salamata Bal, Zie Coulibaly, Alexandra
 Resilience                          Le Courtois and Abderrahmane Fradji
 Trade and Competitiveness           Laurent Corthay, Alexandre Laure
 Transport & ICT                     Ibou Diouf and Arthur Foch
 Water                               Pier Mantovani, Mohamed Nanzoul
 IFC                                 Faheen Allibhoy, Vincent Floreani,
 MIGA                                Conor Healy




                                                   ii
    ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA


        GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
           January 1 – December 31


         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
   (Exchange Rate Effective as of May 31, 2017)

Currency Unit     = Mauritanian Ouguiya (MRO)
 US $ 1.00        =             353




                        iii
               ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


DTIS      Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
EMEL      Emergency food program (Programme alimentaire d’urgence)
EPCV      Survey of Household Living Conditions (Enquête Permanente sur les Conditions de
          Vie des Ménages)
EU        European Union
FDI       Foreign Direct Investment
FITI      Fisheries Transparency Initiative
FNRH      National Oil Fund (Fonds National des Revenues des Hydrocarbonés)
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
IMF       International Monetary Fund
LFPR      Labor Force Participation Rate
LMIC      Lower-Middle Income Country
MDG       Millennium Development Goal
MENA      Middle East and Northern Africa
MRO       Mauritanian Ouguiya
NGO       Non-Governmental Organization
ONS       National Office of Statistics (Office National de la Statistique)
PEFA      Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Framework
PIP       Public Investment Program
PNIDDLE   National Integrated Program to Support Decentralization, Local Development and
          Youth Employment (Programme National Intégré d'appui à la Décentralisation, au
          Développement Local et à l'Emploi des Jeunes)
REER      Real Effective Exchange Rate
SCAPP     Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity Strategy (Stratégie de Croissance
          Accélérée et de Prospérité Partagée)
SCD       Systematic Country Diagnostic
SNIM      National Industrial and Mining Company (Société Nationale Industrielle et
          Minière)
SOE       State-owned Enterprises
SSA       Sub-Saharan Africa
TFP       Total Factor Productivity
UNICEF    United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund
WFP       World Food Program

                                      iv
WGI   Worldwide Governance Indicators
WHO   World Health Organization




      Regional Vice President: Makhtar Diop
            Country Director: Louise Cord
           Country Manager: Laurent Msellati
           Practice Managers: Chiara Bronchi, Lars Christian Moller
          Task Team Leaders: Bronwyn Grieve, Wael Mansour, Paolo
                             Zacchia



                             v
                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS


A.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                    1

B.     COUNTRY CONTEXT                                                                                 2

C.     DIAGNOSTIC OF MAURITANIA’S PRINCIPAL DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES                                     2
     I. INCLUSIVE GROWTH: Robust growth performance during the commodity super-cycle relied on
     a narrow economic base, was capital-intensive, brought limited job creation and is now
     jeopardized by the low commodity price environment.                                     2
     II. POVERTY AND SHARED PROSPERITY: Accelerated reduction in poverty and inequality was
     primarily driven by relative price changes that benefitted poor rural producers, rather than gains
     in productivity or structural mechanisms to enable the poor to build their human capital,
     productive and financial assets.                                                                   7
     III. GOVERNANCE: The narrow political settlement has brought political stability but has not yet
     succeeded in removing hierarchical and discriminatory conceptions of traditional societal
     organization, creating foundational obstacles to inclusive development.                       12
     IV. FRAGILITY: Underlying fragility stresses associated with Mauritania’s delicate and complex
     social fabric and the environmental challenges of an encroaching coastline and an expanding
     desert risk undermining development gains made to date.                                      14
        Environmental Fragility                                                                   15
        Social Fragility                                                                          15

D.     ANALYSIS OF PRIORITY CONSTRAINTS AND IDENTIFICATION OF SOLUTIONS
       16
     I. SUSTAINING AND ACCELERATING INCLUSIVE GROWTH: Reaping the benefits of
     Mauritania’s natural endowments and building the foundations for structural transformation.      16
         1.1. Addressing Weak Management of Extractives                                               16
         1.2. Harnessing the Potential of Livestock and Fisheries in the Face of climate change       18
         1.3. Promoting Productive and Inclusive Cities for Longer-Term Structural Transformation     20
     II. PROMOTING EQUITY: Tackling the structural barriers that restrict the poor from building
     their financial, human capital and productive assets                                             21
         2.1. Addressing High Food Prices in Nouakchott                                               22
         2.2. Promoting the Equitable Distribution of Land in the Senegal River Valley                23
         2.3. Improving Equitable Access to Social Services to Promote Human Capital Development      24
     III. REINFORCING GOOD GOVERNANCE AND SOCIAL COHESION: Broadening the
     political, economic and social space through transparent public resource management and the
     protection of the vulnerable.                                                               27
        3.1. Improving the Transparency and Effectiveness of Public Expenditures and Investments 27
        3.2. Consolidating the Social Contract                                                   29

E.     CONCLUSION                                                                                     31


                                                    vi
                                                            FIGURES
Figure 1- Mauritania's Growth Dynamics .............................................................................................. 5
Figure 2- Mauritania's Poverty Reduction Dynamics-Household Expenditure Growth by Area .......... 8
Figure 3- Mauritania's Urbanization Dynamics ................................................................................... 21
Figure 4- Mauritania's Food Price Dynamics ...................................................................................... 22
Figure 5- Key Resource Constraints in Mauritania’s Social Sectors ................................................... 22


                                                             TABLES
Table 1- Growth Accounting Decomposition (2000 – 2014) ................................................................ 3
Table 2 - Multidimensional Head Count and Poverty Indices ............................................................. 10




                                                                 vii
                   NOTE ON THE STRUCTURE OF THE SCD PACKAGE

The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Mauritania is presented in a new format that is
intended to improve the accessibility of the document and facilitate dialogue with the authorities
and stakeholders. In a departure from the standardized reporting format traditionally employed, the
published SCD package contains two constitutive parts – a written executive summary and an
accompanying slide deck. The executive summary provides policy-makers and stakeholders with a
concise overview of the narrative, as well as the principle conclusions and recommendations emanating
from the diagnostic. It constitutes the principal SCD report. The executive summary is accompanied
by a slide deck. The slide deck is not intended for presentational purposes. Rather, it depicts the
underlying evidence upon which the diagnostic is based in a visually accessible format. The SCD
package draws from a more in-depth analysis of the identified priority constraints and proposed
solutions, which is contained in a series of unpublished background thematic notes.




                                                viii
KEY MESSAGES

Mauritania’s abundant endowment of natural resources, its strategic location at the gateway between
Sub-Saharan and Northern Africa, its richly diverse, yet stratified, cultural and social make-up and its
position in a restive region, increasingly beholden to the ravaging effects of climate change, create a
complex development space for poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Over the last decade, the
country has reaped the benefits of historically high commodity prices, departing from its stagnant
economic growth trajectory. The super-cycle spurred solid economic growth, allowed for significant
government investments in infrastructure, and enabled Mauritania to register one of the best
performances in poverty reduction in the region. Yet as the reality of the ‘new normal’ of low
commodity prices sets in, the narrow, and largely temporary nature of growth and poverty reduction
trends, as well as the concentrated character of the nation’s political bargain, have exposed the unstable
foundations of the country’s recent progress. Through an in-depth analysis of the resource, policy and
institutional factors that underscore Mauritania’s binding development constraints, this Systematic
Country Diagnostic (SCD) charts a course that would help to put the country on track to ending extreme
poverty and improving shared prosperity by 2030.


Four critical resource pathways to sustained inclusive growth and shared prosperity emerge:
 • First, Mauritania has the opportunity to leverage its abundant mineral wealth by transparently and
   sustainably managing extraction, optimizing revenue generation and ensuring that resource rents
   are used to support diversification into labor-intensive sectors and poverty-reducing public
   investments and transfers.
 • Second, the untapped potential of the country’s significant natural endowments in fisheries and
   livestock for pro-poor and job-intensive growth could be better harnessed by investing in
   environmentally resilient production, promoting private sector-led, value-added transformation and
   diversifying the export base.
 • Third, in order to achieve a structural transformation over the medium to longer term, the
   Government would do well to capitalize on the country’s rapid urbanization trend (which is the
   second highest on the continent) and emerging demographic dividend. This will require
   transforming its urban centers into dynamic and resilient economic hubs that foster the emergence
   of a productive service economy. It will also depend upon the State’s ability to progressively invest
   in developing human capital.
 • Fourth, the poor’s access to human capital, productive and financial assets will need to be
   improved. Specific focus ought to be placed upon enhancing the country’s education system,
   ensuring a more equitable distribution of land assets, reducing high food prices and improving
   broad-based quality social service delivery and expanding energy access in rural areas.


Three policy areas will help Mauritania along the identified resource pathways:
 • Better designed macro-fiscal rules will help Mauritania to counter-balance the cyclical nature of its
   resource-based economy and create the market incentives for a strong and externally competitive
   economy in non-extractive sectors.
 • The country’s public expenditure policies will need to address the narrowness of the prevailing
   economic model by rebalancing spending from large infrastructure projects to areas with the
   highest potential for inclusion, such as the livestock and human development sectors, and by
   targeting pro-poor resource allocations within the social sectors. Efficiency gains can be achieved
   through improved transparency and accountability in public resource management and, in the social
   sectors, through a gradual evolution towards increased investments in early childhood
   development.
 • Finally, building upon the Government’s recent achievements in improving the investment climate
   and business environment, regulatory policies will need to create a more level playing field for
   private sector development by addressing underlying anti-competitive practices and enhancing
   transparency in the regulation of key product markets, improving access to credit and reinforcing
   the governance of state-owned enterprises.



                                                   ix
Two underlying fundamentals will need to be addressed to sustain the country’s development
trajectory:
 In order to progressively replace the pervasive influence of informal patrimonial and traditional
  practices, the legitimacy and supremacy of rules-based public institutions need to be enhanced.
  This could be achieved by increasing the performance and accountability of the public
  administration, and uniformly enforcing rules that strengthen the cohesiveness of the social
  contract.
 Consolidated and sustained action for reinforcing the resilience of the nation against the deleterious
  effects of climate change will be critical for a country that relies so heavily upon its natural wealth
  endowments.




                                                   x
     A. INTRODUCTION

1. The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) of Mauritania seeks to identify key constraints and
priority interventions needed for the country to achieve the twin goals of the World Bank Group: i)
ending extreme poverty and ii) improving shared prosperity among the poorest forty percent of the
population (the bottom 40). The analysis steps back from the World Bank Group’s existing portfolio to
conduct a broad overview of the country’s socioeconomic development. The SCD is designed as an
analytical input for stakeholders to debate development priorities. It was undertaken during the period in
which the Government was developing a new Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity Strategy
(Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et Prospérité Partagé, SCAPP). Through close coordination with the
authorities and national stakeholders, the preparation of the SCD contributed to national reflections and
facilitated a strong coherence between the orientations of the Government’s strategy and the World Bank
Group’s twin goals. The SCD is intended to inform the preparation of a new Country Partnership
Framework (CPF).
2. The diagnostic draws on an extensive knowledge base and presents findings and conclusions in an
accessible format geared towards stimulating dialogue with the authorities and relevant stakeholders.
The SCD package incorporates this executive summary which provides a concise overview of the main
findings and recommendations of the diagnostic. The executive summary is accompanied by a slide deck
that sets out the analytical framework and presents the evidence upon which the SCD findings are based in
graphic format. The package draws from a series of background thematic papers that provide a more
detailed analysis of the identified priority constraints and proposed solutions. The SCD is derived
principally from the wealth of recent analysis by the World Bank Group and other sources. While studies
were undertaken during the course of the SCD preparation to complement the existing analytical knowledge
base, important knowledge gaps remain. The SCD identifies these gaps and proposes a range of issues for
further analysis.
3. The prioritization of the critical constraints to poverty reduction and shared prosperity in
Mauritania and the identification and evaluation of possible solutions to the constraints is based upon
a simple, yet comprehensive analytical framework. In a country, that has only recently reached lower-
middle-income status, there is no sector that does not require investment and reform, yet the challenge for
the SCD is to prioritize the constraints that are likely to have the greatest impact upon sustained growth and
poverty reduction. The SCD provides an overview of the main trends in growth, poverty, and governance
over the last ten years and examines the risks to the sustainable achievement of the twin goals. It relies upon
a range of quantitative and qualitative metrics to achieve an evidence-based identification of the priority
binding constraints which are then analyzed in detail through three lenses: resources, policies, and
institutions. Through the resource lens, an analysis is conducted of the specific resource base, with an
emphasis on how the poor share in the resources through factor and product markets and through non-
market allocations (public sector or social norms), and the forward-looking sustainability challenges. Given
the dominant influence of policies and institutions on the utilization of resources1, an assessment is also
made of the design and implementation of relevant policies and the underlying formal and informal
institutional arrangements that affect policy implementation.2 Drawing upon existing analytical work,
consultations with relevant experts and World Bank teams, as well as national focus group discussions, a
set of the most relevant solutions is presented. The solutions are then evaluated on the basis of the
authorizing environment for implementation, the capacity for implementation, the time horizon required
for change and the degree of complementarity of various proposed measures.


1
  See Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson (2012), Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty, New
York: Crown Business; Khan, M., and W. Tompson (2011), “Making Reform Happen in Developing Countries,” Concept paper,
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris.
2 For the purposes of the SCD, the term ‘institutions’ refers to the structures and mechanisms of social order that govern the behavior

of individuals (see further: World Development Report 2017, Governance and the Law, Washington, DC: World Bank).

                                                                  1
      B. COUNTRY CONTEXT

4. Mauritania is a sparsely populated, arid, but resource-rich country, which geographically and
culturally, straddles North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa. The country consists largely of a desert,
such that only 0.5 percent of the land is considered arable. Mauritania has a population of about 4.1 million
people, and the density of 3.9 inhabitants per square kilometer makes it the fourth least densely populated
country in the whole of Africa. Nomadic livestock raising dominates rural life, with productive agriculture
mostly concentrated along the Senegal River on the southern border. Owing to the wealth of natural
resources, which consist mainly of iron ore, but also gold, crude oil, and natural gas, per capita gross
domestic product (GDP) stood at US$1,371 in 2014, up from US$700 in 2007, elevating Mauritania to the
ranks of lower-middle-income countries (LMIC).

      C. DIAGNOSTIC OF MAURITANIA’S PRINCIPAL DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES

I. INCLUSIVE GROWTH: Robust growth performance during the commodity super-cycle relied on a
narrow economic base, was capital-intensive, brought limited job creation and is now jeopardized by the
low commodity price environment.
5. After decades of sluggish performance, Mauritania’s GDP growth accelerated over the last 15
years, but is now cooling down with the end of the commodity super cycle. Over the past decade and a
half, Mauritania has experienced robust GDP growth, averaging 5.5 percent between 2003 and 2015 when
international commodity prices rose to historic levels. Growth performance was close to the average for
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), and represented a marked improvement over the 1990s, when annual growth
averaged only 2.7 percent. As indicated in Part C.II on Poverty and Shared Prosperity, the robust, pro-poor
profile of household expenditure growth, which was concentrated amongst the bottom 40 percent of the
population, demonstrates the inclusiveness of growth over the period3. After proving resilient to the end of
the commodity super-cycle in 2014, GDP growth in 2015 receded to 3 percent on the back of a negative
terms of trade shock and a drop in mining and oil production of 15.7 percent and 11.0 percent, respectively,
year-on-year.
6. Booming revenue from the narrow extractives sector was the main driver of higher economic
growth. As a result of the dramatic rise in global commodity prices, the value of mineral exports jumped
from US$318 million in 2003 to US$2,652 million in 2013, despite generally stagnant mining production.
Over the period, the extractives sector represented, on average, 25 percent of GDP, 82 percent of exports,
and 23 percent of domestic budgetary revenue. The terms of trade improvement is estimated to have
brought, on average, 2.5 percent of additional national income per year. The mining boom translated into
large foreign investments in the extractives sector and significant state-driven public investments.
7. The positive income shock spurred growth in the non-tradable domestic sectors. Driven by favorable
terms of trade, domestic non-tradable sectors, such as communications, construction, utilities and transport,
have expanded with a combined growth rate of almost 6.2 percent a year since 2009. The traditional primary
sectors of agriculture and fisheries have made the biggest contribution to GDP growth due to their overall
size, but have grown more slowly than the economy as a whole. Their share of GDP fell steadily, from 36.0
percent to 29.9 percent in 2003–14. The small manufacturing sector (averaging 9.2 percent of GDP) remains
untapped and its contribution to the economy is mostly unchanged.
8. On the demand side, growth has been driven by investment, which increased almost three times
faster than consumption. The ratio of investment to GDP grew significantly, from less than 43.6 percent

3
    See further, Figure 2.8 Growth Incidence Curve: Mauritania SCD Slide Deck (slide 48).

                                                          2
in 2009 to over 61 percent in 2014. It averaged 39 percent of GDP over 2000–14, well above the averages
of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and SSA (29 and 19 percent, respectively). Private
investment, driven by foreign inflows, rose even faster than public investment.4 Public investment more
than tripled in the five years after 2010, reaching a sizable 13.6 percent of GDP in 2015. While public
investment has been critical for modernizing the country’s economic infrastructure, its macroeconomic
impact has been weaker than expected, estimated at around 3 percent of GDP.5 Poor project management,
cost overruns, delays, and other wastage, including corruption, may have reduced the returns even further,
leaving the program financially unviable.6
9. The capital-intensive nature of growth and the decline in Total Factor Productivity meant that
Mauritania has yet to experience a structural transformation. Growth decompositions using the Solow-
type model reveal that GDP growth was primarily driven by capital stock accumulation, linked to the rise
in public investment and foreign direct investments in the extractives sector (see Table 1). By contrast, total
factor productivity (TFP) has been falling at an annual rate of 2.5 percent since 2000, underscoring the
limited contribution of human capital to growth. The capital-intensive nature of growth helps to explain the
lack of structural transformation in Mauritania. As in other resource-rich countries with high urbanization
rates, the largely informal and low productive commerce sector gained in size, absorbing most of the rural
migrants in the country’s expanding urban centers. This came at the expense of high productivity sectors
in manufacturing and services.
Table 1. Growth Accounting Decomposition (2000-2014)
                                                   Capital stock   Pop., labor &
                             Real GDP per
         Period                                     per unit of    human capital    TFP          Real total GDP
                                capita
                                                      labor          per capita

      2000 - 2010                  1.87                2.75            1.53        -2.38              4.74

      2010 - 2014                  2.98                3.72            2.26        -2.96              5.46

      2000 - 2014                  2.18                3.02            1.73        -2.54              4.94
Source: World Bank staff calculations; DTIS 2016



10. Fiscal policy has remained mostly prudent, with efforts to contain recurrent expenditures and
raise non-extractive revenues, but increased public investment over the past few years has fueled a
rapid expansion in the public debt. The overall fiscal deficit remained at, or below, 3 percent of GDP
between 2006 and 2013, supported by mining revenues and notable foreign grants. Tax revenues increased
rapidly from an average of slightly higher than 12 percent of GDP in 2000-2011 to an average of 17.4
percent of GDP in 2012-2014. In addition, the Government set aside oil revenues in a fund which helped
to finance the 2011 drought response and remained at almost US$100 million in 2013, before falling to
US$60 million in 2015. However, the steady rise in investment spending over the past two years has
undermined the Government’s efforts at fiscal consolidation. Deficits reached 3.4 percent and 3.3 percent
of GDP in 2014 and 2015, respectively. The ambitious Public Investment Program (PIP), with a 35.6
percent externally financed component (up from 21.0 percent in 2000), pushed the public debt stock to 85.4
percent of GDP by the end of 2015, a 15 percent rise since 2010. The absence of fiscal buffers and the
Government’s recourse to bilateral loans and other less-concessional forms of external financing have

4 Foreign direct investment increased from 5.1 to 19.9 percent of GDP in 2006–13.
5 World Bank, Public Expenditure Review of Mauritania, Surfing the Wave: Public Spending During the Commodity Super-Cycle
and Beyond, 2016, Washington, DC: World Bank.
6 Reflecting this concern, the average incremental capital-output ratio, one of the indicators of public investment spending

efficiency, is estimated at 10.4, far above the benchmark ratio of 3.0 for the most well performing countries.
                                                                   3
worsened the debt profile and increased the vulnerability of the debt stock to exchange rate risks, leaving
the country at a high risk of debt distress (see further Annex 1 – Selected Macro-Fiscal Indicators Tables).
11. Suggesting symptoms of Dutch disease, consumer price inflation increased notably during the
super-cycle period, while the country’s real effective exchange rate appreciated significantly,
undermining economic competitiveness. Headline inflation averaged 6.4 percent between 2000 and 2011,
compared with 4.2 percent between 2012 and 2014. These inflationary pressures were mostly driven by the
rise in food prices. Available data shows that food prices rose rapidly by an annual average of 8.1 percent
between 2005 and 2011, before decelerating to 4.6 percent after 2012. In 2015, this trend continued and the
prices of food fell by 1.1 percent (year-on-year). Food constitutes 54 percent of the household consumption
basket in Nouakchott7 and, as such, is by far the largest bundle. As a result, food price rises contributed to
the deterioration of purchasing power for net food purchasers, especially urban populations, while the rise
in prices of meat, fish and other agriculture produce meant expanded incomes for households working in
agriculture, herding and fishery. High inflation, combined with a fixed nominal exchange rate, led to an
appreciation of the real effective exchange rate (REER) by a yearly average of 3.8 percent over the period
2000-2011, which contributed to eroding the competitiveness of the economy and further limited job-
creating structural transformation. Recent downward adjustments of the nominal exchange rate have only
partially reversed the REER trend.
12. The country’s state-driven development model has done little to encourage private sector–led
economic diversification, limiting competition and crowding out private sector entrants. A few
powerful and politically connected business groups are de facto in control of trading monopolies and
productive sectors and appear to dominate large state procurement contracts. New and independent firms
face challenges competing with these groups or obtaining credit from the few large banks, while lucrative
import monopolies discourage efforts to develop local suppliers and penalize poor consumers by imposing
markups on basic commodities.8 Overall, businesses are burdened by limited access to finance, corruption,
and an inefficient public bureaucracy. The private sector is generally under-developed and largely informal,
with its participation in the formal sector confined to a discrete and concentrated set of interests. Despite
entering the top 10 performers in improving the business climate in 2015, Mauritania still ranks 160th
among 190 economies in Doing Business 2017 and 141st among 144 countries in the Global
Competitiveness Report 2014–15.9
13. Moreover, the narrow basis of economic growth has failed to stimulate job creation, while the
steadily declining labor force participation rate has undermined the growth effects of productivity
gains and limited opportunities for the country to reap the benefits of an emerging demographic
dividend. The capital-intensive and enclave nature of recent growth - driven by the mining sector, which
accounts for only 1.7 percent of employment - has resulted in limited job creation. Shapely growth
decompositions for 2000-2014 confirm these dynamics, demonstrating a negative 35 percent contribution
to growth of the labor force participation rate (LFPR). This trend was amplified during the commodity
super-cycle, when the LFPR decline undid nearly the entire positive productivity effect.10 Overall, less than
half of the working-age population in Mauritania is employed.11 The gender gap is particularly severe. Men
hold three jobs in every four, even though women represent 55 percent of the working-age population. The
female labor force participation rate of 22 percent in 2014 (down from 28 percent in 2008) stands in sharp

7 This is the weight used in the CPI for Mauritania, which is collected solely in Nouakchott.
8 Despite the many commercial banks, five big banks account for 60 percent of loans and 70 percent of deposits.
9 World Bank, Doing Business 2017: Measuring Regulatory Quality and Efficiency, 2016, Washington, DC: World Bank,

http://www.doingbusiness.org/reports/global-reports/doing-business-2017; Schwab, Klaus, ed., 2014, “Insight Report: The Global
Competitiveness Report 2014–2015”, Geneva: World Economic Forum.
10 Contribution to GDP per capita growth due to productivity change was calculated at 199 percent, compared to a -180 percent for

that of the change in labor force participation.
11 The employment rate, which is particularly low among youth, is shrinking rather than rising, dropping from 48.7 percent in 2008

to 41.6 percent in 2014.

                                                                4
contrast with the SSA average of 64 percent. Labor markets are also handicapped by pervasive informality,
which affects 85 percent of the labor force (or 96 percent of those aged 19 to 25 years) and generates 30
percent of GDP. These labor market dynamics will constrain the country from reaping the full benefits of
a demographic dividend that has been initiated by recent demographic shifts (growth of the working
population and decreasing proportion of dependents).12


Figure 1- Mauritania's Growth Dynamics

 Mauritania has experienced robust, but volatile                                                                              …however, in per capita terms, growth has not been
 growth, driven by high global commodity prices…                                                                              sufficient to enable convergence with SSA or LMIC
                                                                                                                              averages.
                                         Real GDP growth and global iron ore, 2000-2015                                       2100                        GDP per capita (current USD)
                                                                                                      170                     2000
                                                                                                                              1900
                                18.0%
  Real GDP Growth (annual, %)




                                                                                                                              1800
                                                                                                                              1700
                                                                                                      120                     1600
                                                                                                                              1500


                                                                                                           Iron Price $/dmt
                                13.0%
                                                                                                                              1400
                                                                                                                              1300
                                                                                                      70                      1200
                                 8.0%                                                                                         1100
                                                                                                                              1000
                                                                                                                               900
                                                                                                                               800                                                                      Mauritania
                                 3.0%                                                                 20
                                                                                                                               700
                                                                                                                               600                                                                      SSA
                                                                                                                               500                                                                      LMIC
                                                                                                                               400
                                -2.0%                                                                 -30                      300
                                           Real GDP                          GDP excl. extractives                                    2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                           Iron prices ($/dmt)

 Declining labor force participation undermined the                                                                           Employment principally occurred in the low productivity
 impact of productivity gains on growth.                                                                                      agro-pastoral and largely informal commerce sectors,
                                                                                                                              while the potential of manufacturing and services
                                                                                                                              remained untapped
                                    Shapely Decomposition of Growth in per capita                                             3000
                                                                                                                                      MRO per      Level of Productivity vs. Share of GDP, 2014
                                              value added (2000 – 2014)                                                                worker                     Size of bubble – employment share
                                                                                                                                                                                  Extractives (8000 MRO per worker)
                                                                                                                              2500
                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                                                                                     1.70                                                              Transp &                            Other Services
                                                                                                                              2000                                      Comm.
                                                                              0.83                                                                                                                            Agriculture &
                                                                                                                                                                        Construction                            Herding
                                                                                                                              1500
                                -0.75                                                                                                      Fisheries
                                                                                                                              1000
                                                                   0.35                                                                                Public Sector

                                                                                                                               500
                                                                                                                                                                        Commerce
                   -1.0                  -0.5         0.0          0.5         1.0         1.5              2.0                                                                                                Share of GDP (%)
                                                                                                                                  0
                       Productivity             Employment       Participation Rate   Demograpic Chan                                 0           5               10                15             20             25          30


Source: WDI; World Bank Commodity Price Data, 2016; Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office (NSO).

14. The end of the commodity super-cycle has exposed a number of macroeconomic vulnerabilities
and prompted the need to adjust external and fiscal imbalances going forward. The commodity super-
cycle exacerbated underlying structural imbalances in the balance of payments of the country, resulting in
large and sustained current-account deficits that averaged 20 percent during the commodity boom years

12 Mauritania has experienced a fall in the dependency ratio from 85 percent in 2000 to 76 percent in 2015. This dynamic was

influenced by several factors including a small increase in life expectancy (from 60 in 2000 to 63 in 2014), as well as the decrease
in the total fertility rate (from 5.4 in 2000 to 4.6 in 2014) and in infant mortality (from 76 deaths per 1000 birth in 2000 to 65 in
2014) – World Bank, World Development Indicators 2015, Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                                                                                              5
2011-2014.13 As commodity prices rose, extractives exports accounted for an increasingly large share of
foreign-exchange inflows. Nevertheless, these earnings were more than offset by the capital goods and
services imports required by the extractive industries and the PIP, and by the repatriation of profits to
foreign-owned companies. This resulted in net foreign-exchange outflows, which exceeded both private
remittances and official transfers. As a result, it added strains to the reserves of the Central Bank and
increased the country’s vulnerability to the reduction in commodity-linked foreign direct investments (FDI).
Foreign-exchange controls, rigid exchange-rate policies and a lack of monetary policy tools limited the
Central Bank’s ability to address structural imbalances and respond to terms of trade shocks. It also
contributed to dampening the economy’s competitiveness and holding back the development of a
manufacturing sector. Moreover, the concentration of domestic revenues in the mining and oil sectors, at
around 24 percent,14 coupled with a reliance on foreign grants and intermittent pressures on public
spending,15 prevented the build-up of fiscal buffers when commodity prices were high. The expansion of
the Government’s ambitious PIP, and increased foreign borrowing, compounded rising fiscal pressures as
commodity prices fell. Despite a series of major tax reforms launched in 2011, public debt rose from 75.5
percent of GDP in 2007 to 89.1 percent in 2015 leading the country to a high risk of debt distress (see
further Annex 1 – Selected Macro-Fiscal Indicators Tables).

15. Looking ahead, Mauritania has the chance to sustain and accelerate inclusive growth by
leveraging its existing comparative advantages in extractives, fisheries and livestock, whilst gradually
shifting to private sector–led diversification in urban-based competitive, labor-intensive sectors.
Mauritania’s existing comparative advantages, in the short-term, are tied to its considerable natural
endowments. Recent estimates put its mineral wealth at the top, accounting for 43 percent of total natural
resource wealth (subject to trends in commodity prices), followed by fisheries, and livestock-dominated
agro-pastoralism.16 Acknowledging the need to better harness the promise of diversified growth and the
employment-creating potential of its non-extractive natural resource wealth, the Government has launched
reforms and begun rechanneling public investment into agro- pastoralism and fisheries. Sustaining inclusive
growth in the long term, however, will require a structural transformation to higher-productivity activities
that will likely be concentrated in urban centers. This will involve refocusing public investments on the
formation of human capital and shifting toward private sector–led diversification in competitive and labor-
intensive sectors.
16. Three priority constraint areas will need to be tackled if the ‘extract and export’ model is to be
effectively transformed into sustainable economic diversification and job creation:
17. First, the weak management of extractive rents is a binding constraint to inclusive growth in the
short to medium term, as it limits both the optimal and pro-poor use of revenue and impedes
economic diversification. Mauritania benefits from abundant, diversified mineral wealth. Recent oil and
gas discoveries have identified a reservoir, the Grand Tortue, which straddles the border and could contain
between 25 and 50 trillion cubic feet of gas. There is also an estimated 100 years of iron ore and gold
production at current capacity. The International Council on Mining and Metals ranks Mauritania second
after the Democratic Republic of Congo among countries in which mining is likely to make the highest
relative contribution to the economy. However, setbacks in attracting private investments, the weak
performance of the iron ore parastatal company and comparatively low revenue generation limit the optimal
and sustainable exploitation of the country’s resource wealth. Even in the most favorable outlook, it is well
established that most large-scale extractive industries create disproportionately few jobs and this has been
exemplified in Mauritania. The policy framework has not adequately enabled the use of extractive rents to


13 Compared to an average deficit of 15.1 percent of GDP in the period 2003-2011.
14 Average of extractives revenues to domestic revenues excluding grants in the commodity price boom years 2011-2014.
15 Foreign grants average 1.1 percent of GDP in the past 15 years. Moreover, Mauritania experienced several exogenous shocks,

including droughts and security crises, which demanded emergency spending.
16 World Bank, Inclusive Green Growth: The Pathway to Sustainable Development, 2012, Washington, DC: World Bank.

                                                             6
support the growth of competitive labor-intensive sectors of the economy, while efficiency gains could be
made in using some of the resources for poverty-reducing investments or transfers.
18. Second, the failure to harness the full potential of Mauritania’s largest non-extractive natural
endowments in livestock and fisheries constrains the country’s diversification and job creation
prospects. The economic potential of livestock exports remains untapped, notwithstanding the sector’s
significance. National accounts estimate that the sector’s share in the economy was on average 16 percent
between 2005 and 2015, which is likely to be underestimated in light of the high degree of informality in
livestock operations. It represents over three-quarters of the value-added in the agro-pastoral sector,
provides revenues to roughly one million individuals, plays a key role in food security and resilience and
serves as a means of capital accumulation and insurance, especially among the poorest. Though the pastoral
economy benefited from higher prices for livestock products, production stagnated. The higher price trend
may not continue, especially if lower mineral rents spill over into lower demand for food in urban areas.
Moreover, the sector is subject to acute desertification and climate change stresses. Mauritania’s fisheries
sector, despite having some of the richest resources in the world, is also performing below potential.
Although the sector accounted for 15.2 percent of government revenue and 25 percent of foreign exchange
revenue, it contributed only two percent of GDP on average from 2005 to 2015, highlighting its weak links
with the national economy. The sector faces significant challenges in sustainability and in the generation
of local revenue and employment. In both the fisheries and livestock sectors, the development of value-
added industries is critical.
19. Finally, the rapid and outpaced management of urbanization in Mauritania hinders the eventual
emergence of productive and inclusive urban centers of growth. Mauritania has the second highest rate
of urbanization on the continent.17 The fast-paced expansion of urban centers induced by the heavy flow of
drought-affected rural and nomadic populations into the cities has created inordinate challenges in planning
and the provision of services. Few of the positive effects ordinarily associated with agglomeration have
emerged. Urban centers are characterized by informality, poor infrastructure and service coverage, self-
employment and weak human capital – characteristics which are neither favorable to attracting the private
sector nor to creating an enabling environment for the development of higher-productivity services and
tertiary sectors.

II. POVERTY AND SHARED PROSPERITY: Accelerated reduction in poverty and inequality was
primarily driven by relative price changes that benefitted poor rural producers, rather than gains in
productivity or structural mechanisms to enable the poor to build their human capital, productive and
financial assets.

20. Mauritania experienced accelerated poverty reduction during the commodity boom, making it a
leading performer in the region. Until the early 2000s, Mauritania had been on a slow poverty reduction
trajectory, with a decline in the poverty rate of slightly below 1 percent on average per year. The average
rate of poverty reduction accelerated to around 1.5 percentage points a year during the commodity super-
cycle, 2004–14.18 In particular, during the latest period 2008–14, Mauritania experienced a significant
reduction in poverty, as the poverty rate dropped from 44.5 percent to 33.0 percent (based on the national
poverty line of MRO 177,200). Over the same 2008-2014 period, extreme poverty halved, with the rate
declining from 10.8 percent to 5.6 percent, based on the international absolute extreme poverty line of

17 The urbanization rate is estimated at between 59 percent and 62 percent (2012 census-adjusted projections; World Bank, 2015,
World Development Indicators 2015, Washington, DC: World Bank). Nouakchott, growing at an average of 10.0 percent a year up
to 2000 and at 4.4 percent a year since then, has experienced the second-highest rate of urbanization in Africa and now accounts
for around 30 percent of the national population.
18 In 2014–15, the National Office of Statistics revised poverty estimates based on a new consumption aggregate and poverty line.

Because of the change in methodology, the official poverty lines of 2008 (UM 32,800 at 1988 prices) and 2014 (UM 177,200 at
2014 prices) are not comparable and the poverty headcount for 2008 has been recalculated to ensure comparability.

                                                               7
US$1.90 (purchasing power parity). Poverty reduction has been robust, as confirmed by subjective
perceptions of poverty, and is consistent across selected poverty lines and poverty indicators (the poverty
rate and the poverty gap or severity of poverty).19 Furthermore, sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the
decline in poverty is robust to methodological changes in the definition of the poverty line: adopting poverty
lines around the 2014 national poverty line would still result in large poverty declines, of around 9-12
percentage points. Cross-country benchmarking confirms that Mauritania’s performance in poverty
reduction was above average. Poverty elasticity to GDP growth was the fourth highest in Africa, after
South Africa, Madagascar, and Botswana.
21. Poverty reduction has been reinforced by the reduction of inequality and vulnerability. Driven
by the robust, pro-poor profile of household expenditure growth, inequality, as measured by the Gini Index,
declined from 35.3 to 31.9 in 2008–14. Moreover, various estimates show a decrease in vulnerability in
2008–14, indicating improved endowments associated with consumption. The share of the hard-core poor
— people who are both poor and likely to remain poor in the future — dropped by half, from 32.8 percent
to 15.6 percent.
22. The strong decline in poverty has been driven mostly by developments in rural areas, where the
majority of the poor are located, while Nouakchott has experienced a slight increase in poverty. In
the early years of the commodity boom, 2004–08, poverty reduction was driven by higher incomes in the
public sector and among the urban, non-agricultural, self-employed. By contrast, between 2008 and 2014
the greatest growth in mean household expenditure occurred in rural areas, where all percentiles of the
expenditure distribution did well and the lower deciles performed particularly well. Since Mauritania’s poor
populations are concentrated in rural areas (78 percent in 2008), where they are principally engaged in
agriculture and livestock, this rural bias in expenditure growth had a significant impact in terms of poverty
reduction. In fact, poverty change decompositions show that only 13.6 percent of poverty reduction is
explained by population shifts between areas, while 78 percent is explained by higher household
expenditure within rural areas. Urban areas registered fewer gains in poverty reduction, while the capital
city, Nouakchott experienced an increase in poverty.


Figure 2- Mauritania's Poverty Reduction Dynamics-Household Expenditure Growth by
Area
  Consumption growth has been larger in rural areas, while Nouakchott has actually experienced a decrease in
  consumption growth




Source: World Bank staff estimates, based on the 2008 and 2014 EPCV.




23. The main driver of poverty reduction in rural areas has been the increase in the welfare of
agricultural and livestock producers. Net food producer households experienced a growth rate in per
capita household expenditure of over 33.0 percent, compared with only 1.4 percent among non-producers.

19 While 79 percent of respondents considered themselves poor in 2008, only 61.2 percent did so in 2014, according to the Enquête

Permanente sur les Conditions de Vie des Ménages, EPVC (Ongoing Household Living Conditions Survey).
                                                                       8
This trend is confirmed by the fact that agriculture and livestock households, which experienced poverty
rates of between 50 and 70 percent in 2008, benefitted from the most significant increases in expenditure.
Indeed, households for which the head of household was employed in agriculture or livestock experienced
a mean growth in per capita expenditure of 31.9 and 26.2 percent, respectively. Over the same period, there
was a significant labor force movement out of agriculture and into livestock, amounting to around a 4-
percent reduction in agriculture and a 5-percent increase in livestock of total population. Improvements in
the production function of the agricultural sector (less rain-fed agriculture and more mechanized, hence
productive technology) explain both the higher returns and the structural shift of labor out of the sector and
into livestock. Thus, the livestock sector has become the most important driver of the decline in poverty.
24. The increase in expenditures in rural areas has been driven principally by favorable relative
price changes in domestically produced food and, to a much lesser extent, to the expansion of output.
Over the 2008-2014 period, GDP growth rates in agriculture and livestock were only around 2.5 percent
per year. While this reflects a considerable reduction in comparison with the preceding 2004-2008 period,
when GDP growth rates averaged 13 and 6 percent, respectively, it is still an expansion. The rise in rural
incomes is, therefore, largely due to price increases for primary sector goods, which exceeded the inflation
rate by a cumulative 30 percent over the 2008-2014 period and, to a lesser extent, to output expansion.
Specifically, livestock producers benefitted from high meat prices, which outperformed inflation by over
15 percent over the period. High prices meant that livestock herders needed to sell fewer animals, enabling
them to capitalize on breeding of their stocks. The emergency food program, EMEL, which also provided
animal feed, may have enabled drought-affected populations to cope without selling their assets, enabling
a stronger recovery, while supporting producers of animal feed. Public investments in infrastructure and
services also influenced poverty reduction by facilitating improved connectivity and market access of rural
areas.
25. Rising poverty in Nouakchott was largely due to higher domestic and imported food prices and
to the rapid influx of predominantly poor rural migrant populations. The increase in prices led to
increases in poverty in Nouakchott. High food price increases negatively affected the purchasing power of
net food purchasers, especially in the capital city, as food constitutes 54 percent of the household
consumption basket in Nouakchott. On top of price increases for domestically-produced food items, the
price of imported rice in Nouakchott was more than double the world price, while imported wheat was 60
percent more expensive, reflecting monopolistic tendencies in the food importation market. This
unfavorable evolution of prices constitutes the main explanation for the drastic decrease in food
consumption in the capital city. Furthermore, Nouakchott has increased its share of population from 22.3
to 27.1 percent, accounting for about half of the overall urbanization trend. Although there is a lack of data
to conclude confidently, it is likely that migrating populations were predominantly poor, unskilled laborers
who couldn’t find a job due to the mechanization of agriculture or purchase livestock, resulting in a shift of
poverty from rural to urban areas. Finally, methodological changes in the survey data collection may have
played a role in overestimating the decrease in food consumption among wealthier urban households by
affecting the quality of their reporting.20
26. Progress has been also achieved with respect to non-monetary measures of wellbeing. Estimates
of multi-dimensional welfare indices proposed by Alkire and Foster – the Multidimensional Headcount
Index (HO) and the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MO)21 – using the 2008 and 2014 household surveys
indicate substantial improvements by 31 and 24 percentage points, respectively (Table 2). The same
estimations using the 2007 and 2011 Multiple Indicators Cluster Surveys (MICS) show a significant
reduction of the HO from 61.7 to 52.2 percent and the MO from 35.2 to 28.5 percent, further providing
evidence of the robust improvement in poverty reduction and access to basic services in Mauritania. The

20The change in the questionnaires of food consumption may have led to an underestimation of food consumption in urban areas.
21The difference between the two indices is that the first considers only the share of multidimensional poor while the second
considers the share and the intensity of multidimensional poverty (it is the product between these two).

                                                             9
Human Opportunity Index (HOI), which measures the availability and equitable distribution of
opportunities, also showed progress across all dimensions, other than labor. The most significant
contribution to overall changes in the HOI comes from changes in coverage and, to a lesser extent,
equalization between population groups. For example, the HOI for school attendance improved from 65.9
to 91 percent between 2008 and 2014, as a result of both an increase in the coverage of school attendance
and a decrease in differential access rates across population groups (e.g., urban/rural, regions). Similarly,
the HOI for health satisfaction increased from 18.9 to 82.8 percent with a corresponding decline in
dissimilarity across population groups of 84.6 percent. For labor, access has declined and become more
inequitable, confirming negative dynamics outlined in the Growth section. Importantly, a comparison of
the HOI at the regional level showed very little variation in the HOI between regions, indicating that
improvements in opportunities occurred relatively uniformly across regions. The analysis does however
show that, amongst the regions that experienced the most significant declines in poverty levels, some (such
as Hodh El Chargi, Tagrant, and Hodh Guidimagha) experienced a decline in HOI for literacy. This
indicates that in certain regions, even if they experienced reductions in monetary poverty, literacy declined,
suggesting that these regions face challenges of inclusion, at least with respect to education. An ongoing
qualitative study into access to social services in specific regions will provide further evidence of the factors
underlying inclusion. A quantitative assessment of inclusion and access to services has recently been
engaged to develop a more detailed diagnostic of inclusion at the regional level.

 
Table 2: Multidimensional Headcount and Poverty Indices 




                                                                                                          
Source: World Bank staff estimates, based on the 2008 and 2014 EPCV.


27. Despite improvements, the country’s social indicators are among the lowest in the world.
Mauritania ranked 153rd among 186 countries on the Human Development Index22 in 2014. Its
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals was mixed: the goals on child malnutrition, malaria
control, and sex parity in primary education were met, while the remaining five objectives were not.

28. In health, Mauritania has achieved some positive outcomes, but performance on maternal and
reproductive health, and nutrition, remain limited. Life expectancy has risen, reaching 63 years in 2015,
vaccination coverage has expanded and is now higher than the SSA average in DTP and measles vaccine
coverage, and tuberculosis incidence has declined. However, maternal and child health outcomes are
worrisome. More than half of the infants in rural areas are delivered without the care of skilled birth
attendants, and the maternal mortality ratio of 602 per 100,000 live births, though falling, is still almost
22   United Nations Development Program, Human Development Report: Work for Human Development, 2015.
                                                                       10
double the ratio in Senegal (317) and above the SSA average (547). Despite government efforts, child
marriage is widely practiced, and, according to UNICEF, 19 percent of children are married before age 15,
and 43 percent before age 18. Female genital mutilation affects 69 percent of women aged 15–49. Global
acute malnutrition rates in six of the country’s 15 regions are above 15 percent and, in some cases, up to 28
percent - almost double the critical emergency threshold of the World Health Organization 23. Moreover,
with a wasting prevalence of 11.6 percent, Mauritania scores only 114th among 130 countries in the Global
Nutrition Report 2016. 24 In fact, child and maternal malnutrition is the leading risk factor for death and
disability in Mauritania. 25
29. Health problems are exacerbated by the limited and uneven coverage of basic water, sanitation
and hygiene services, with Mauritania featuring the lowest overall rate of access to improved water
in the region. Slightly more than half the population has access to safe water (57 percent) and 40 percent
benefit from improved sanitation. Despite the progress in recent years, this still compares poorly with
regional and international standards. In Senegal, for example, the corresponding shares are 92 percent and
48 percent, respectively. There is a significant gap between rural and urban areas: only 14 percent of rural
areas have access to sanitation versus 58 percent of urban areas, suggesting a prevalence of open defecation.
Because of the lack of sanitation, diarrheal diseases accounted for almost one in six neonatal and under-5
deaths (16 percent) in 2013 and are one of the top causes of mortality and disability. 26
30. Increased public spending on education has yielded uneven improvements in access and education
quality remains an issue. Gross enrollment ratios in preschool and secondary school have risen, although
the primary-school enrollment ratio fell from 104.6 percent to 100.4 percent in 2010–14. 27 Net enrollment
rates also improved for all ages between 2008 and 2014, with no exceptions. However, among the poorest
20 percent of the population, almost two-thirds of children aged 6–11 are still not in school. Many of them
attend traditional religious schools, mahadras, of which there are approximately 6,500 in the country and
for which attendance is not counted in official enrollment data, as they do not follow the basic curriculum.
Notwithstanding improvements in access, high attrition rates between years of education, presents a key
challenge. Only 60 percent of primary-school students reach the last grade, 34 percent continue on in
secondary school and a mere 12 percent advance to the final year of upper-secondary education. Even
though boys and girls start on par, the gap between them increases with the level of education. Boys are
nearly fifty percent more likely to complete secondary education than girls. At the same time, for the
poorest girls the probability of completing secondary school becomes almost non-existent (only 0.8 and 1.3
percent of girls in the poorest quintile are likely to complete secondary education in urban and rural areas,
respectively 28). More than half of all primary schools are unable to provide educational continuity. Poor
retention also reflects an alarming lack of education quality. Standardized tests in Mathematics and French

23  World Food Program, WFP Chief Sees At First Hand Food And Nutrition Challenges In Mauritania, 2015, available at;
https://www.wfp.org/news/news-release/wfp-chief-sees-first-hand-food-and-nutrition-challenges-mauritania.
24 IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute), 2016, Global Nutrition Report 2016: From Promise to Impact, Ending

Malnutrition by 2030, 2016, Washington, DC: IFPRI.
25 Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2015), Mauritania profile in Global Burden of Disease, available at:

http://www.healthdata.org/mauritania, Seattle: University of Washington
26 WHO, Neonatal and child health country profile of Mauritania, 2014; Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Mauritania

profile in Global Burden of Disease 2015, according to which diarrheal diseases are the third most widespread cause of death and
disability after lower respiratory infections and neonatal sepsis.
27 It should be noted that the Gross Enrollment Rate has fluctuated above the 100 percent mark since 2008 and there is some concern

regarding the reliability of administrative data: see Mauritania, Ministry of National Education (2015), Rapport d’État sur le
Système Éducatif National (RESEN). Although the household surveys include data on attendance rates, these do not produce more
reliable statistics on attendance or enrollment rates. The statistics cannot be compared across time because of changes in the
questionnaire between 2008 and 2014 resulting in missing observations. Furthermore, the data measure attendance during the
school year rather than at the beginning of the school year and thus they are not comparable with official gross enrollment rates:
World Bank 2016. Islamic Republic of Mauritania: Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility 2008-2014, Washington, DC: World
Bank.
28 Mauritania, Ministry of National Education (2015), Rapport d’État sur le Système Éducatif National (RESEN).



                                                               11
in primary schools show that learning achievement is low and has been stagnating or deteriorating over the
past 15 years. The decline in the literacy rate among under-15-year-olds in 2008–14 appears to coincide
with reforms that introduced French and Arabic bilingual education and structural changes in the secondary
cycle.
31. Despite the progress in poverty reduction, poverty is a widespread, overwhelmingly rural
phenomenon associated with uneven access to social services and productive assets. Three-quarters of
the poor live in rural areas, mostly in the south. Urban coastal areas show the lowest poverty rates. The
highest poverty rates are among households engaged in livestock-rearing and agriculture. Despite the recent
growth in livestock productive assets (which was linked to the rise in meat prices and the improved savings
capacity of livestock rearers to purchase stock), qualitative evidence suggests that land assets are
inequitably distributed, especially in the fertile Senegal River valley, where the majority of poor agro-
pastoral producers are located. Women are particularly affected; only 18.7 percent own land across the
country. 29 The urban poor are principally engaged in informal services, which represent the third most
significant occupation linked to poverty. Poverty is highly correlated with educational attainment. The
highest rates of poverty occur in households headed by those who never went to school or have an
incomplete primary education. The bottom 40 has the least access to other basic services, such as healthcare,
water, and sanitation.

32. Mauritania’s prospects for progress in poverty reduction are clouded by unfavorable commodity
prices and will require a fresh approach to tackling ongoing distributional inequities and human
development gaps. Besides accelerating inclusive growth, improvements in equity will be needed to unlock
the prevailing poverty traps in Mauritania. Limited access to land in rural areas and high food prices in
urban areas undermine the capacity of the poor to accumulate assets. Unequal access to social services and
inequitable labor markets prevent the poor from reaping returns on their assets and deprive the country of
a healthy, educated, and productive workforce to drive growth. Thus, in addition to the priority constraint
areas identified in the preceding section on Growth, three other priority constraint areas need to be
addressed to ensure shared prosperity in Mauritania. First, high, distorted food prices exert disproportionate
pressure on the urban poor and partly explain the rise in poverty in Nouakchott. Second, because land is a
vital productive asset for the majority of the rural poor, inequities in land resource distribution, especially
in the Senegal River valley, have a crucial impact on the productive and revenue-generation capacity of the
poor. Third, inequities in access to social services and the resulting distortions in human development
outcomes and low human capital formation represent structural constraints with respect to both equity and
inclusive growth.

III. GOVERNANCE: The narrow political settlement has brought political stability but has not yet
succeeded in removing hierarchical and discriminatory conceptions of traditional societal organization,
creating foundational obstacles to inclusive development.

33. Historically, the features of Mauritania’s governance landscape have created long-standing,
foundational challenges for inclusive growth and shared prosperity. The development of a modern,
pluralistic polity and the establishment of rules-based state institutions have been hampered by a colonial
legacy that institutionalized political privilege and by the influence of powerful tribal and family networks
in the creation of the modern State. 30 Since Independence, deeply entrenched informal relationships of

29 CPIA (Country Policy and Institutional Assessment), Africa (database), available at: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/cpia/,

Washington, DC: World Bank.
30 Evidence on institutional path dependence suggests that the institutional logic of colonial rule in Mauritania, which was anchored

in the conferral of political privileges to certain tribes, may have been inherited by subsequent governments. See Acemoglu, Daron,
Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2004, “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” In Handbook of
Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, 385–472, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

                                                                12
loyalty and dependence have permeated formal political and administrative systems. Wealth has
customarily been redistributed to a clientele chosen according to ethnicity, tribe, or status, while loyal tribal
leaders have been rewarded with positions in government and key economic sectors that confer access to
public resources to ingratiate their constituencies.31
34. The coups and governance crises that, until recently, characterized the post-independence era did
little to enhance the governance environment or shift the low political equilibrium. Recurrent political
instability and military coups have resulted in the interchange of power between a small subset of tribal
groups. Thus effective political contestation has traditionally been very confined in Mauritania. Each
government change has typically been accompanied by a “spoil system” whereby the networks created by
the previous regime are ousted and replaced by new ones close to the new regime. While the purge of old
elites is often portrayed in Mauritania, as elsewhere, as an “anti-corruption drive”, changes in power have
tended to shift patronage structures rather than eliminate them and the military remains an influential
institution in the country. 32
35. In contrast to preceding periods, and notwithstanding the restive character of the region, the
political leadership has forged a period of sustained political stability in recent years. The prevailing
political settlement remains concentrated on an ethnically homogenous minority who are connected with
the political leadership and who control the principal centers of economic activity and occupy senior
positions in the military, the administration and the judiciary. Beyond this inner circle, the political
leadership relies upon a secondary layer of co-optation in which the leaders of the broad array of societal
groupings are granted access to economic and administrative opportunities in return for their loyalty. The
influx of extractive rents has helped to consolidate the loyalty of co-opted interests and this has contributed
to political stability.
36. However, recent governance trends have been mixed: the evidence of stagnating and deteriorating
perceptions of governance in the last ten years are concerning, though not uncommon, for a resource
rich country. Mauritania’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) scores in public sector
management have improved, rising from 3.0 to 3.2 in 2008–15 and marginally surpassing the SSA average
of 3.0 in 2015. 33 However, according to the Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI), perceptions with
respect to all six dimensions of governance have stagnated or declined since 2006. 34 Mauritania performed
better than the regional average on many governance measures in 2006, but now lags behind LMIC
comparators in the region and the SSA average on all WGI dimensions. It ranks 112th among 168 countries
(29th percentile) on the 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index, and the 2016 Global
Competitiveness Index identifies corruption as the third most problematic factor for doing business in
Mauritania. 35
37. Underscoring these trends, Mauritania bears several of the hallmarks of a rentier economy. The
resource revenue surge and the adoption of a state-driven development model appear to have facilitated
pervasive rent-seeking by a concentrated set of political and economic elites. Shortcomings in the
application of the progressive legal framework in procurement and greater public spending on large capital
investment projects have opened opportunities for well-connected interests to dominate lucrative state
procurement contracts. The reliance on public enterprises, as well as the military engineering corps, to
execute a proportion of public investments, together with the processes used by these institutions to contract

31 World Bank (2008), “Mauritania: Anti-Corruption Study,” Report 70747, Washington, DC: World Bank.
32 World Bank (2016), “Islamic Republic of Mauritania. Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) Update: From Short-Term
Rents to Sustainable Macroeconomic Growth and Trade-Led Development”, Washington, DC: World Bank.
33 CPIA Africa (database), available at: http://datatopics.worldbank.org/cpia/, Washington, DC: World Bank.
34 WGI database, available at: http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/index.aspx#home, Washington, DC: World Bank.
35      CPI       (Corruption        Perceptions        Index)     database,       Transparency     International, London,
http://www.transparency.org/research/cpi/overview; GCI (Global Competitiveness Index) database, World Economic Forum,
Geneva, http://reports.weforum.org/global-competitiveness-report-2015-2016/.

                                                           13
with the private sector, which are often in contravention of the law, add to perceptions of capture. The
Government is trying to strengthen oversight in the parastatal sector, but there are signs that at least some
profit-making public enterprises may have been unduly influenced to use their cash reserves to finance
public projects or participate in weaker ventures to benefit specific groups. 36 This is especially problematic
given the large share of subsidies and other budget transfers allocated to public enterprises. For example,
the progressive expansion of the state iron ore company’s engagement beyond its core business appears to
have resulted in the sub-ordination of quality and cost considerations to political motives linked to the
protection of privileged interests. Despite continued access to cheap credit for investment, the national iron
ore company’s (Société Nationale Industrielle et Minière, SNIM) production and financial output have not
improved, yet the company has incurred a number of liabilities and provided capital for national
investments, including the construction of the new airport. Furthermore, until recently, up to thirty percent
of government expenditure is classified as ‘other’, opening opportunities for opaque and discretionary
spending and raising the risk of misallocation or misappropriation by private interests. 37 Finally, as
indicated in the preceding section on Growth, the functioning of key product markets (including in rice
importation, fisheries, construction, hotels and credit provision by banks) appears to be heavily influenced
by oligopolistic structures.
38. Patronage systems in the public administration continue to distort incentive structures and
influence public resource allocation and service delivery capabilities. The public administration is still
the largest formal employer. 38 The Government recently committed to improving the management of the
wage bill through ghost worker controls, the introduction of biometric registration and improvements in
human resource management systems. However, public office remains heavily and directly influenced by
special interests. 39 Merit-based recruitment of senior administrators and performance-based management
have not become institutionalized and a rent-seeking logic continues to permeate across the layers of the
administration, skewing policies and limiting accountability for service provision.
39. In a new era of low commodity prices and limited fiscal space, the Government will face increasing
pressure to optimize public spending and reduce the distortionary effects of the rentier economy. The
political stakes for transforming the governance landscape in Mauritania are high, yet empirical evidence
indicates that the costs of maintaining a rentier-based economy on job creation, private sector development,
inclusive growth and social cohesion are equally significant and risk undermining the Government’s
development objectives. Given the cross-cutting nature of governance, all of the priority constraints
analyzed in the next section of this SCD incorporate an assessment of relevant governance and institutional
challenges, including those related to revenue generation, public service delivery, decentralization and
citizen engagement. In addition to these, the limited transparency in public expenditure is identified as a
stand-alone priority constraint area given its significance in creating the conditions for rent-seeking.

IV. FRAGILITY: Underlying fragility stresses associated with Mauritania’s delicate and complex social
fabric and the environmental challenges of an encroaching coastline and an expanding desert risk
undermining development gains made to date.



36 World Bank (2016), “Islamic Republic of Mauritania. Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) Update: From Short-Term
Rents to Sustainable Macroeconomic Growth and Trade-Led Development”, Washington, DC: World Bank.
37 World Bank (2016), “Public Expenditure Review of Mauritania, Surfing the Wave: Public Spending During the Commodity

Super-Cycle and Beyond”, Washington, DC: World Bank.
38 Official statistics indicate the public wage bill is broadly in line with the region, at an average of 39.7 percent of recurrent

spending in 2009–15. However, spending on wages represents 48.2 percent of tax receipts and is high relative to the convergence
criteria of the West African Economic and Monetary Union, at 35.0 percent of tax revenue. The actual wage bill in 2015 was likely
to have been much higher than the budgeted amount because nonpermanent staff and parastatal staff were not included in the
official data.
39 CPIA Africa (database), World Bank, Washington, DC, http://datatopics.worldbank.org/cpia/.



                                                               14
Environmental Fragility

40. In a nation that depends so heavily on its natural resource endowments, the impact of
environmental degradation and climate change on economic development and on the livelihoods of
the poor could be catastrophic. Mauritania is caught between an expanding desert and an eroding
coastline. The livelihoods and food security of most of the poor, who rely on livestock-rearing and
agriculture, are jeopardized by encroaching desertification, rising temperatures, the increasing scarcity of
water and flash flooding, coupled with the greater regularity and intensity of drought, and the erosion of
soil and arable land quality. 40 The conflict between pastoralists and farmers including in oasis zones, over
diminishing natural resources threatens social stability and economic empowerment in rural areas. 41 Rising
seawater temperatures, ocean acidification, and biological overexploitation are depleting valuable fish
stocks and depriving coastal populations of vital sources of nutrition and revenue. Coastal urban cities,
including the two largest cities, Nouadibhou and Nouakchott, also face substantial environmental risks.
Coastal erosion, flooding, the salinization of underground water and the rising frequency of heat waves are
likely to present significant challenges for the housing and revenue-generating activities of urban dwellers.
Given their cross-cutting and issue-specific nature, environmental and climate change constraints are
integrated into the analysis of the principal constraint areas.

Social Fragility

41. Social cohesion in Mauritania is precarious and risks derailing economic and social progress. The
difficulties involved in cultivating a strong shared national identity are deeply rooted in ethno-racial
divisions, sociopolitical tensions, historical grievances over discriminatory state practices, and the slow
pace of integration of marginalized groups excluded from social and economic opportunity. 42 Mauritanian
society is constructed around a complex and hierarchical system, made up principally of white Moors, black
Moors or Haratine, and Black Africans and in which ethnicity, familial clans, and tribes are intertwined.
Social stratification creates tensions and resentment between and within ethnic groups due to the delineation
of higher and lower social classes. This is often exacerbated by perceived widening inequalities and unfair
treatment.
42. The Government has undertaken concerted efforts to harness the richness of the country’s ethnic
and cultural diversity and break away from the historical legacy of slavery and ethnic stratification,
but powerful societal divisions remain. Government efforts have included a presidential
acknowledgement of the legitimacy of the grievances felt by black Africans in the wake of the events in the
late 1980’s, constitutional amendments passed in 2012 that affirmed the multiethnic character of the state,
criminalized slavery and prohibited military coups, the creation of a new anti-slavery law in 2015, together
with the establishment of the Tadamoun 43 to deal with the “scars of slavery”. Yet, the legacy of slavery
and ethnic discrimination continues to fuel grievances. Though many former Haratine and Afro-
Mauritanian slaves have been freed and have attempted to assimilate into society, the country has attracted
international attention for reports of their ongoing cultural enslavement. 44

40 Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) Under The United Nations Framework Convention On climate change

(UNFCCC), Islamic Republic of Mauritania, 2015
41 The erosion of traditional institutions of collective management, the expansion in desertification, and the growing demand for

meat and milk from cities has led many oasis farmers to convert to pastoralism and seek and convert new lands. This has aggravated
conflict in rural areas between pastoralists and oasis farmers.
42 These difficulties were highlighted in the National Consultations on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, United Nations

Development Programme and Ministry of Economic Affairs and Development, Nouakchott, July 2013, and in the Dialogue
National Inclusif (comprehensive national dialogue), Nouakchott, September 29–October 18, 2016.
43 Program for the Prevention of Conflicts and the Consolidation of Social Cohesion
44    Global Slavery Index (database), Walk Free Foundation, Broadway Nedlands, Western Australia,
http://www.globalslaveryindex.org/.

                                                               15
43. Social fragmentation is further reinforced by several other drivers. The justice system perpetuates
social inequalities and cultivates divisions and tensions. 45 Informal social norms permeate the formal
system, creating the enabling conditions for corruption, the infiltration of informal, and often
discriminatory, customary forms of dispute settlement, and the politicization of the judiciary. At the same
time, Mauritania has experienced a fundamental social restructuring, with a massive shift from nomadic to
sedentary lifestyles. 46 Rapid urbanization has weakened the traditional nomadic and rural mechanisms of
social regulation without creating adequate economic opportunities or social mixing. Urban youth represent
a particularly fragile population segment. 47 Evidence of an increase in youth radicalization in the peripheries
of cities is emerging. From a governance perspective, the freedom and efficacy of political participation led
by a growing corpus of civil society organizations have dramatically improved, but the penetration of a
privileged elite in the organs of the modern state has slowed progress in reducing social inequalities and
created diffuse resentment over sentiments of economic and political exclusion. A lack of resources, limited
local government discretion and the influence of traditional authorities over local government have not only
slowed the decentralization process but also limited the extent to which it operates as an effective channel
for improved citizen engagement and inclusive participation and service delivery.
44. Mauritania has been a bulwark against regional instability, but, in an unstable region, the
spillover risk of transnational stressors is high. Mauritania shares a long border with Algeria and Mali
and suffered numerous attacks from Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb in 2005–11, shutting down a small,
but promising desert tourism industry. The Government has taken a hard line against terrorism and has been
able to reduce the incidence of terrorism on its territory and maintain political stability in an otherwise
volatile region. Yet, the continued rebellion in Mali has had many negative spillovers, including large
numbers of refugees, trade disruptions, and illegal trafficking.
45. Based on the above analysis and the Government’s own recognition of the importance of reinforcing
national identity as a basis for building a stronger state-society relationship, the weak social contract
represents a priority cross-cutting sustainability constraint to development in Mauritania.

     D. ANALYSIS OF PRIORITY CONSTRAINTS AND IDENTIFICATION OF SOLUTIONS

I. SUSTAINING AND ACCELERATING INCLUSIVE GROWTH: Reaping the benefits of Mauritania’s
natural endowments and building the foundations for structural transformation.

1.1. Addressing Weak Management of Extractives

46. Despite the abundance of mineral resources, water scarcity and infrastructure deficits limit the
potential growth contribution of the extractive sector over the next 15 years and highlight the delicate
trade-offs between optimizing extraction and ensuring social and environmental sustainability.
Prospective mining investors are constrained by difficult access to electricity, water and transport, while
downstream industrial processing infrastructure is lacking. Few mineral deposits will be competitive in the
absence of a strategic location near existing infrastructure. Water scarcity is particularly problematic.
Existing exploitations are depleting water tables and putting national freshwater resources at risk. Without
a well-defined land development plan, the country will face challenges in calibrating mining activity with
social and ecological sustainability to maintain optimal levels of extraction over the long haul.
47. The upstream governance of the extractive sector creates obstacles to attracting foreign
investment, while policy and institutional weaknesses in revenue mobilization undermine the
sustainability of returns to the country’s natural resource wealth. During the 2000s, reputable investors

45 Rao, Sumedh, 2014, “Conflict Analysis of Mauritania,” GSDRC, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K.
46 Today, only two percent of the population is nomadic, compared with 75 percent in 1960: EPCV, 2014.
47 Boukhars, Anouar, 2016, “Mauritania’s Precarious Stability and Islamist Undercurrent,” February 11, Carnegie Endowment for

International Peace, Washington, DC.
                                                            16
were successfully attracted to the country, and the management of the mineral cadaster was considered
international best practice. Yet, as international commodity prices reached an all-time high, sectoral
management became more restrictive. The mineral cadaster system has since regressed in technical and
administrative reliability and in the loss of autonomy to political decision makers. This has jeopardized the
principles of a level playing field and the rules-based award of licenses. The domination and preferential
treatment of the two major state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the sector 48, together with the promotion of
well-connected national suppliers and subcontractors in the absence of competitive processes, have
contributed to rent seeking and short-term deal making that are detrimental to the development of the
industry. Institutional capacity limitations also influence effective, sustainable management, creating
challenges for the negotiation of production-sharing contracts in the emerging oil and gas sector. In terms
of revenue mobilization, various comparative financial models show that the effective tax rate of about 30
percent of mining profits ranks among the lowest on the continent. Notwithstanding recent government
efforts with respect to revenue mobilization, the absence of a unified tax code for mining operations,
together with coordination and capacity challenges in tax recovery, has led to the loss of potential tax
revenue.
48. The lack of fiscal rules on the management of extractive revenues and inefficiency in the public
investment and public financial management systems hamper the effective use of extractive rents
Mauritania created a sovereign wealth fund, ‘the National Oil Fund’ 49, to collect government revenue from
the Chinguetti operation. While the Fund is depleted and now largely obsolete, in principle, it constitutes a
good mechanism for fiscal stabilization under a proper set of fiscal rules 50. However, several governance
issues hindered the proper functioning of the Fund, including the absence of audits, the lack of clear rules
governing the use of resources and weak criteria for the selection of projects, all of which limited the utility
and effective management of the Fund.
49. Moving forward, the Government will need to focus on harnessing recent oil and gas discoveries
and seizing the immediate and politically feasible opportunities to optimize extractive revenue
generation. At the same time, efforts are needed to lay the foundation for more costly, lengthy, or
politically sensitive solutions to the sustainable exploitation of natural resources and the effective
management of extractive rents. Urgent efforts are needed to build capacity and ensure expertise in the
hydrocarbon sector, given the impending gas negotiations, the complexity of gas development, and the
irreversibility of the decisions to be made. In the short term, the introduction of a uniform fiscal regime
with caps on individual deals and tax exemptions and capacity-building in tax administration would enable
higher rates of tax collection. The ongoing audit of the National Oil Fund also provides an opportunity to
lay the groundwork for a fiscal rule to manage natural resource revenue. More broadly, a specific program
of policy and institutional changes will need to be introduced to ensure optimal fiscal outcomes, drawing
upon ongoing analytical work. Over the medium term, the Government could focus on (i) the reintroduction
of independent, rules-based license management by an autonomous mineral cadaster management agency;
(ii) improved planning and incentives for optimized development of a competitive industry through a
reconsideration of the role and the promotion of the two principle SOEs – the SNIM and SMPH; (iii) the
identification of investment corridors to promote concerted, long-term planning and investment in energy
provision, transport solutions, and water supply; (iv) the completion of a national territorial development
plan and environmental evaluation studies for the mining and agro-pastoral sectors; and (5) training for the
development of skilled professionals, subcontractors, and suppliers.




48 Société Nationale Industrielle et Minière (SNIM) and Société Mauritanienne des Hydrocarbures (SMPH)
49 Fonds National des Revenus des Hydrocarbures (FNRH)
50 Cf. Dessus and Varoudakis (2013).

                                                            17
1.2. Harnessing the Potential of Livestock and Fisheries in the Face of climate change

a) Fisheries

50. Mauritania has some of the richest fish resources in the world, yet the country has failed to reap
the economic and employment benefits associated with onshore value-added processing. The country’s
marine riches have attracted fleets from around the world. The international fishing agreements of 2015
will generate estimated annual revenues of €59 million for the Government. This is substantial, but the
Government misses out on the benefits of much of the value added generation and job creation potential in
the sector. Only 10 percent of the total industrial catch is off-loaded for processing, and 55,000 people are
employed in the sector. A special economic zone focused on fish processing has been established in
Nouadhibou, attracting national and foreign investors, but the dominant products are frozen octopus and
fishmeal, which have low value added. Onshore employment is thus modest, and offloading from foreign
vessels is limited.
51. Pressure on the sustainability of the country’s fish resources is likely to rise over the medium
term. Though fish resources have been better managed in Mauritania than in Senegal, some species are
overexploited or on the verge thereof, notably, higher-value species, such as octopus and small pelagic
(sardines and mackerel) used for fishmeal. 51 Global warming may be affecting resources, while the
incentives for overfishing will intensify as global fish stocks dwindle. The value of the sector in 2013 was
estimated at roughly US$10 billion, though the cost of the annual depletion of fish stocks is estimated at a
rate of US$390 million.
52. Opportunities for expanding and diversifying the fish export base are clouded by poor
postharvest handling of catches, the concentration of market outlets and commodities, and the
shortcomings of the state export promotion agency. The dilapidated state and poor management of
national semi-industrial coastal and artisanal fleets, together with illegal fishing and inadequacies in post-
harvest handling and export facilities have weakened the prospects for the exportation of high value-added
fresh fish products. The dramatic expansion in frozen fishmeal exports for animal consumption occurred as
a result of the dominant interventions of certain elite interests and high commodity prices. But it poses a
serious threat to the sustainability of fish stocks, limits the availability of raw material for new value-added
fish processors and creates few jobs or economic benefits. The Government’s commitment to phasing out
fishmeal exports represents a critical step in the right direction. The business environment for foreign
investment in processing has improved through the launch of the Free Zone and the Fisheries Transparency
Initiative (FITI), however the institutional capacity to carry out the reforms needs to be enhanced, while the
lack of broader investment climate reforms is an impediment. Fish export outlets are heavily concentrated.
The European Union (EU) and Japan capture 85 percent of the export value in frozen fish products. The
role of the state agency for commercial trade in fish and for promoting frozen fish exports, the SMCP 52 has
been questioned. The SMCP’s engagement in taxation and repatriation of currency overlaps with the
functions of the Customs Authority and Central Bank. As an export promotion agency, the agency has also
demonstrated limited proactivity in pursuing alternative markets in Africa and Asia or supporting exporters.
53. Mauritania stands out in the region for the Government’s commitment to transparent,
sustainable fish resource management. Enhancing institutional capacity, the effective implementation of
the FITI, and the radical shift to the fisheries management quotas introduced in 2015 are critical to the
management of depleting fish stocks. Particular efforts are needed to deploy monitoring capacities to verify
compliance with the new quotas. To harness the sector’s potential for job creation and inclusive growth,
the Government should boost the capacity for processing value added products for human consumption by

51 Technical assessments were conducted by the Institut Mauritanien de Recherches Océanographiques et des Pêches (Mauritanian

Institute for Oceanographic Research and Fisheries) in 2006 and the Fisheries Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in 2010.
52 Société Mauritanienne de Commercialisation de Poissons (SMCP)

                                                             18
pursuing investment climate reforms and promoting diversification in processing among fishmeal
producers. Opportunities exist for diversification in the export base to prevent the overexploitation of fish
stocks and to optimize revenue. This will require developing alternative export outlets (air and land), new
export destinations in Africa for existing exports in small pelagic (but for human consumption), investment
markets for species that are not overexploited, a modernized national fleet, public-private partnerships in
the development of port facilities, enhanced postharvest handling and export facilities, and a review of the
role of the state fish commercialization agency in promoting exports.

b) Livestock

54. Livestock rearing occurs principally in the poorest regions with predominantly poor populations
engaged in all of the three main livestock systems operating in the country. Extensive transhumance-
based pastoralism represents the dominant system and is concentrated in the southeast. Transhumant
herders tend to be poor and many do not own the entirety of their herds. Though the transhumant system
has proven resilient to harsh climatic conditions, the effects of climate change have a deleterious impact on
the availability of water points, forcing transhumant herders across the border and into the southern
agricultural areas. Traditional sedentary agro-pastoral systems exist around the Senegal River valley. In
these areas, livestock is closely linked with rain-fed and irrigated agriculture where fodder production is
most economical and poor pastoralists engage in mixed low productivity agro-pastoral practices. Small
ruminant and poultry keeping systems are also prevalent amongst poor rural populations in these areas,
with livestock considered as a principal savings mechanism. Women play an important role in animal
rearing at the household level (milk collection and poultry). Modern sedentary systems, which tend to be
dominated by wealthy elites, are only nascent in Mauritania. The livestock sector is highly redistributive,
with an estimated 80 percent of the value-added captured by primary producers.
55. Although international and domestic demand for livestock products has grown, domestic
transformation remains below potential in all sub-sectors and the potential for export diversification
outside the traditional regional market has yet to be tapped. Meat production has so far been exclusively
destined for the national market and informal transhumance-based live animal exports for traditional
neighboring regional markets. Exports of livestock are handicapped by the quality of the animals and meat
available on the local market, the absence of timely and reliable information on prices and demand in the
import countries, the lack of professionalism of the exporters, who operate mainly in the informal sector,
and the many “informal taxes” traders must pay along their route. Poor zoo-sanitary and public health
safeguards preclude access to the dynamic and lucrative frozen and fresh meat markets in MENA. The local
transformation of hides and skins is limited and more than 80 percent are informally exported with no
significant value-added in Mauritania. The export of hides and skins is hindered by the limited
competitiveness of local tanneries, the absence of modem slaughtering processes and the poor conditions
of the skins offered for sale. Import substitution of milk and milk products is constrained by low supply,
while efforts to export camel milk and camel cheese have interesting prospects in export niche markets but
are limited by strict zoo-sanitary regulations prevailing in the EU market.
56. Despite its significance, the livestock sector has been neglected by government spending and
policy. In 2014, less than five percent of the budget of the then Ministry of Rural Development was
allocated to the sector, and the last livestock census dates to colonial times. The Government has yet to
adopt a detailed strategic plan for the sector. The limited de-concentration of extension and support services,
together with the lack of enforcement of animal health and sanitary policies and poor input controls, have
had a significant impact on livestock productivity. The litany of failed and unproductive private sector
endeavors (notably in tanneries) reflects a weak business environment for agro-processing, the prevalence
of uncompetitive practices and particular difficulties in accessing credit. The dedicated credit organization
Union Nationale des Coopératives d’Epargne et de Crédit pour l’Elevage (the National Union of Livestock
Savings and Loan Associations), created in 2008 to address private sector funding constraints, has never
entered into operation, although the Government is currently reviewing credit mechanisms in the sector.
                                                      19
57. The Government recognizes that, to harness the potential in the livestock sector, more substantive
engagement in sectoral management is needed. In the short term, there is a pressing need to close the
knowledge gap on how the sector operates and to chart a course for strategically supporting sectoral
development. The creation of the Ministry of Livestock in 2014 and plans for a livestock census are pivotal
first steps. The Census ought to be accompanied by an in-depth assessment of key value chains and a more
detailed identification of the bottlenecks to productivity and export diversification. The ongoing elaboration
of a national livestock strategic plan would need to involve the engagement of all stakeholders and
incorporate a market- and private sector–driven export development stance. Budget allocations befitting
the sector’s weight in the economy will also be critical in facilitating the implementation of the policy.
58. Targeted efforts to enhance the resilience of livestock and agro-sylvo-pastoral producers in the
face of climate change and to promote domestic processing and export diversification will need to be
prioritized. Addressing the environmental sustainability of the transhumance-based system will require
medium-term investments in pastoral hydraulics and research into genetic breeding modifications, the
protection of transhumance corridors, and the promotion of fodder crops for midseason and drought. The
authorities could also strengthen the early drought warning and response system for livestock. Enhancing
the complementarity of mixed agro-pastoral sedentary systems will require the introduction of climate smart
agriculture practices and improved land management. To develop a competitive and diversified export base,
the promotion of animal product-processing activities, including animal feed, meat, milk, hide and skins,
and gelatin, together with targeted measures to improve the business environment in the sector, will be
critical.

1.3. Promoting Productive and Inclusive Cities for Longer-Term Structural Transformation

59. Mauritania has yet to reap the economic productivity and poverty reduction gains associated with
agglomeration economies. The urbanization rate of 60 percent is well above the SSA average of 37 percent
and has been driven mainly by push factors. Rural and nomadic populations have been migrating to cities
as an adaptation strategy to cope with droughts and desertification. Urbanization tends to stimulate
agglomeration economies and is associated with higher per capita incomes and poverty reduction. However,
in Mauritania, periods of rapid per capita income growth seem to coincide with slow increases in urban
populations, while periods of quasi-economic stagnation or slight regression are associated with rapid
urbanization.
60. The “leapfrog” urbanization pattern in Nouakchott raises the costs of the provision of service
infrastructure and creates structural impediments to the private sector and to integrated labor
markets. 53 Nouakchott has a much flatter and lower population density gradient than other African capital
cities. The urbanization pattern is characterized by discontinuous or “leapfrog” development, resulting in
voids between developed land parcels and sprawling, low-density settlements. This hinders economies of
scale and raises appreciably the cost of providing basic network services, such as sewerage, drainage, water,
waste collection and electricity. It also impedes mobility, resulting in long, costly travel distances between
jobs and services. The paucity of personal automobile ownership and public transport has led to fragmented,
inefficient labor markets whereby supply and demand are met locally rather than within an integrated urban
area, which likewise prevents the emergence of large-scale firms and traps Nouakchott in a low level
development trajectory.




53 The absence of data precludes a comprehensive analysis of all cities. The SCD focuses on Nouakchott, which hosts 45 percent

of urban dwellers and 30 percent of the total population.
                                                             20
Figure 3- Mauritania's Urbanization Dynamics

 Urbanization in Mauritania is mainly a result of push                                                 The dominant urbanization pattern is of low-density,
 factors linked to economic slowdowns rather than                                                      discontinuous settlements, with Nouakchott having one
 economic growth                                                                                       of the highest degrees of leapfrog development in
                                                                                                       Africa
                              80            Urbanization rate vs gdp per capita                        0.6   Share of "leapfrog" development in all new
                                                                                                                            development
                              70                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                 1990-2000
  Urban population share, %




                              60                                                                                 2000-2010
                                                                                                       0.4
                              50
                                                                                                       0.3
                              40
                                                                                                       0.2
                              30
                                                                                                       0.1
                              20

                              10                                                                        0




                                                                                                                  Lusaka



                                                                                                                    Kigali
                                                                                                                 Conakry
                                                                                                                    Addis

                                                                                                                    Abuja




                                                                                                                 Kampala
                                                                                                                Windhoek




                                                                                                                    Lagos

                                                                                                                  Nairobi



                                                                                                              Nouakchott
                                                                                                                   Touba
                                                                                                                    Dakar
                                                                                                             Ouagadougou
                                                                                                                   Sukuta




                                                                                                                    Kano
                                                                                                                Bulawayo




                                                                                                                    Accra
                                                                                                                  Niamey




                                                                                                                    Nyala
                                                                                                                  Maputo
                                                                                                                 Bamako
                               0
                                   5.5         6           6.5          7           7.5           8
                                             Log of per capita gdp (2010 constant US$)
                                         Mauritania, 1960 - 2014             All countries 2013
Sources: WDI, World Bank staff calculations based on Baruah 2015.

61. Poor urban planning, institutional coordination failures, and policy shortcomings in land and
access to finance have accentuated urbanization challenges. Efforts to develop comprehensive city
master plans have been outpaced by the speed of urbanization. Though a more refined analysis is warranted,
it appears that the Government’s equity-driven programs to subsidize land distribution may have fueled
land speculation. Subsidized landholders have no incentive to develop their plots, but hold on to them to
sell later at higher prices. The lack of efficient, affordable financing precludes private sector developers
from constructing higher-density, multifamily lodgings close to activity centers. City-based private sector
operators are burdened by the high cost and limited availability of reliable services. Decentralization has
conferred extensive responsibilities on urban municipalities for urban management; yet capacity and fiscal
resources remain limited. More broadly the lack of effective coordination within and between the structures
charged with overseeing urban development create challenges for the development of individual cities,
while government efforts to strategically manage national territorial development have yet to be analyzed.
62. Environmental degradation and climate change threaten the sustainability of coastal cities. The
two main coastal cities, Nouadhibou and Nouakchott, are exposed to substantial risks of inundation and
submersion. In the short term, this will affect population settlements, groundwater and aquatic resources,
and infrastructure. In the medium term, the existence of the coastal cities could be jeopardized. The
authorities are acutely aware of the challenges and have developed a strategic management plan for the
coastline, investing in significant sand dune fixation. However, an in-depth assessment of implementation
has yet to be carried out and implementation coordination challenges, particularly to enforce controls
against human-induced sand dune erosion, persist.
63. Leveraging rapid urbanization to transform cities into poles of inclusive economic growth and
diversification is a long-term endeavor, requiring strategic planning. A panoply of reforms will be
needed to enhance urban planning, promote urban development, strengthen coordination between central
and decentralized institutions, improve the business environment and develop coping strategies to manage
the considerable environmental risks. Further analysis of the economic growth potential of cities, the spatial
dimensions of strategic territorial development (including the absorptive potential of secondary cities) and
a prospective modeling of specific cities will be needed.

II. PROMOTING EQUITY: Tackling the structural barriers that restrict the poor from building their
financial, human capital and productive assets
                                                                                                  21
2.1. Addressing High Food Prices in Nouakchott

64. Stubbornly high domestic prices of cereal imports in Nouakchott place heavy burdens on poor
urban consumers and suggest a lack of competitiveness, especially in rice. The domestic prices of wheat
and rice in Nouakchott are well above international prices. In 2004–16, the average price of wheat and
wheat flour in Nouakchott were, respectively, 73 percent and 130 percent higher than world prices, while
the gap in rice averaged 92 percent and 134 percent. Price transmission is asymmetric: increases in
international prices are transmitted more quickly than decreases to domestic prices. The difference between
domestic and world prices is not unusual in West Africa and is often attributed to the cost of transport and
insurance, distributor margins, customs duties, and handling charges. An analysis of the cost structure of
imported wheat and rice in Nouakchott in 2014 reveals that over half the retail price can be attributed to
gross distributor margins, while tariffs, taxes, handling, and transport costs only play a minor role. Though
the food import regime appears liberal and transparent, that domestic prices are influenced by importer
profit margins suggests that, in practice, the sector is dominated by a concentration of interests and
influenced by uncompetitive practices.
Figure 4- Mauritania's Food Price Dynamics

 Domestic prices of wheat and rice in Nouakchott are well above the level of international prices
                   Domestic prices of wheat and wheat flour and world                                                                                                                           Domestic and world rice prices (MRO / kg)
    200                         wheat prices (MRO / kg)                                                                                                                                   300

    150
                                                                                                                                                                                          200

    100

                                                                                                                                                                                          100
     50


      0                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-04



                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-06



                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-08



                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-10



                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-12



                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-03



                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-05



                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-07



                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-09



                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-11



                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-13



                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-03



                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-05



                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-07



                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-09



                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-11



                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-13



                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-15
                            May-05



                                                       May-07



                                                                                  May-09



                                                                                                             May-11



                                                                                                                                        May-13



                                                                                                                                                                   May-15
                   Sep-04



                                              Sep-06



                                                                         Sep-08



                                                                                                    Sep-10



                                                                                                                               Sep-12



                                                                                                                                                          Sep-14
          Jan-04



                                     Jan-06



                                                                Jan-08



                                                                                           Jan-10



                                                                                                                      Jan-12



                                                                                                                                                 Jan-14



                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-16




                                                                                         Local milled rice (NKC)                                                                                                           Imported broken rice (NKC)
            Wheat grain - Nouakchott               Wheat flour - Nouakchott
            Wheat grain - US (Gulf)                                                      Thai A1 Super
Sources: Fews Net and ONS for domestic prices; FAO for international prices; OANDA for USD / MRO exchange rate.

65. The Government sought to raise domestic rice and wheat production to cut dependency on food
imports, but the substitutability of domestic products is limited by low quality. Government input
subsidies and price support programs resulted in productivity and production improvements in rice. Yet,
rice imports also rose sharply over the same period, and the prices of local and imported rice increased in
Nouakchott by 50 percent and 11 percent, respectively, in 2014–16. Although domestic rice production can
potentially compete with imported rice, local consumers consider domestic rice inferior, and this has kept
the demand for imported rice high. 54
66. Tackling high food prices in Nouakchott to benefit the urban poor will require ensuring an
effective trade-off between improving the substitutability of domestic rice production and enhancing
the competitiveness of the rice importation market. High food prices negatively impact upon the
country’s poverty reduction objectives and there is a strong case for further investigating and addressing
the indications of market domination and un-competitive practices that appear to influence price levels. At
the same time, if the quality of domestic production is improved, the Government’s import substitutability
program could reduce the country’s food import dependency creating a buffer against food insecurity when
world food prices are high. This would require short-term efforts to support producers in quality enhancing
initiatives across the value chain and longer-term efforts to facilitate the pro-poor extension of small

54 On the basis of estimates prepared for the SCD, the cost price of one kilogram of milled rice in Nouakchott ranged between UM

73 and UM 97, which was below the duty paid price of imported rice in 2014.
                                                                                                                                                                                     22
irrigation in the Senegal River valley. Lowering imported food prices and simultaneously investing in
improving the substitutability of domestic food products could be counter-productive. Trade-offs would
need to be made and the economic efficiency of investing in water-intensive rice production in a water-
scarce country would need to be taken into account.

2.2. Promoting the Equitable Distribution of Land in the Senegal River Valley

67. It appears that few poor small-scale producers hold formal land tenure rights in the Senegal River
valley, while most rely on informal customary rights. The land law of 1983 created a legal framework
for conferring formal individual and collective land rights. Its implementation enabled cooperatives of
small-scale producers, including women and Haratine farmers, to gain access to irrigated land in Brakna,
Guidimaka, and Trarza. However, few formal titles appear to have been issued. 55 The length and complexity
of the registration process have favored wealthier, large-scale producers, urban elites, and foreign
agricultural investors. The majority of small-scale, low-income producers rely on prevailing, though
formally abolished, customary land management systems, which provide for the flexible transfer of land
among different users through a variety of leasehold and usufruct arrangements. Certain groups, notably
women, transhumant pastoralists, and former Afro-Mauritanian landowners exiled in 1989 face difficulties
accessing land under both systems.

68. Weaknesses in the design of Mauritania’s land policies have ultimately resulted in limited take
up and the de facto continuation of a dual system that is the source of both tenure insecurity for land
users and investors and social tensions. Though customary land rights were formally abolished by the
statutory law, they continue to be upheld under Islamic law. Of the total land area, an estimated 85 percent
is held under customary land tenure by 90 percent of the population. 56 In addition, the availability of an
option to convert collective rights into individual rights has created a disincentive for members of
cooperatives to invest in collective land, while the influence of customary norms may have dissuaded many
from seeking to register individual rights. The lack of clarity in the legal framework for titling and large-
scale investments is a source of social tensions and tenure insecurity among local communities and investors
and thus affects the business environment.

69. Institutional capacity limitations and the influence of customary norms have created
opportunities for land capture and generated citizen mistrust in the formal land registration
processes. The lack of (i) reliable cadastral surveys, (ii) mapping and databases of rural land, (iii) an up-
to-date land registry, (iv) reliable record-keeping and (v) well-trained personnel constitute serious
impediments to the effective implementation and enforcement of the land law and the delivery of quality
land administration service. These weaknesses have also fostered patrimonial practices and corruption in
the registration of land interests, enabling privileged urban elite interests to capture valuable land resources
(often also co-opting traditional leaders). Local conflict resolution and judicial processes are compromised
by weak capacity and by the influence of traditional cultural leaders, perpetuating the marginalization of
certain groups, particularly women.
70. There is widespread acknowledgement of the shortcomings in the existing dual system of land
rights and the weak land administration apparatus and the Government has committed to an
ambitious process for reforming the land policy framework. The Government has also engaged in the
development of a statutory framework for the protection of movable and real property rights tenure (“droits
réels”) 57. Improving the distribution of land in the Senegal River valley will need to be a key focus of the
strategic vision for land management in Mauritania and should draw upon a thorough analysis of the

55 Except for the land cadaster in Rosso, there are no reliable statistics on land titling in the Senegal River valley.
56 World Bank (2014), “Land Governance Framework Report,” World Bank, Washington, DC.
57 République Islamique de Mauritanie 2015: Termes de Référence pour l’Elaboration d’un Code des Droits Réels en Mauritanie.

Ministère de la Justice ; Ministère des Affaires Economiques et du Développement ; Ministères des Affaires Economiques.
                                                            23
prevailing interests, practices and land distribution arrangements in the region. The strategic vision will
need to incorporate: (i) the recognition, delimitation and formalization of the multitude of ownership and
land use rights, including cultural rights; (ii) shared land and water use planning and participatory natural
resource management, including the promotion of multi-stakeholder land agreements and conventions; (iii)
mechanisms to strengthen communal land management institutions to facilitate the co-existence of
pastoralists and agricultural producers. Improving the land conflict resolution processes also represents a
key priority.

2.3. Improving Equitable Access to Social Services to Promote Human Capital Development

71. Regressive public spending in health, education and social assistance results in inequitable access
to services and reinforces the low human capital base of the poor in Mauritania. Despite efforts to
increase public spending on social services in recent years, spending is low compared with economically
similar countries and it is not equitably distributed. In education, though spending on primary education is
comparatively high, the poorest children receive the least benefit from overall education spending. Two
thirds of children from the poorest quintile are not in schools and those who are enrolled are almost four
times less likely to complete primary education than those from the richest quintile. Yet 66 percent of
students who completed primary and lower secondary benefited from 51 percent of public resources in the
sector, while the 17 percent of students who completed upper secondary benefited from 49 percent of
education expenditures. The geographic distribution of education resources is also biased towards wealthier
regions, with per-student expenditure in poor rural regions considerably below the national average. In
health, there is evidence of geographic distortions in spending that disadvantage regions characterized by
high poverty. Recent analysis also indicates that social safety net subsidies in the food and energy sectors
have failed to reach the poorest segments of the population. While spending on water, sanitation and
hygiene services is limited, further analysis into the distribution of spending on water and sanitation is
needed to better understand the significant gaps between rural and urban areas – an issue that is common
in many countries in the region.
72. Inefficiencies in public spending in social services, together with the shortage of qualified human
resources compound the challenges faced by the Government in delivering quality public services
that are targeted to poorer populations. Recurrent expenditures in education represent 85 percent of total
spending, leaving limited resources for critical inputs to improve learning outcomes. At the same time
teacher capacity is low, with only five percent of student teachers considered to be bilingual in a system
that introduced bilingualism almost two decades ago. Few teachers are actually teaching in schools, with
heavy concentrations in privileged urban centers. In health, the situation is strikingly similar. Front line
services that offer health care to three quarters of the population only receive one third of public health
resources, while half of the resources are allocated to tertiary services and central administration. And
medical expertise is also heavily concentrated in Nouakchott and regional health centers.
73. Sectoral governance challenges cut across the social sectors, reinforcing distortions in access to
services and limiting the impact of finite resource allocations on human development outcomes in
Mauritania. Institutional weaknesses in coordination and organization, together with limited statistical
capacity hamper effective evidence-based policy decisions in the respective ministries. The allocative
efficiency and service provision gains anticipated from the decentralization process have also yet to
materialize and local governments have insufficient resources and weak capacity to fulfill their mandates.
Informal institutions also play a critical role in undermining equitable access to services. The entrenched
system of patronage in the public administration limits the accountability of government workers and opens
opportunities for policy distortions. At the same time, social norms 58 create ongoing hurdles for certain
parts of society to take advantage of basis service provision.


58   For example, early marriage (even though prohibited, but still practiced) impedes girls from pursuing education or careers.
                                                                  24
Figure 5: Key Resource Constraints in Mauritania’s Social Sectors

 Financial resources devoted to social services (as                                      and they are regressively distributed, disadvantaging
 indicated in the education sector) fall below key                                       already vulnerable groups
 comparators
                      Education expenditure (% of GDP)                                                                 1200                                                             100
                                                                            5.6
                                                                  5.4




                                                                                                                                                                                              Coverage in % of age group
                                                                                          Per pupil spending in US $
                                                                                                                       1000                                                             80
                                                4.7      4.8
                               4.3    4.3                                                                              800
                      4
                                                                                                                                                                                        60
          3.3
                                                                                                                       600
                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                       400

                                                                                                                       200                                                              20

                                                                                                                         0                                                              0
     Mauritania     SSA        Mali   LMIC Cote d'Ivoire Togo   Burundi   Senegal                                                 Primary         Secondary             Tertiary
                                                                                                                                  Per-pubil spending                    Coverage
 Human resources are also insufficient (as demonstrated                                  …and are similarly regressively distributed across
 by the health sector)                                                                   regions in favor of bigger urban centers
     50                                                                                                                       Distribution of Health Workers by Region,2014
                          Physicians and nurses / midwives
                              (per 10,000 people), 2015                                                                                                                                  Gorgol
     40                                                                                                                                           Inchiri Tag. Tiris Z. Adrar               4%
                                                                                                                                                                              Guidi.
                  Physicians                                                                                                                        1%     2% 2%         3%          Hodh
                                                                                                                                                                               3%
     30                                                                                                                                                                              Gharbi
                  Nurses/midwives                                                                                                                                                     5%
                                                                                                      Nouakchott
     20                                                                                                  45%                                                                        Nouadhibou
                                                                                                                                                                       Brakna          5%
     10                                                                                                                                                                  6%

                                                                                                                                                     Hodh                 Trarza
                                                                                                                                                              Assaba       7%
      0                                                                                                                                             Chargui     8%
                                                                                                                                                      9%




Sources: WDI, WHO, Ministry of Health




74. Mauritania has made important strides in improving access to education, however these gains are
undermined by policy weaknesses in improving educational quality as reflected in low learning
outcomes. There appear to be difficulties in implementing the 1999 education reforms, which introduced
bilingualism and other structural changes. Low learning outcomes and falling literacy rates among young
children have become evident. The deteriorating quality of public primary education has created a crisis of
confidence. 59 The national education system is becoming fractured. Enrollments are rising more quickly in
private schools than public schools. Though private schools generally perform better than public schools in
terms of learning outcomes, the standards in the private market are heterogeneous and there are few quality
assurance mechanisms in place. At the other end of the spectrum, the parallel system of religious education
in the mahadras, captures a significant proportion of poor children who are left behind by the public
education system. These institutions provide little to no instruction in Math, Science or languages other
than Arabic. Government efforts to better control the mahadras and create bridges between traditional
Islamic and modern schools date back to 1959, yet with the exception of initiatives focused on secondary
and tertiary education, the public and traditional systems of education have evolved separately. Government
initiatives to target underprivileged zones and introduce public schools of excellence represent positive
steps towards creating a more equitable education system, yet targeting with respect to both initiatives
continues to pose challenges.


59Parents cite the low quality of public education as one of the principal reasons—after cultural considerations and distance—for
keeping their 6- to 11-year-old children out of school.
                                                                                    25
75. To ensure effective returns to education among the poor, the relevance of education to the labor
market needs to be strengthened. There are significant skills gaps in Mauritania, particularly in sectors
such as education, health and government. It is estimated that there are about 350,000 unemployed out-of-
school youth (15-25 years of age) without any employable skills and 65,000 additional school leavers each
year. Six percent of firms considered workers’ low education levels to be their number one problem, which
was an increase over 2006 and twice as high as the SSA average. 60 Despite a trebling in enrollments in
technical and vocational schools, skills acquisition is limited. Spending on tertiary education also showed
an upward trend, accounting for an average of one-fifth of total education spending in 2010–14. However,
the quality and relevance of higher education remains a challenge. While tracer studies of university
graduates are done only occasionally, job insertion rates among university graduates are low.

76. The Government has identified critical policy reforms to address the affordability of health care
services and to target reproductive and maternal health. About 44 percent of health care spending
involves direct payments by households, which is above the regional average. Vulnerable groups—mainly
poor households—are the most affected by the financial burden of health care: 1.5 percent of the population
is likely to fall into poverty because of catastrophic health spending (more than 160 people a day). Free
health care and subsidized programs (malaria and obstetrical care) are underfunded and inefficient. The
Government also developed the National Strategic Plan on Reproductive Health 2016–2020 to improve the
supply of priority reproductive health services and to advocate for these types of services. The
implementation of these policies and the targeting of services to poor and vulnerable populations constitute
key challenges. Certain socio-cultural norms, including the widespread but illegal practice of female genital
mutilation, negatively impact upon women’s health and undermine health policy reforms.
77. Good health and capacity to learn are underscored by access to potable water resources and
sanitation and hygiene services, together with wholesome nutrition. Acute deficits in access to water
and sanitation in rural areas and underprivileged urban areas reflect a combination of weaknesses in the
legal and policy framework and the limited promotion of private sector innovation. Social safety nets have
been structured around providing crisis responses in the form of food aid, with food transfers accounting
for 82 percent of total spending on social safety nets between 2008 and 2013. Yet international evidence
shows that long-term food subsidy and/or distribution programs may increase vulnerability by reducing the
incentive for the private sector to maintain functioning food markets. Social safety nets are fragmented and
poorly coordinated and school feeding and nutrition programs have received limited resources in recent
years. However, the Government’s National Social Protection Strategy, if effectively implemented, would
significantly improve the impact of social protection spending on the poor.
78. Access to energy, particularly in poor rural areas, also contributes to improvements in well-being
and human development. The absence of sterilization equipment and refrigeration for the preservation of
basic medicines, the lack of lighting to enable reading and other productive activities in the evening and the
inability to pump potable water all influence weak human development outcomes in rural areas. Mauritania
has made substantial progress in increasing generation capacity, with 20 percent solar and wind capacity in
the energy mix, 23 percent hydro-carbon imports and potential to export gas-based generation. However,
the rural energy access rate falls well below that of regional comparators, at only 4 percent. Access to rural
energy is hindered by the absence of a coherent rural access strategy and fragmented institutional
arrangements.

79. Moving forward, a number of ‘quick win’ solutions, if taken in the short term, could help to yield
important returns on investments in human capital down the line. Notwithstanding the finite fiscal
envelope, there is considerable scope for the Government to review the allocation of resources and the
efficiency of expenditures devoted to the education, health and water and sanitation sectors to better target

60IFC (International Finance Corporation) and World Bank (2014), “Mauritania: Country Profile 2014,” Enterprise Survey, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
                                                            26
poor populations and to take action on specific shortcomings in human development outcomes. In
education, this will require focusing on raising the quality of public schooling in the most underprivileged
zones, improving targeting mechanisms to give the poorest children opportunities to access scholarships
and public schools of excellence and creating effective channels between public schools and the religious
educative system. It will also involve reinforcing efforts to improve the relevance of the vocational
education and training system, by auditing public training and university institutions and better analyzing
labor market deficits. In health, the reallocation of resources to front line primary care and focusing
interventions on improving maternal and infant health are needed. Whilst in the water and sanitation sector,
further analysis is required to identify the opportunities for resource re-allocations. Concerted efforts will
also be needed to improve the quality of service provision by strengthening institutional and individual
capacity at both the central and decentralized levels and ensuring the effective management and control of
teaching and health personnel, in particular. While decentralization processes will take time to develop,
there are immediate gains to be made from harnessing the potential for citizen engagement in monitoring
service delivery provision, drawing from the wealth of innovative practices engaged in other countries,
80. Building Mauritania’s human capital base and ensuring equitable access to services will require
a multifaceted and holistic response over the medium to long term. At a strategic level, the heavy
emphasis on capital investments that has characterized Mauritania’s economic space will need to make way
for increased spending in social services. While improving the education system clearly represents a top
order priority, the adoption of a life-cycle approach to human development could yield much greater returns
for the country in the medium to longer term. Investing in reproductive health would help to accelerate the
demographic transition and consolidate the demographic dividend. Emerging evidence also indicates that
investing in early childhood has a significant impact on children’s health and readiness to learn and can
bring important economic returns later in life, often greater than investments in formal education and
training later in life. In adopting a life-cycle approach, the authorities would need to prioritize maternal,
neonatal and child health, adequate nutrition (especially in the first 1,000 days of a child’s life), early
stimulation and learning opportunities, whilst ensuring that social protection mechanisms are consolidated
and provide appropriate incentives for behavioral change to encourage early childhood development. The
development of a universal health coverage policy will also be critical. Furthermore, the policy and
institutional framework for rural energy access needs to be consolidated to facilitate the expansion of mini-
grid and off-grid technologies, with a particular focus on renewables.

III. REINFORCING GOOD GOVERNANCE AND SOCIAL COHESION: Broadening the political,
economic and social space through transparent public resource management and the protection of the
vulnerable.

3.1. Improving the Transparency and Effectiveness of Public Expenditures and Investments

81. Public financial management reforms have yielded discrete results, yet implementation failures
have meant that the changes in practices and outcomes are limited. The 2014 Public Expenditure and
Financial Assessment (PEFA) exercise shows little or no progress since 2008 and, in some cases,
deterioration in performance. Despite improvements in recent years, budget preparation processes lack
credibility and are poorly aligned with policy objectives. Budget execution is characterized by weak internal
and external controls and irregular oversight and monitoring of public spending. Little progress has been
made on oversight of the large parastatal sector, or on the integration of financial management information
systems. The low standards of the auditing and accounting profession weaken efforts to impose controls
and accountability. While Mauritania scored poorly on the performance of its internal and external control
institutions, some notable advances in auditing in the Court of Accounts will likely change this rating. 61 The
new public finance framework law is expected to introduce, among other reforms, program-based budgeting
61 The low performance of the internal auditor, General State Inspector and the Supreme Audit Institution is reflected in the relevant

PEFA scores, which are all rated D.
                                                                 27
and a detailed process and calendar for budget preparation. However, past experience has shown that
introducing policy based budgeting in a low capacity environment can pose its own challenges and will not
necessarily improve budget practices.
82. Weaknesses in the national procurement processes, raise the risks of fraud and corruption,
particularly in a context of high capital investments. Notwithstanding improvements to the legal and
regulatory framework, many of the provisions of the new Procurement Code have yet to be effectively
applied. Procurement processes are managed externally by sectoral tender commissions, which operate with
limited engagement of the contracting ministry. The capacity of the commissions tends to be weak and
there is limited transparency with regard to the management of procurement processes by these
commissions. Serious bottlenecks and delays in procurement have the effect of limiting the annual project
implementation window. Lack of procurement expertise is prevalent across the institutions charged with
execution, control and regulation. The influence of the control organ/regulator is relatively limited: reports,
guidance and recommendations are neither published nor adopted by the Government. Many of the large
state investment contracts are managed by state execution agencies, with limited controls over their sub-
contracting out to the private sector.
83. The expanded parastatal sector plays a central role in managing public expenditures and
providing social services yet, government scrutiny of SOE performance is limited. Excluding the state-
owned iron ore mining company, the combined annual turnover of the 13 largest SOEs is at least 12 percent
of GDP, and they hold assets valued at 35 percent of GDP. The sector imposes a substantial burden on the
national budget and represents an important source of fiscal risk. Government support for SOEs increased
to 17 percent of total public spending in 2013. 62 The combined debt of these SOEs was estimated at 18.0
percent of GDP in 2014, and tax arrears were 2.3 percent of GDP. The growth in the number of SOEs and
public agencies is at least partly motivated by the need to create jobs in an economy characterized by capital-
intensive mining and foreign-dominated fishing. However, limited information is available regarding the
performance of these entities in service delivery or operational efficiency. SOE managers have sometimes
been selected on the basis of political affiliations rather than expertise, contributing to their inefficiency.
Some SOEs suffer from unsustainable debt burdens, large operating losses, substantial payment arrears,
and other symptoms of financial distress.
84. Improving transparency in public expenditure management without addressing corruption and
the misappropriation of public funds will likely fuel public frustration and derail reform. The
authorities assigned a high priority to the fight against corruption. A new code of ethics for public servants
was introduced, and several criminal investigations were launched, leading to high-profile dismissals and
a few arrests. A new Anti-Corruption Law was also passed by Parliament in February 2016. Some groups,
such as the military, have escaped scrutiny. Nonetheless, perceptions of corruption, though negative, appear
to have marginally improved. A key challenge will be to sustain the positive signaling effect induced by
the recent improvements to the anti-corruption policy framework by ensuring effective implementation,
particularly in public procurement. The systems for detecting, uncovering, and prosecuting corrupt practices
are only nascent. Institutions to promote accountability have not established mechanisms for working with
the public to uncover fraud and corruption. The Procurement Control Commission and external or internal
auditors do not report on fraud and corruption in procurement. Though provided for in current legislation,
there is no system for banning firms found guilty of procurement fraud.
85. Moving forward, a range of reforms have been identified to strengthen the transparent and
effective management of public resources. In the short term, to improve public financial management,
the authorities will need to enhance the transparency and quality of fiscal data, increase budget credibility
and discipline, and strengthen the oversight of SOEs through regular performance monitoring and the
publication of annual financial audits. The implementation of performance-based program budgeting, in

62 For example, see World Bank (2013), “Governance of State-Owned Enterprises and Public Agencies in the Islamic Republic of

Mauritania,” Report 78013-MR, World Bank, Washington, DC.
                                                            28
the medium term, would require significant organizational changes in public administration. Particular
emphasis should also be placed on enhancing the transparency of procurement through the consolidation
of the Public Procurement Code, the adoption of comprehensive regulations, and support for independent
procurement entities. Oversight and complaints handling mechanisms need to be strengthened. Further
analysis is also required to identify options for improving the transparency of sub-contracting between state
execution agencies and the private sector. Public investment could be made more efficient by prioritizing
public expenditures and improving monitoring and evaluation. Genuine attempts to combat corruption will
require building the commitment and capacity of the judicial authorities to proactively pursue cases of
corruption and fraud. Crucially, the authorities will also need to focus on improving communications with
citizens and the media to signal commitment to substantively tackling corruption.
86. Enhancing transparency in public expenditures is a necessary, though politically challenging,
precursor to facilitating greater accountability and signaling a credible commitment to improved
governance. Despite the Government’s commitment to reform, efforts to rationalize public-expenditure
management, and to strengthen rules for procurement procedures and those governing conflicts of interest
will likely face resistance from powerful constituents. For reforms to be successful, national reformers
within the Government will need to establish broad-based and inclusive coalitions with influential sectors
in society as well as international donors and investors. These forces will have a better chance of
withstanding the pressures that are bound to emanate from groups standing to lose out in the reform process.
In a context in which rents have declined, the effective implementation of these reforms will be a litmus
test of the Mauritanian leadership’s willingness to embrace a more open and inclusive model of governance
and to build broader coalitions of support beyond existing informal elite networks.
87. The creation of a more inclusive political bargain will ultimately also require sustained efforts to
develop modern, rule-based institutions and more effective modalities for citizen engagement and
contestation. The in-depth analysis of the preceding priority constraints identifies a panoply of targeted
institutional and governance reforms, including those related to extractive revenue mobilization, that are
critical to developing the foundations for an inclusive governance environment. Across the sectors, the need
to strengthen the authority and capacity of state institutions also emerges and reinforces the over-arching
importance of building a public administration that is performance-driven, capable and accountable, both
at the central and local levels. In the short term, the strategic vision for the modernization of the public
administration needs to be refined, with particular emphasis on recruitment and nomination processes.
Further along, there is a need to consolidate and effectively apply a merit-based performance management
system. Modalities for strengthening citizen engagement will also be critical to unlocking the narrow
confines of the political settlement. In the short to medium term, there are opportunities to draw upon the
extensive coverage of local non-governmental organizations and harness the hitherto untapped potential of
local citizen engagement to enhance local level accountability routes. Over the longer term, the
decentralization process could play an important role in strengthening local level contestation, but will
require further political commitment for an effective decentralization of resources.

3.2. Consolidating the Social Contract

88. Fostering a sense of belonging to the nation constitutes an elemental part of building a social
contract in Mauritania, but is complicated by an incomplete national unification process and a
fractured education system. Social unification processes, though advanced, have yet to achieve their
expected impact. The Program for the Prevention of Conflicts and the Consolidation of Social Cohesion
(Tadamoun), has received significant public funding but has been criticized for its heavy emphasis on
investments in infrastructure and limited effectiveness in service provision. Bilingualism in schools has
done little to improve feelings of alienation and resentment linked to the government’s language policies.
Whilst recognizing the multi-ethnic dimension of the Mauritanian State and the existence of several national
languages, the Constitution upholds Arabic as the country’s sole official language. Arabization policies,
especially in education and justice and legitimized discrimination practices against non-Arabic speaking
                                                     29
communities, according to these communities, further fueling ethnic and linguistic divides. 63 Attempts to
unify Arabic and French education streams through a bilingual system have encountered difficulties in
implementation.
89. More broadly, the fractured education system presents a key challenge to the cultivation of a
common national identity in Mauritania, locking youth into the logic of division and socio-lingual
based difference. The poorest and most disadvantaged students are geographically and economically
wedged into choosing between poor quality public education and Islamic mahadras. 64 Government
attempts to improve connections between the Islamic and public education systems have largely failed,
reflecting limitations in resources, weak institutional coordination and resistance by certain religious
leaders. While the majority of mahadras do not propagate violent ideologies, certain mahadras and
mosques have become important social networks that bind together students that are already alienated and
isolated from their surroundings opening up the possibility for radicalization by charismatic preachers. The
influence of these institutions merits more detailed analysis.
90. Regulatory complexities and practical impediments to civil registration have also hampered the
development of a unified sense of national identity. Voting, travel within the country, and access to
education, health care, and other social benefits depend on the formal registration of an individual in the
civil registry. However, controversies over access to this process have fueled unrest, magnified identity
cleavages, and fostered sex-based discrimination. For example, the legal framework restricts a woman’s
ability to transmit her nationality to children conceived out of wedlock, and urban refugees and asylum
seekers face difficulties in registering their children born in Mauritania. The process of birth registration
and of obtaining national identification cards is also complicated and expensive, making it inaccessible to
the children of the poorest, least well-educated, and most remote members of the population. According to
the United Nations Children’s Fund, only 58.8 percent of under-5-year-olds are currently registered because
many in this age-group have no birth certificates. The policy has led to the issuance of national identity
cards, passports, and residency cards to, respectively, only 62 percent, 6 percent, and 4 percent of
individuals enrolled in primary, secondary, or tertiary education.
91. Building an inclusive social compact requires better protection of vulnerable groups by state
institutions. The poor performance of the country’s judicial and informal dispute resolution institutions
represents a serious obstacle to the protection of the most vulnerable, including women and people
subjected to cultural slavery. 65 The 2016 Ibrahim Index of African Governance ranks Mauritania’s rule of
law 40th of 54 African states and points to a 15-point deterioration in the quality of the rule of law since
2006. 66 Despite government programs to strengthen the capacity of judges, improve access to legal aid, and
enhance the delivery of judicial services, public spending on the justice sector has declined. 67 The absence
of in-depth analysis of the needs of the vulnerable and of the interface between French, Arabic and informal
dispute resolution processes impede effectively targeted reforms. The social protection system is a
cornerstone of the state’s protection of the vulnerable. Significant strides have been made through the
adoption of a comprehensive national social protection strategy in June 2013, the creation of a social register
for extremely poor and vulnerable households, and the design of a conditional cash transfer system,
Tekavoul (solidarity), which will provide resources to support households in developing human capital and
building productive capacity. The Government has recognized the need to maintain a safety net system that
combines stable, continuous support to vulnerable households through a coordinated mechanism for

63 See “Police Disperse Mauritanian Blacks in ‘Racist’ Protest,” Al Arabiya News (November 28, 2011), Nouakchott, Mauritania,
http://english.alarabiya.net/articles/2011/11/28/179742.html. In 2010, confrontations between Arabic- and non–Arabic-speaking
students erupted after ministers said Arabic was the dominant language. In 2011, a civil census excluding non-Arabic speakers led
to massive protests, conducted, for instance, by the movement Touche pas à ma Nationalité (don’t question my citizenship).
64 Anouar Boukhars “Mauritania’s precarious stability and Islamist Undercurrent”, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace,

(Feb. 2016): 10.
65 Dialogue National Inclusif (comprehensive national dialogue), Nouakchott, September 29–October 18, 2016.
66 IIAG (Ibrahim Index of African Governance) (database), Mo Ibrahim Foundation, London, http://mo.ibrahim.foundation/iiag/.
67 World Bank (2016), “Mauritania: Public Expenditure Review, Update,” World Bank, Washington, DC.

                                                              30
activating emergency responses in the event of crises. Nonetheless, the proliferation of humanitarian
emergency assistance schemes and the maintenance of untargeted subsidy programs limit the extent to
which vulnerable populations are supported by the social safety net. Inadequate institutional capacity and
resources also pose considerable barriers to the sustainability of the safety net system.
92. Among the litany of potential solutions identified for consolidating the social contract, the
following are considered critical: (i) consolidate the reconciliation process that has already started by
following through on committed reforms and engagement emerging from the three-week national dialogue
process in 2016 and focusing on the impact of social reunification programs; (ii) explore the options for
better accommodating linguistic plurality, drawing upon international experience, and reinvigorate efforts
to implement education reforms, including the bilingual policy; (iii) improve the nationality and civil
registration processes to ensure that the most vulnerable members of society are recognized and have access
to state services; (iv) adopt a holistic approach to education that better integrates religious education,
incorporates the needs of those left behind by the education system, and harnesses the educative role of
actors outside the formal education system; (v) explore options for introducing affirmative action in
employment, procurement, the geographical targeting of public investment, and access to credit to open
economic opportunities to women entrepreneurs, as well as entrepreneurs of a specific ethnic group or
social cast; (vi) improve access to justice among the most vulnerable, including protection for women,
former slaves, and the landless and effectively address ongoing cases of slavery; (vii) improve the targeting
and consolidation of the Social Protection System.

    E. CONCLUSION

93. The end of the commodity super cycle marked a decisive turning point in the Government’s quest
to end poverty and achieve shared prosperity by 2030. Reliant on its extractive resource wealth, the
country made important inroads into both poverty reduction and economic growth during the mining boom.
Yet, the dramatic downturn in international commodity prices has placed the country’s extractive-driven
and state-dominated development trajectory on an unstable footing. Transforming Mauritania’s extractive
wealth and promoting private sector–led diversification will require a phased development approach that
harnesses the growth and employment creation prospects of the country’s livestock and fisheries resources
in the short to medium term and draws upon the country’s demographic dividend and rapid urbanization as
the vectors for developing productive and inclusive cities and a competent and dynamic workforce capable
of supporting structural transformation in the longer term. At the same time, the equitable redistribution of
land and social services and reforms to reduce high food prices in Nouakchott will be critical to creating
the necessary structural conditions for the eradication of poverty. In the end, the challenges of sustaining
and accelerating inclusive growth, improving equity among the bottom 40 and ensuring the sustainability
of the country’s development model will require a paradigmatic shift toward the creation of an open
economic, political and social space, supported by capable and accountable modern state institutions and
underscored by a clear vision for strengthening the country’s resilience to the effects of climate change.




                                                     31
                               Annex 1: Selected Macro- Fiscal Indicator Tables



Table A1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators

                                                     2013        2014    2015 E2016 P2017 P2018              P2019
 Real Economy                                                    annual change unless otherwise indicated
 Real GDP growth                                        6.1         5.6     1.4     2.0      3.5       2.7       4.6
 Per Capita GDP (current US$)                         1478        1358    1191    1112     1109      1076      1068
 Non-extractives GDP growth                             4.8         5.8     2.4     2.4      3.2       4.0       5.0

 Prices                                                          annual change unless otherwise indicated
 GDP deflator                                           3.0       -9.2     -4.9     1.8      3.6       3.5       3.9
 CPI Inflation                                          4.1        3.5      0.5     1.5      3.6       4.4       4.7
 Iron Price (US$/dmt)*                                 135          97       56      58       80        75        75
 Copper Prices (US$/mt)*                              7332       6863     5510    4868     5941      6050      6161
 Oil Price (US$/bbl)*                                  104          96       51      43       55        60        61
 Gold Prices (US$/ troy oz)*                          1411       1266     1161    1249     1234      1222      1210

 Fiscal Accounts                                              Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated
 Expenditures                                         25.8     29.5      32.7    28.6     28.0      27.7        27.6
 Revenues                                             30.1     26.1      29.3    28.5     27.7      27.8        28.1
 Primary Government Balance                            5.2      -2.4     -2.3     1.0      0.6       1.2         1.7
 General Government Balance                            4.3      -3.4     -3.4    -0.1     -0.3       0.1         0.5
 Public Debt (including Kuwait debt)                  70.0     77.8      94.2    99.4     99.5 100.2            99.2
      domestic                                         4.1       6.2      5.6     4.6      3.7       3.0         3.4
      external                                        65.9     71.5      88.6    94.8     95.8      97.2        95.8
 Public Debt (excluding Kuwait Debt)                  52.5     59.2      73.5    77.8     74.7      76.0        74.8
 PV of Public Debt /GDP                                                          56.8     61.8      63.2        62.6

 Balance of Payment                                           Percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated
 Current Account Balance                             -22.0     -27.3    -19.9   -16.0     -17.1    -10.7        -9.6
 Imports                                             -53.2     -49.1    -40.6   -41.0     -44.6    -41.5       -40.7
 Exports                                              46.3      35.9     29.0    30.2      32.9     35.2        34.5
 Foreign Direct Investment                            19.7        9.3    10.5      5.9     11.3       7.0         7.3
 Gross Reserves (million US$, eop)                     982       620      821     825       826      875         945
      in months of goods imports                        3.9       2.8      5.1     5.2       4.7      5.4         5.8
      in months of imports (goods & services)           3.0       2.2      4.2     4.4       3.9      4.4         4.9

 ToT (index)                                           34.2      -23.4    -18.5    -10.5      1.7     -7.5      -2.1
 Exchange Rate (avg)                                    296        302      324      352
 GDP (nominal - billion MRO)                         1,696       1,626    1569     1629     1747     1857      2018
 GDP (nominal - million US$)                          5724        5391    4844     4635     4734     4703      4777
Source: MEF, Office National des Statistiques, BCM, IMF Article IV, UN Population World Bank Staff calculations.
*The public debt ratio includes a dormant US$1 billion debt to Kuwait (around 20 percent of GDP). No interest or principal
repayment is done on this loan. Negotiations between the two governments are underway to cancel it.




                                                            32
Table A2: Key Fiscal Indicators

   % of GDP                                                2013     2014      2015     E2016     P2017     P2018     P2019
   Total Revenues                                           30.1     26.1      29.3      28.5     27.7      27.8      28.1
     Revenues excluding Extractives and Grants              24.3     20.5      25.8      24.8     24.2      24.6      24.2
        Tax Revenues (excl. extractives)                    14.6     15.8      17.0      17.8     17.3      17.6      17.9
          Income and corporate tax                           5.1      5.8       6.1       5.8      5.8       5.8       6.0
          Tax on goods and services                          6.7      7.3       7.9       8.4      7.8       8.0       8.1
          Tax on trade                                       1.9      2.3       2.5       2.9      2.5       2.5       2.6
          Other tax                                          0.9      0.4       0.6       0.7      1.2       1.3       1.2
        Non-tax revenues                                     9.7      4.4       9.1       7.8      6.9       7.0       6.4
          Revenues from fishing                              3.8      2.2       2.8       3.6      3.6       3.8       3.7
          Dividends from SOEs                                0.7      0.5       0.9       0.6      0.5       0.5       0.5
          Special Accounts                                   3.8      0.7       3.0       2.6      1.5       1.5       1.1
          Others                                             1.3      1.1       2.4       1.0      1.3       1.3       1.1
     Extractive Revenues                                     5.2      5.4       1.7       1.6      1.7       1.4       2.1
        Mining Revenues                                      3.9      4.0       0.8       1.0      1.1       1.4       2.1
        Petroleum Revenues                                   1.2      1.5       0.8       0.7      0.6       0.0       0.0
     Grants                                                  0.7      0.1       1.8       2.1      1.8       1.8       1.8

   Total Expenditure                                       25.8      29.5      32.7      28.6      28.0      27.7        27.6
     Recurrent Expenditures                                15.8      17.7      18.5      17.0      16.2      16.0        16.0
        Wage Bill                                           6.1       6.8       7.6       7.6       7.5       7.3         7.3
        Goods and Services                                  3.5       4.0       4.0       3.6       3.7       3.6         3.6
        Transfers to SOEs                                   4.1       4.5       4.3       3.4       3.3       3.2         3.2
        Interest Payments                                   0.9       1.0       1.1       1.1       0.9       1.1         1.2
           external                                         0.7       0.7       0.8       0.8       0.7       0.9         0.9
           domestic                                         0.2       0.2       0.3       0.2       0.2       0.2         0.2
        Others                                              1.0       1.5       1.5       1.3       0.7       0.7         0.7
     Special Accounts                                       0.4       0.6       0.2       0.6       0.1       0.1         0.1
     Capital Expenditure                                   10.0      11.8      14.0      11.7      11.5      11.4        11.3
        through external resources                          2.9       3.6       5.0       2.5       3.7       3.6         3.6
        through domestic resources                          7.1       8.2       9.0       9.2       7.8       7.8         7.7
     Restructuring                                          0.0       0.0       0.2       0.0       0.2       0.2         0.2

   Primary balance (excluding grants)                        4.6      -2.5     -4.1       -1.1      -1.1      -0.6       -0.1
   Primary balance                                           5.2      -2.4     -2.3        1.0       0.6       1.2        1.7
   Budget balance (excluding grants)                         3.6      -3.5     -5.2       -2.2      -2.1      -1.7       -1.3
   Budget balance                                            4.3      -3.4     -3.4       -0.1      -0.3       0.1        0.5
Source: Ministry of Economic and Finance, World Bank Staff Calculation. Figures for 2016 are based on estimated GDP
figures.
* According to the budget law, extractives revenues include various tax revenues from extractives companies, royalties
and dividends.




                                                              33
                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY




S Y S T E M AT I C C O U N T R Y D I A G N O S T I C
O F M A U R I TA N I A
 1
              May 2017
                                        Executive Summary
    Mauritania’s abundant endowment of natural resources, its strategic location at the gateway between Sub-Saharan and
    Northern Africa, its richly diverse, yet stratified, cultural and social make-up and its position in a restive region, increasingly
    beholden to the ravaging effects of Climate Change, create a complex development space for poverty reduction and shared
    prosperity. Over the last decade, the country has reaped the benefits of historically high commodity prices, departing from its
    stagnant economic growth trajectory. The super-cycle spurred solid economic growth, allowed for significant government
    investments in infrastructure, and enabled Mauritania to register one of the best performances in poverty reduction in the
    region. Yet as the reality of the ‘new normal’ of low commodity prices sets in, the narrow, and largely temporary nature of
    growth and poverty reduction trends, as well as the concentrated character of the nation’s political bargain, have exposed
    the unstable foundations of the country’s recent progress.


    This Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) charts a course that would help to put the country on track to ending extreme
    poverty and improving shared prosperity in a sustainable way amongst the poorest forty percent of the population by 2030.

2
                                                                                                                         Photo credit: WFP / Justin Smith
                           Executive Summary (contd.)
Four resource pathways:
   Leverage abundant mineral wealth to stimulate diversification in labor-intensive sectors and pro-poor investments
   Harness the employment creation and diversification potential of natural endowments in fisheries and livestock through environmentally
    resilient productivity enhancements; private sector-led transformation and export diversification
   Capitalize on urbanization trends and the emerging demographic dividend to trigger structural transformation through the development
    of productive and inclusive cities and human capital.
   Reinforce the productive, financial and human capital assets of the poor by alleviating structural inequities in land distribution, access to
    social services, and high food prices, by prioritizing the development of an effective education system and by expanding energy access in
    rural areas.
Three essential policy areas:
 Adopt well designed macro-fiscal rules to counter-balance the cyclical nature of the resource-based economy and create the market
    incentives for a competitive economy in non-extractive sectors
 Improve efficiency and pro-poor targeting of public expenditure and investment policies, with a particular focus on education.
 Create a more level playing field for private sector development through regulatory policies that tackle underlying anti-competitive
    practices and enhance transparency in key product markets

Two foundational features:
     Reinforce the legitimacy and authority public institutions by building a public administration that is performance-driven, capable, and
      accountable at the local and central levels and uniformly enforcing rules that strengthen the cohesiveness of the social contract
3    Anchor development in consolidated and sustained action for building national resilience against the harsh effects of climate change
                                                                                                                                 Photo credit: WFP / Justin Smith
                                           Contents
     5    Analytical Framework & Key Findings     PART B. CONSTRAINTS AND SOLUTIONS

    PART A. DIAGNOSTIC                            109   Methodology

     9    Diagnostic Methodology                  112   Deep Dive into Constraint Areas
                                                          Weak Management of Extractives

    12    Economic Growth                                 Failure to Harness Fisheries & Livestock Potential
                                                          Rapid and Outpaced Urbanization
                                                          Distorted Food Prices
    40    Poverty & Shared Prosperity
                                                          Inequitable Distribution of Arable Land
                                                          Low and Inequitable Access to Social Services
    82    Governance                                      Lack of Transparency in Public Expenditure
                                                          Social Fragility

    94    Sustainability                          132   Conclusion

    107   Overview of Priority Constraint Areas         Knowledge Gaps, Bibliography and
                                                  134   Acronyms
4
Overaching Analytical Framework
Is based upon a comprehensive analysis to arrive at principal constraint areas and prioritized potential solutions



    PART A. DIAGNOSTIC

                                                                                                                      Priority
                                                                                                                     Constraint
                                                                                                                       Areas
                   Growth                      Poverty                 Governance                Sustainability
                       Constitutive dimensions                              Cross-cutting dimensions


    PART B. DEEP DIVE INTO EACH PRIORITY CONSTRAINT AREA

      Detailed analysis of each constraint area                Identification and assessment of solution
            through the following lenses:                        areas based on the following criteria:
                                                                Authorizing                   Time required for     Solution
             $                                                   environment                    change
         $                                                                                                             areas
                                                                Implementation                Degree of
      Resources         Policies         Institutions            capacity                       complementarity


5
                                            Key Diagnostic Findings

                  Growth                                      Poverty                                 Governance                                 Sustainability
•   Accelerated, but narrow and             •   Overwhelmingly rural, clustered       •   Rent distribution consolidating       •   Culturally rich and diverse, but
    cyclical, following global commodity        among agro-pastoral producers             political bargain and reinforcing         delicate and complex social
    prices                                  •   Recently demonstrating leading            political stability                       structures, based on traditional,
•   Capital-intensive, driven by                performance in the region (both       •   Dominance of parallel informal            hierarchical and stratified
    extractive resource-revenues and            poverty and inequality)                   structures and weak authority of          conceptions of societal order
    public investment                       •   Driven by relative price increases        modern state institutions             •   Underscored by slow progress
•   Lacking productivity-enhancing              rather than labor productivity or     •   Narrow political settlement reliant       towards political and economic
    structural transformation                   structural mechanisms to sustain          on rentier economy and patronage          inclusion and…
•   Underscored by limited job                  trickling down of extractive wealth   •   Limited transparency in public        •   Environmental challenges
    creation, concentrated private sector   •   Underpinned by uneven access to           expenditures create enabling              associated with an encroaching
    and weak business environment               services and distribution of assets       conditions for rent-seeking               coastline and an expanding
                                                                                                                                    desertification

                                                                    Priority Constraint Areas
      Weak Management of
                                                    Distorted Food Prices
      Extractives
                                                                                                Limited Transparency in                     Social fragility*
           Failure to Harness                                                                   Public Spending*
                                                    Inequitable Distribution of
           Potential in Livestock                   Arable Land
           & Fisheries                                                                     *Cross-cutting governance and environmental fragility issues
                                                                                                are addressed across all priority constraint areas
6
      Rapid and Outpaced                            Low and Inequitable Access
      Urbanization                                  to Social Services
                         Key Constraint Analysis Findings

    4       Critical resource
            pathways                            3       Overarching policy
                                                        areas                                2      Underling foundational
                                                                                                    features

    1. Leverage a strong comparative            1. Adopt prudent and well-designed           1. Enhance the legitimacy and
       advantage in abundant mineral               macro-fiscal rules to counter the            authority of modern rules-based
       resources                                   cyclical nature of resource-based            state institutions by building a public
                                                   economic growth                              administration that is performance-
    2. Harness an untapped economic and
       employment potential of significant      2. Improve efficiency and pro-poor              driven, capable, and accountable at
       endowments in fisheries and                 targeting of redistributive public           the local and central levels and
       livestock                                   expenditure and investment policies          uniformly enforcing rules to protect the
                                                   in areas with the highest potential for      vulnerable.
    3. Capitalize on rapid urbanization trend
                                                   inclusion (livestock and human
       and emerging demographic dividend
                                                   development)                              2. Reinforce the resilience of the nation
       for medium term structural
       transformation                           3. Strengthen regulatory policies               against the deleterious effects of
                                                   targeted at creating a more level            climate change, particularly important
    4. Reinforce the human capital as well
                                                   playing field for private sector             in light of heavy reliance upon the
       as productive and financial asset base
                                                   development                                  nation’s natural wealth endowments
       of the poor


7
Part A

DIAGNOSTIC
Analytical Methodology for Diagnostic
Diagnostic assesses progress towards the World Bank’s twin goals and identifies key constraints to achieving them

                                                                                Constitutive dimensions
  The SCD examines Mauritania’s progress towards
   achieving the World Bank’s twin goals of (i) ending
   extreme poverty and (ii) improving shared prosperity
                                                                           GROWTH
   among the bottom 40 percent through an analysis of two                                          POVERTY &
                                                                                                    S H AR E D
   constitutive dimensions (Inclusive Growth, and Poverty                                          PROSPERITY

   and Shared Prosperity) and two cross-cutting
                                                                                     PROGRESS
   dimensions (Governance and Sustainability)*.                                        TOWARDS
                                                                                   TWI N G O ALS
  For each of the dimensions, the diagnostic draws upon a
                                                                      SUSTAINABILITY
   series of metrics and methods to achieve an evidence-
   based identification of priority constraint areas.                                            GOVERNANCE



  The priority constraint areas are those that, if removed,
   are likely to have the most significant impact on the
   twin goals.                                                                  Cross-cutting dimensions

9 *Advisory Group for SCD in “Analytical Approaches for Systematic
    Country Diagnostic: A Resource Document”, World Bank, 2014
Analytical Methodology for Diagnostic
It builds upon a wide range of qualitative and quantitative data and analysis

                                                                                                           1
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS                        QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS                                                                       2
                                                                                                       WORLD BANK
 Government data                              Government consultations                                  a n a l ys i s &
                                                                                                       benchmarking        GOVERNMENT
                                                                                                                              data &
 Reports and datasets of National             Coordination with authorities; focus
                                                                                              EXTERNAL                        reports
 Statistical Office and various ministries    groups with relevant ministries
                                                                                             consultations
                                                                                              with experts
                                                                                         6        &
 WB data & benchmarking                       Internal workshops                                            DIAGNOSTIC
                                                                                              stake-
                                                                                                                                      OTHER
 Public Expenditure Review; Poverty           Multiple country team meetings                 holders
 Assessment; Doing Business; etc.             and discussions
                                                                                                                                     relevant     3
                                                                                                                                     literature

                                                                                                  INTERNAL
 Other relevant literature                    External consultations                              workshops         CONSULTATIONS
                                                                                                                       with the
 Reports by IMF, WEF, UNICEF,                 Focus groups with experts and
                                                                                                                      Government
 WFP, IFPRI, WHO, etc.                        other relevant stakeholders                         5
                                                                                                                                 4



10
                                Growth                      Poverty                  Governance                 Sustainability
     Country Context
      Mauritania is sparsely-populated, arid, but resource-rich with a small domestic market and a low human capital base
                                                           Population
                                       Map of Mauritania
                                                            4.07 million people with very low (4th lowest in Africa) density of 3.95 p/sq. km
                                                            Largely urban with 60% living in cities (mainly Nouakchott and Nouadhibou)
                                                            Complex and hierarchical systems with high degree of social stratification
                                                           Territory & Resources
                                                            Dominance of desert with arable land at only 0.5% of the territory
                                                            Wealth of natural resources: iron ore, gold, copper, oil, and gas
                                                            Abundant fish endowment and significant livestock potential
                                                           Economy
                                                            High GDP growth of 5.5% in 2003-14 driven by commodities and public investment
                                                            Recent slow-down - real GDP growth at 3.5% in 2015.
                                                            Lower-middle income country- GNI at 1,270 USD in 2014
                                                           Human Development
                                                            Accelerated poverty reduction – 33% in 2014 (down from 44.5% in 2008), but…
                                                            Low and decreasing levels of employment (particularly for the poor) – 35.6% in
                                                             2014 (down from 39.3% in 2008).
      11

Source: World Development Indicators
                                                            Limited human development outcomes: 156th out of 188 in HDI
                                                        GROWTH
                                               Robust growth performance during the
                                             commodity super-cycle relied on a narrow
                                               economic base, was capital-intensive,
                                               brought limited job creation and is now
                                              jeopardized by the low commodity price
                                                             environment


     12        © 2015 Ipsos.
Photo credit: Kinross Gold from mining.com
      Growth Trends
       Growth accelerated during the commodity super-cycle, but remained in line with the average in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                             Growth          Poverty       Governance    Sustainability      Constraints

                                      Average growth rate (2003-2015)
                                                Largely driven by global commodity prices, growth has                                                              At the same time it has been volatile due to a combination
                                5.5%                been robust, almost doubling vis-à-vis the 1990s,                                                                of political instability, droughts and external price shocks.
                                                    when annual growth averaged only 2.7 percent.                                                                   And it is roughly consistent with the average growth in
                                                                                                                                                                     Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
                                                  Figure 1.1 Real GDP growth and global iron ore, 2000-2015
                                                                                                                                                                    23
                                                                                                                                          170                                         Figure 1.2. GDP growth (annual, %), 2000-2014
                                                              Transition Government and
                                    18.0%                        discovery of oil - 2006
                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                                          130
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mauritania
      Real GDP Growth (annual, %)




                                                                                                          Mining buoyancy -
                                                                                                               2010s
                                    13.0%                                                                                                 110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SSA




                                                                                                                                                Iron Price $/dmt
                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                          90
                                              Period of unrest and                         Global financial
                                     8.0%      attempted military                                                                         70
                                                                                             crisis - 2009                                                           8
                                               coups: 2001-2004
                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                       New coup and
                                     3.0%                                              elections - 2008
                                                                                                                                          30                         3

                                                                                                                                          10
                                            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                                              2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                                    -2.0%                                                                                                 -10                       -2
                                                     Real GDP                GDP excl. extractives                  Iron prices ($/dmt)
       13

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations; World Development Indicators, World Bank Commodity Price Data (Pink Sheet), 2016
     Growth Trends
      GDP per capita has increased, but has proved insufficient to enable convergence with higher income countries
                                                                                        Growth        Poverty       Governance     Sustainability     Constraints


                  GDP per capita comparison (2014)
                                                                       3200                      Figure 1.3. GDP per capita (current USD)
                                                                       3100
                                                                       3000
           1,370              Mauritania                               2900
                                                                       2800
                                                                       2700
                                                                       2600
                                                                       2500
                                                                       2400
                                                                       2300
                                                                       2200
           1,800              Sub-Saharan   2,030   Lower-middle       2100
                                                                       2000
                              Africa                Income countries   1900
                                                                       1800
                                                                       1700
                                                                       1600
                                                                       1500
            GDP per capita in Mauritania has more than doubled        1400
                                                                       1300
                                                                       1200
               from US $525 in 2003 to US $1370 in 2014, enabling      1100
                                                                       1000                                                                         Mauritania
               the country to join the ranks of lower-middle income     900
                                                                        800                                                                         SSA
               countries (LMIC).                                        700
                                                                        600                                                                         LMIC
                                                                        500
            However, it is still below the averages of both SSA        400
                                                                                                                                                    Morocco
                                                                        300
               and LMIC.                                                      2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014



      14

Source: World Development Indicators
      Growth Trends
       Income per capita grew faster than GDP per capita, translating mainly into investment rather than private consumption
                                                                                                         Growth         Poverty     Governance   Sustainability     Constraints



          Due to a large positive shock to the value of its exports                          Table 1.1. Real GDP vs. RGDI vs. RNNDI versus private consumption
              during the super-cycle, per capita real gross domestic
                                                                                                                                                    Growth (%)
              income (RGDI) grew almost at twice the pace of real                              Real prices (2004=100)
                                                                                                                                            Average                Average
              GDP per capita.                                                                                                              2003-2013              2014-2015
                                                                                               GDP                                           5.6%                   3.6%
          However, this has not translated into an improvement in
                                                                                               RGDI (GDP + ToT gains)                        8.0%                   3.9%
              national income, due to large outflows (mainly repatriation
                                                                                               RNNDI (RGDI + real net income from
                                                                                                                                             6.8%                   3.5%
              of extractives profits) since 2006. After 2012, these were not                   abroad)

              compensated by external production factors, such as official                     Real Private Consumption                      4.1%                   3.8%

              grants and private remittances.                                                  GDP per capita                                2.8%                   2.2%

                                                                                               RGDI per capita                               5.1%                   1.4%
          Unlike public consumption, the share of private consumption
              stagnated between 2003-2015. As a result, per capita growth                      RNNDI per capita                              4.0%                   1.0%

              in real private consumption has increased by one                                 Real Private Consumption per capita           1.3%                   1.3%
              percentage point less than per capita GDP.
       15

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
      Growth Drivers
       Driven by rising commodity prices, the exportation of extractives has been the main engine of economic growth
                                                                                                                                               Growth            Poverty          Governance         Sustainability       Constraints

     The pace of the non-oil mining sector production growth has been                                                         However, underpinned by high global prices and favorable terms of
         modest, at 4.6 percent annually between 2003-2013, with the                                                            trade, the value of mineral exports jumped from US$164 mln (2003)
         overall sector not expanding much in real terms.                                                                       to US$2,263 mln (2013), reaching 85 percent of total export value,
                                                                                                                                40 percent of GDP and 18 percent of domestic budget revenues.
                          Figure 1.4. Contribution to Growth (% of real GDP), supply side, 2005-                                    3000                       Figure 1.5. Export Value, USD mln
    20.0%                                                 2015

                                                                                                                                    2500
    15.0%

                                                                                                                                    2000

    10.0%
                                                                                                                                    1500

     5.0%
                                                                                                                                    1000


     0.0%                                                                                                                            500



    -5.0%                                                                                                                              0
                 2005        2006        2007       2008        2009        2010        2011   2012   2013    2014     2015             2003     2004   2005   2006   2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013    2014
                  Agriculture and Herding                        Fisheries                            Extractives
                  Manufacturing                                  BTP                                  Commerce and Services                    Iron      Petroluem           Copper          Gold       Fishing       Others
                  Government                                     Net Taxes                            GDP
       16

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
      Growth Drivers
       Linked to the mining boom, non-tradable sectors displayed impressive growth, while primary sectors performed less well
                                                                                                                                      Growth          Poverty         Governance   Sustainability     Constraints


     Benefiting from the extractive industries boom and public                                                          Agriculture has grown more slowly than the economy
            investments financed by resource rents, non-tradable services                                                 as a whole. Generally, the share of primary sectors in
            (incl. construction, transport and communications) have grown                                                 total GDP has fallen steadily from 36 percent in 2003 to
            at a combined annual rate of almost 12 percent since 2003.                                                    27 percent in 2015.

                                                                                                                                                Figure 1.7. Real GDP Structure, 2003-2015
                                 Figure 1.6. Growth by Sector (%, real 2004 prices),                                    100%
                                               average for 2003-2013
                                                                                                                        80%

                                                                                                                 13.3   60%
                                                                                                          10.9
                                                                                              6.9   7.7                 40%
                                                                     4.5          5.3
                                            3           3.7
                2.1          2.3                                                                                        20%

                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                               2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

                                                                                                                           Agriculture and Herding        Fisheries                     Extractives
                                                                                                                           Manufacturing                  BTP                           Commerce and Services
                                                                                                                           Government                     Net Taxes

       17

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
      Growth Drivers
      On the back of large investments in mining and construction, GDP growth has been dominated by capital formation
                                                                                                                                                                            Growth           Poverty      Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

         Investment to GDP ratio
                                                                                                    Table 1.2. Expenditure Decomposition of Growth, 2000-2014
                                                                                %
                             %                                                                                                                                                 Structure (% GDP)                          Growth (%)

                 20                                             60                                   Real prices (2004=100)
                                                                                                                                                                2003-2015           2003-2013    2014-2015    2003-2015    2003-2013    2014-2015

                                                                                                     Consumption                                                85.8                87.0%        79.3%        3.9%         4.2%         2.2%
                2000                                           2014
                                                                                                          Government Consumption                                23.3%               23.9%        20.3%        3.5%         4.6%         -2.2%

        Investment to GDP ratio,                                                                          Household Consumption                                 62.5%               63.1%        59.0%        3.9%         4.1%         3.8%

        average for 2000-2014                                                                        Gross Capital Formation                                    51.6%               50.4%        58.7%        16.6%        21.6%        -2.8%

                                                                               %                     Net External Demand                                        -37.1%              -37.3%       -35.8%       14.7%        21.6%        -16.7%
                                 %                                 19                                      Exports of G&S                                       28.7%               29.1%        26.4%        4.6%         6.5%         -5.6%

                  39                        vs.
                                                                    SSA                                    Imports of G&S                                       65.8%               66.4%        62.2%        8.5%         12.8%        -12.3%

                                                                               %                     GDP                                                        100%                100%         102%         5.5%         5.6%         3.6%
            Mauritania                                             29                              *Note: 2013 & 2014 figures are provisional, while 2015 figures are projections




      18                                                        MENA*
Note: MENA – Middle East and Northern Africa, as defined by IBRD
Source: National Statistical Office, World Bank staff calculations; World Development Indicators
      Growth Drivers
       Public investment and FDI in extractives have accordingly been key contributors to growth on the demand side…
                                                                                                                                            Growth           Poverty           Governance     Sustainability     Constraints


          Capital formation has been the major contributor to accelerated growth during the commodities boom with public investment
              and foreign direct investment (FDI) in extractives, a sector with heavy public sector presence, playing a central role. This role
              has by far exceeded that of domestic private investment.

      60.0                              Figure 1.8. Investments (% of GDP), 2003-2015                                                     Figure 1.9. Contribution to Growth (% of real GDP), demand side, 2003-2015
                                                                                                                        40.0%
      50.0
                                                                                                                        30.0%

      40.0
                                                                                                                        20.0%

      30.0
                                                                                                                        10.0%

      20.0                                                                                                               0.0%
                                                                                                                                 2003   2004   2005   2006   2007    2008   2009   2010     2011   2012   2013   2014   2015
      10.0                                                                                                              -10.0%


        0.0                                                                                                             -20.0%
                2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                                                                                 Public consumption                 Private consumption               Investments
                             Public Investment                          FDI                   Gross Capital Formation            External demand                    Real GDP
      * No data available for public Investment in 2009
      19

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
      Growth Drivers
       …resulting in an extractives-dominated and state-driven growth model
                                                                                                                                                                             Growth          Poverty      Governance        Sustainability      Constraints


        The public investment budget increased from
                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1.10. Public Investment Budget, 2004–14 (MRO billion and percentage of GDP)
             MRO 173 billion (US$ 576 million) in 2010 to                                                                                300.00                                                                                                    16.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          14.0%
             a high of MRO 255 billion (US$ 850 million) in                                                                                                                                                                                        14.0%
                                                                                                                                         250.00                                                                                   12.5%




                                                                                              Public Investment Budget (MRO, billion)
             2015, an increase of 47 percent between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          11.2%                    12.0%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Investment Budget as % of GDP
             2010 and 2014.                                                                                                              200.00                                                                    9.5%
                                                                                                                                                  8.9%                                                                                             10.0%

        The investment rate tripled, going from 65                                                                                      150.00                                                                                                    8.0%
                                                                                                                                                                         6.8%
             Bn MRO (US$ 216 million) or 5.4 percent of                                                                                                    6.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                  5.8%                    5.9%
                                                                                                                                                                  5.5%                      5.4%   5.4%                                            6.0%
             GDP in 2010 to 228 Bn MRO (US$ 760                                                                                          100.00

             million) or 14 percent of GDP in 2015.                                                                                                                                                                                                4.0%
                                                                                                                                          50.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.0%
        The proportion of investment to recurrent
                                                                                                                                             -                                                                                                     0.0%
             expenditures in the national budget has also                                                                                         2004     2005   2006   2007     2008      2009   2010   2011     2012    2013   2014    2015
             changed significantly, increasing from 36
                                                                                                                                                         Executed (MRO Bn)            Budgeted (MRO Bn)          Investment Spending % of GDP
             percent to 53 percent in 2014.

      20

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
      Growth Drivers
      Growth driven by capital accumulation has come at the expense of increases in Total Factor Productivity…
                                                                                            Growth       Poverty      Governance    Sustainability   Constraints



                      Mauritania’s Total Factor Productivity (TFP) has fallen at an annual rate of 2.5 percent since 2000.

                      This TFP decline underscores the limited contribution of human capital to growth and helps to explain the
                       country’s inability to sustain per-capita income convergence.


                                    Table 1.3. Extended Growth Accounting Decomposition, Mauritania, 1991-2014
                                                                Capital stock   Pop., labour &
                                                Real GDP per
                               Period                            per unit of    human capital        TFP           Real total GDP
                                                   capita
                                                                   labour         per capita
                             1991 - 2000            -0.14           0.44            1.07             -1.63              2.79

                             2000 - 2010            1.87            2.75            1.53             -2.38              4.74

                             2010 - 2014            2.98            3.72            2.26             -2.96              5.46

                             2000 - 2014            2.18            3.02            1.73             -2.54              4.94




      21

Source: DTIS, 2016
      Growth Drivers
       …while limited inter-sectoral labor movements have further impeded structural transformation
                                                                                                                                  Growth                Poverty            Governance            Sustainability            Constraints

       The reallocation of labor from primary sectors has been limited and has not contributed to productivity gains, with a
        significant proportion of this employment focused in mostly informal and low productive trade (commerce).

       By contrast, virtually no labor movements to industry were registered. High-wage jobs in mining, manufacturing and
        transport and communication were not created on a sufficient scale to absorb the growing labor force.
                                                                                                                                    Figure 1.12. Level of Productivity vs. Share of GDP, 2014
                                         Figure 1.11. Employment Share by Sectors
                                                                                                                MRO per worker                Size of bubble – employment share
                                                                                                                3000                                                     Extractives (8000 MRO per worker)
           100%
             90%
                                                                                              Extractives       2500
             80%                                                                                                                 Manufacturing                                                               Other Services
                                                                                              Manufacturing                                                        Transp & Comm.
             70%                                                                                                2000
                                                                                              Fisheries                                                           Construction
             60%                                                                                                                                                                                                Agriculture &
                                                                                              Transp. & Comm.                                                                                                     Herding
             50%                                                                                                1500
                                                                                              Construction
                                                                                                                             Fisheries
             40%
                                                                                              Other Services
                                                                                                                1000
             30%                                                                                                                             Public Sector
                                                                                              Public Sector
             20%
                                                                                              Ag. & Herding      500
             10%                                                                                                                                              Commerce
                                                                                              Commerce
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Share of GDP (%)
               0%                                                                                                  0
                                2000                        2008                       2014                            0                 5                   10              15                 20                 25                 30
      22

Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
                      Growth Model Limitations


Mauritania’s dependence on extractive resource revenues and increased public
     investment has yielded strong growth during the commodity super-cycle, but
                       volatility during periods of deceleration.


 This state-dominated and rent-driven development model creates a number of
         structural challenges in the context of low global commodity prices.




23
    Growth Model Limitations
    High inflation and appreciated exchange rate, symptomatic of Dutch Disease, eroded Mauritania’s competitiveness
                                                                                                     Growth              Poverty         Governance         Sustainability       Constraints
     As expected from a commodity producer, during the period of                 20.0                                       Figure 1.13. CPI Inflation (%)
         high commodity prices Mauritania experienced increased                                                                                                        Headline Inflation (%)
                                                                                  15.0
         inflation and an appreciated exchange rate:                                                                                                                   Core Inlfation (%)

                                                                                  10.0
              Headline inflation averaged 6.4 percent over 2000-2011,
                  compared to 4.2 percent between 2012 and 2014.                    5.0


              On the back of higher domestic inflation, the real                   0.0
                                                                                            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                  exchange rate (RER) appreciated significantly, with its      *Private Consumption deflator from national accounts is used for 2000-2005 due to lack of CPI data in this period

                  annual appreciation rate averaging 3.8 percent over               360.0                     Figure 1.14. Real exchange rate, RER (LCU per USD),
                                                                                                                                   2000-2015
                  2000-2011. This has undermined Mauritania’s external
                                                                                    310.0
                  competitiveness and increased its vulnerability to shocks.

     As global prices tumbled, MRO started depreciating (by an                     260.0

         average of 4.8 percent in the first half of 2016), bringing the
                                                                                    210.0
         currency closer to its medium-term equilibrium. The continued                                   RER (MUV/GDP)
                                                                                                         RER (MUV/CPI)
         nominal depreciation could help to bring about a real                      160.0
         depreciation and regained competitiveness.                                           2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
    24
Source: WDI, World Bank
      Growth Model Limitations
       Large public investment has fueled rapid public debt accumulation…
                                                                                                                     Growth             Poverty        Governance    Sustainability    Constraints

                 Total public and publicly guaranteed
                                                                                              1600.0                    Figure 1.15. Public debt, 2006-2015 (billion MRO                       1
                 debt-to-GDP ratio (2015)
                                                                                                                                and percentage of nominal GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.9
                                                                                              1400.0
                               Largely driven by spending on public
           89%                                                                                                                                                                                 0.8
                                   investment program (PIP)                                   1200.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.7
         The absence of fiscal buffers and increasing recourse                               1000.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.6
              to bilateral loans and other less-concessional forms of
                                                                                               800.0                                                                                           0.5
              external financing have worsened the debt profile and
              increased the vulnerability of the debt stock to                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                               600.0
              exchange-rate risks. The joint WB-IMF DSA 2016                                                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                                               400.0
              indicates that the country is at high risk of debt
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
              distress.                                                                        200.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1
                        Foreign-financed PIP
                                                                               %                 0.0                                                                                           0
                                   %                                                                   2006   2007    2008       2009     2010       2011   2012     2013       2014   2015
                          21                                      36                                                  External            Domestic          Debt to GDP ratio

      25                 2000                                    2014
Source: Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office, World Bank Staff Calculations
     Growth Model Limitations
     …with a significant additional burden imposed on the national budget by the large para-statal sector
                                                                                                                              Growth            Poverty      Governance   Sustainability    Constraints

   Dividend payments from SOEs to the national budget rose from 0.6                                                Meanwhile, explicit subsidies to commercial SOEs averaged 3.7
        to 16.5 percent of total domestic revenues between 2004 and 2012.                                            percent of revenues in 2010-14. Around MRO 26.8 bn was spent
                                                                                                                     on capital injections alone through share purchases or as loans
   However, the gradual decline in parastatal contributions to 2.3
                                                                                                                     and advances in 2011-13.
        percent in 2016, linked primarily to the state iron ore company
        (SNIM), has created fiscal pressures.                                                                       The net fiscal impact of SOEs was negative starting 2015,
                                                                                                                     signaling an increased contribution to the fiscal deficit.

                           Figure 1.16. Dividend payments (MRO Bn and % of Revenues)
             70.0                                                                                          18.0%           Figure 1.17. Subsidies to SOEs (MRO Bn and % of Revenues)
                                  Dividends MRO Bn                                                         16.0%      20                                                               6%
             60.0
                                  Dividends as % of Income                                                 14.0%      18
             50.0                                                                                                                                                                      5%
                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                           12.0%
                                                                                                                      14
             40.0                                                                                                                                                                      4%
                                                                                                           10.0%      12
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MRO
                                                                                                           8.0%       10                                                               3%
             30.0
                                                                                                                       8                                                                         % of
                                                                                                           6.0%                                                                        2%        Revenues
             20.0                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                           4.0%        4
                                                                                                                                                                                       1%
             10.0                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                           2.0%
                                                                                                                       0                                                               0%
              0.0                                                                                          0.0%               2010       2011         2012       2013      2014
                    2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
     26
Source: World Bank, Mauritania Public Expenditure Review, 2016
Growth Model Limitations
The concentration of revenues in extractives and the expansionary fiscal policy resulted in limited fiscal space
                                                                                                                                   Growth                Poverty            Governance         Sustainability         Constraints


 After averaging 20 percent of domestic revenues, fiscal revenues                                                      This expansion reflects not only a 5 fold increase in public
     from extractives collapsed at the bust of iron prices in 2014.                                                        investment, but also a surge in public employment (with the

 The rise in public debt, despite major tax reforms in 2011, is a                                                         wage bill rising from 3.5 to 7.7 percent of GDP) and the

     result of an expansionary fiscal policy that outpaced                                                                 proliferation of public enterprises (transfers to SOEs

     improvements in revenues, with total spending increasing by                                                           increasing from 2.6 to 4.5 percent of GDP).

     more than 200 percent in 10 years.
                                                                                                                                         Figure 1.19. Public Expenditure Composition (bln MRO)
                                                                                                                     500                                                                                                       180
     600
                          Figure 1.18. Revenues composition (bn MRO)                                           180
                                                                                                                     400                                                                                                       150
     500                                                                                                       150
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               120
                                                                                                                     300
     400                                                                                                       120                                                                                                             90
                                                                                                                     200
     300                                                                                                       90                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                     100                                                                                                       30
     200                                                                                                       60

     100                                                                                                       30      0                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                           2004   2005   2006    2007    2008    2009   2010   2011     2012    2013   2014    2015    2016
       0                                                                                                       0             Capital Expenditure - domestic finance                   Capital Expenditure - external finance
           2004   2005   2006   2007    2008    2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014    2015   2016                      Special Account - mostly capital expenditure             Interest Payments
                                                                                                                             Transfers to SOEs                                        Goods and Services
                  Recettes Fiscale (hors extractives)                 Recette non-Fiscale (hors extractives)
                  Recettes Extractives                                Dons                                                   Wage Bill                                                Iron Price ($/dmt) - RHS
27                Iron Price ($/dmt) - RHS
     Growth Model Limitations
      The state-driven development model also raises concerns about the quality and efficiency of investment
                                                                                                            Growth           Poverty         Governance       Sustainability   Constraints

        Despite the rapidly expanded public investment program                                These inefficiencies reduce the overall quality of
            (PIP), its impact on economic growth has been lower than                            Mauritania’s infrastructure and act as a drag on productivity
            expected.                                                                           growth.
                                                                                                                  Figure 1.20. Infrastructure Quality Index
        One indicator of public investment spending efficiency is the
                                                                                                                             Overall infrastructure
            average incremental capital-output ratio (ICOR), which in                                                               4
                                                                                                                                 3.5
            Mauritania is estimated at 10.4, far above the benchmark                                                                3
                                                                                                                                 2.5
            ratio of 3.0 for the best-performing countries, indicating low                                                          2
            productivity of capital, and therefore a low level of efficiency of                                                  1.5
                                                                                                    Electricity                                                  Roads
                                                                                                                                    1
            public investments (PER, 2016).                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                    0
        The PER (2016) estimates that the PIP for 2014-16 has the
            potential to increase by 3.2 percent in 2019 while maintaining                                                                                            Mauritania
                                                                                                                                                                      Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                                                                                      Low income
            a modest effect on prices and imports. However, poor project                                                                                              Lower middle income
            management, cost overruns, delays and other forms of                                           Air Transport                              Ports

            wastage (including corruption) could reduce those returns to
            zero.
      28
Source: Fraser Institute 2015; World Bank, 2016, Mauritania Public Expenditure Review (PER)
     Growth Model Limitations
     Moreover, narrow economic growth failed to stimulate job creation
                                                                                                                                             Growth         Poverty        Governance    Sustainability    Constraints
       Unemployment declined
                                                                                                                                     The growth decomposition analysis confirms a decline in the
                                                                                                                                     labor participation rate, which continues to act as a brake on
                                                                                                                                     the country’s economic growth.
                  18.8%                                           14.4%
                                                                        2014
                         2008
                                                                                                                                              Figure 1.21. Shapley Decomposition of Growth in Per Capita
                                                                                                                                                                Value Added, 2008-2014
      However, this has largely been due to people leaving the Labor
      Force, as the Labor Force Participation Rate also declined
                                                                                                                                                                 Productivity                              2.95




                                                                                                                                                                Employment               0.89
                  48.7%                                       41.6%
                                                                   2014
                         2008
                                                                                                                                               -2.66        Participation rate

                                                                                                         64%
                                                                   22%              vs.                                                                  Demographic change       0.31



     29
                                                            Mauritania                                     SSA
Note: Includes informal employment (based on standard international definition of employment) as used in the Household survey EPCV
Source: EPVC 2014, WDI, ILO KILM Data, 2012-2014 values (for cross-country data), World Bank
     Growth Model Limitations
     …with labor markets persistently burdened by high degree of informality…
                                                                                                                                   Growth               Poverty   Governance   Sustainability     Constraints


        Most Mauritanians are employed in the informal sector (i.e.,                                                       The prevalence of informal employment is even higher
            without a formal contract and lacking contributions to the                                                       among young graduates, which is an ominous trend given
            national social security fund) in subsistence occupations, as                                                    Mauritania’s dynamic demographic transition.
            well as in precarious, seasonal jobs*.
                                                                                                                                         Figure 1.23. Rate of Informal Employment Among
                                            Figure 1.22. Total employment structure, 2012                                                           Graduates (% of labor force)
                                                       16.6
                                                                                                                                               Total                                              85%


                                                                                                                                             Tertiary                          52%


                                                                                                                                                TVET                                                  99%

                                                                                           83.4
                                                                                                                                  Secondary 2nd cycle                                                 87%


                                                                                                                                  Secondary 1st cycle                                           80%

                                                      Informal Sector            Formal sector
                                                                                                                                             Primary                                              85%
               *For further information on the labor market profile and dynamics in Mauritania, please refer to World
     30        Bank (2016), Transforming the Trajectory of the Youth, Labor Market Dynamics and Growth, Brief.

Source: RESEN 2015; World Bank (2016), Transforming the Trajectory of the Youth, Labor Market Dynamics and Growth, Brief
     Growth Model Limitations
      …and low level of female participation
                                                                                                                                                                    Growth                  Poverty             Governance        Sustainability   Constraints

      The gender gap in labor markets is particularly severe. Three out of four jobs are                                                                                                            Figure 1.25. Female youth (15-24 y.o.) labor
                                                                                                                                                                                                           participation rate, %, 2012-2014
           held by men despite women representing 55 percent of the working-age
                                                                                                                                                                                       Togo                                       67.8
           population. Labor force participation is especially low for young women – only
           21% among 20-24 years-old, likely linked to early marriage and child rearing*.                                                                                               Mali                               47.7


                                                    Figure 1.24. Labor Force Participation by Age, 2012                                                                               Benin                               44.6
        100
                                                                                    85.8         87.9
           90               Men                                                                               83.9         84.1
                                                                        82                                                                                                    Côte d'Ivoire                            40.5
                                                                                                                                        77.3
           80               Women                        72.7
                                                                                                                                                      68.4
           70               Total                                                                                                                                                    Nigeria                       34.8
           60
                                            48.9                                                                                                                                    Senegal                       31.2
           50                                                                                                     43.3
                                                                                       39.2          38.7
           40                                                             35.1                                                              35.6
                                                             32.4                                                              30.7                                                  Tunisia               22.2
           30                  22.7             21.9                                                                                                       20
           20                       12.8                                                                                                                                             Yemen                 21.8
                  11.8
                     8.4
           10
                                                                                                                                                                                Mauritania               18.5
           0
                   0-14         15-19        20-24        25-29        30-34         35-39        40-44        45-49        50-54        55-59         60-64
                                                                                                                                                                                  Morocco               17.4
                *For further information on the labor market profile and dynamics in Mauritania, including profile of women, please
      31        refer to World Bank (2016), Transforming the Trajectory of the Youth, Labor Market Dynamics and Growth, Brief.
Source: 2012 Mauritania Labor Force and Informal Sector Survey; ILO KILM Data, 2012-2014 values, as reported in World Bank (2016), Transforming the Trajectory of the Youth, Labor Market Dynamics and Growth, Brief
      Growth Model Limitations
      Combined with Dutch Disease symptoms, the poor investment climate holds back private sector growth
                                                                                                                                                            Growth                   Poverty           Governance             Sustainability           Constraints



                                         Mauritania ranked 138 out of 140                                                                                             Mauritania ranked 168 out of 189
                                         (2015-2016 WEF Report)                                                                                                       (2016 World Bank Doing Business Report)


                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1.28. Comparative
           Figure 1.26. Comparative                                                                                                                     ranking, 2016
              ranking, 2015-2016
     Morocco                                          4.2                                                                                        Morroco                                49.66
                                                               Figure 1.27. Global Competitiveness Index,                                                                                          Figure 1.29. Doing Business Index, Selected
                                                               Selected Scores (1-7, best), 2015-2016, WEF                                                                                                      Scores, 2016, WB
        Algeria                                   4                                   Institutions
                                                                                                                                                    Mali                     48.99                                   Starting a business
                                                                                        6                                                                                                                               200                     Dealing with
                                                                    Innovation                             Infrastructure                                                                           Resolving
                                                                                        5                                                                                                                                                       construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                   insolvency           150
                                                                                                                                              SSA average                                                                                         permits
 Cote d'Ivoire                                 3.9                                      4                                                                                48.57
                                                         Business
                                                                                        3                          Macroecon environment                                                                                100
                                                       sophistication
                                                                                                                                                                                         Enforcing                                                        Getting
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                                 Senegal              45.72              contracts                       50                              electricity
       Senegal                              3.7                                         1
                                                                                                                         Health and primary
                                                      Market size                       0                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                             education
           Mali                       3.4                                                                                                         Algeria            45.54              Trading                                                          Registering
                                                                                                                                                                                     across borders                                                       property
                                                      Technological                                                Higher education and
                                                        readiness                                                        training
   Mauritania                  3                                                                                                                  Guinea         44.74
                                                             Financial market                                                                                                                         Paying
                                                                                                           Goods market efficiency                                                                                                              Getting credit
                                                               development                                                                                                                             taxes
                                                                                 Labor market efficiency                                                                                                        Protecting minority investors
       Guinea              2.8                                                                                                                Mauritania         40.56
      32                                     Mauritania                 Morroco             Senegal               Mali             Algeria                                            Mauritania           Morroco             Algeria            Senegal              Mali

Source: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2015-2016; World Bank Doing Business Report 2016
      Growth Model Limitations
      Limited access to finance by the private sector presents a particular investment climate challenge
                                                                                         Growth          Poverty             Governance      Sustainability   Constraints

      Mauritania’s banking system remains small, shallow and fragmented,                       Figure 1.30. Most problematic factors for doing business,
                                                                                                                      WEF survey
           with total assets of around $2 billion ($320 million for the largest bank).
           Financial intermediation is improving but remains weak; in spite of                                                                                        30.4


           rapid credit growth over the last few years, the credit/GDP ratio is still                                                                         13.8
                                                                                                                               6     6.3        6.8     8
           around 22% and payments are principally conducted in cash.                     3.8     4.2     5.6          5.6



      Firms report access to finance as the main constraint in the 2014
           Enterprise survey (52% compared to 42% in sub-Saharan Africa).

      More than three quarters of Mauritania’s firms (77%) continue to rely
           on internal financing for investment (compared to 75% and 71% for                              Figure 1.31. Population with an account in financial
                                                                                                                48.1      institution, % (15+)
           Sub-Saharan African and Lower Middle Income countries).
                                                                                                                                                 35.5
      Financial inclusion is also low, even compared to countries at similar                                                                                 Mauritania
                                                                                                         22.2
           income levels, with only around 20% of the adult population having a                                                       18.8                    LMIC

           bank account (23% if mobile accounts are counted) - below the
           average for sub-Saharan Africa in particular for mobile accounts.
                                                                                                                Male                       Female
      33

Source: DTIS, 2016; World Development Indicators
     Growth Opportunities
      Growth prospects in the short to medium term are based on Mauritania’s comparative advantages in natural endowments
                                                                                                                               Growth        Poverty        Governance      Sustainability    Constraints


         Recent estimates from the World Bank’s Green Growth                                                          Mineral resources are followed by fisheries, and agro-
             Report put mineral resources (iron ore, oil, gold, copper and                                              pastoralism, dominated by livestock.
             natural gas) at the top of Mauritania’s comparative                                                       Disaggregated analysis demonstrates that fisheries and
             advantages - they account for 43 percent of the total natural                                              livestock together account for almost half of Mauritania’s
             resource wealth.                                                                                           natural resource wealth.
                                 Figure 1.32. Natural resource wealth in Mauritania, 2013                                          Figure 1.33. Natural resource wealth in Mauritania
                                                                                                                        100%
                                                                                                                                                  (disaggregated), 2013
                   100%                                                                                                                                                               5%
                                                                                                                                                                                 4%
                     90%                                                                                                90%
                                                                              24%                                                                                          14%
                     80%                                                                                                80%                                                                  Forestry
                                                                                                                                                                      7%
                     70%                                                                                                70%                                                                  Agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                11%
                     60%                                             33%                                                60%                                                                  Pastoralism
                                                                                              Agropastoralism                                              4%
                     50%                                                                                                50%                                                                  Natural Gas
                                                                                              Fisheries                                              22%
                     40%                                                                                                40%                                                                  Petroleum
                                                                                              Extractive Industries
                     30%                                                                                                30%                                                                  Gold
                     20%                                     43%                                                        20%                                                                  Iron Ore
                                                                                                                                               33%
                     10%                                                                                                10%                                                                  Fisheries
                      0%                                                                                                 0%
      34
                                                                Aggregated                                                                                  Disaggregated
Source: World Bank, 2014, Mele, Gianluca, Mauritania: Counting on Natural Wealth for a Sustainable Future
      Growth Opportunities
      Long-term growth is linked to structural transformation driven by urban-based competitive and labor intensive sectors
                                                                                                                             Growth         Poverty     Governance   Sustainability     Constraints

                                                                                                                Table 1.4. Shapley Decomposition of per Capita Value Added Growth,
       Productivity analysis demonstrates that                                                                 Productivity and Employment by Major Sector, 2008-2014

            services, largely concentrated in urban                                                                                                                  Percent          Contribution

            centers, have the biggest contribution to total                                                      Annual Growth per capita Value Added                 1.48               100%

                                                                                                                  Change in Productivity                              2.95               199%
            productivity growth in the economy,
                                                                                                                         Agriculture                                  0.45               30%
            highlighting their importance in stimulating
                                                                                                                         Industry                                     0.09                6%
            long-term job-creating structural
                                                                                                                         Services                                     2.59               175%
            transformation.                                                                                              Intersectoral Reallocation Effect            -0.18              -12%

       With the second highest urbanization rate in                                                             Change in Employment Rate                            0.89               60%

            the continent, Mauritania’s cities will play a                                                               Agriculture                                  0.24               16%

                                                                                                                         Industry                                     -0.01               -1%
            critical role in stimulating economic
                                                                                                                         Services                                     0.66               45%
            diversification through the growth of
                                                                                                                 Change in Participation Rate                         -2.66             -180%
            productive, labor intensive service sectors.
                                                                                                                 Change in Share of Working Age Population            0.31               21%
      35

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data from Mauritania Central Bank, National Statistical Office
Mining Potential
Rich and diversified resources, principle source of government revenues

Mauritania’s rank by International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM):
               On a global list of countries in terms of relative potential
     2nd       contribution of the mining sector to the national economy
               (only after Democratic Republic Congo)
 Mauritania benefits from abundant and diversified mineral endowments,
     with the recoverable resources estimated to allow 100 years of iron ore
     and gold production at current capacity.

 The total copper resources amount to almost 1000 times the 2014
     output. Significant gas discoveries have the potential to redefine access
     to energy across the country, increasing direct and indirect employment
     well as state revenues.

 Despite the abundance of mineral resources, water scarcity and
     infrastructure deficits limit the potential growth contribution of the sector
     and highlight the delicate trade-offs between optimizing extraction and
     ensuring sustainability. Moreover, the upstream governance of the
36
     extractive sector creates obstacles to attracting foreign investment and
     generating revenue.                                                             Photo credit: WFP / Justin Smith
      Livestock Potential
      One of the most important pillars supporting rural livelihoods
                                                                           Livestock plays an important role in food
     Agro-pastoralism is a main                                                 security and resilience: local production is
     livelihood for:
                                                                                estimated to cover 30% of milk and 100% of
                               of rural                                         red meat national consumption.
             60%               households
                                                                           Livestock is not only a source of revenue
                                                                                and food, but a form of capital
     It is dominated by livestock
     rearing, which accounts for:                                               accumulation and insurance, especially
                                                                                for the poorest, in the context of low
                               of agricultural                                  productive and highly volatile agriculture.
            75%                GDP
                               (average for 2005-2015)                     Though the pastoral economy benefited
                                                                                from higher prices, production stagnated

           16%* of nominal                                                      and is burdened by low productivity. It is
                              national GDP                                      subject to acute desertification and climate
                              (average for 2005-2015)
                                                                                change stresses. Moreover, exports are
     *Contribution is likely to be
     underestimated because livestock
                                                                                handicapped by low meat quality, poor zoo-
     operations are largely informal                                            sanitary and public health safeguards, and
      37
                                                                                limited domestic transformation etc.
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on National Statistic Office, Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) Update, 2016   Photo credit: WFP / Justin Smith
      Fisheries Potential
      Significant economic potential and employment opportunities
                                                                              By contrast, the sector’s contribution to
     Fisheries sector accounts for                                                GDP (incl. catches and ancillary upstream
     (average for 2005-2015):
                                                                                  and downstream activities) is rather small
                               of total export                                    at 2.2% over 2005-2015, reflecting its
             18%               value                                              weak linkages with the national economy.

                                                                              Despite its economic and employment
                               of government                                      potential, the sector faces serious
             15%               revenue                                            challenges in sustainability and generating
                                                                                  local revenue, being characterized by low
                                                                                  productivity and low value addition. The
                               of revenue in                                      dominant products (frozen octopus and
           25%*                foreign currencies
                                                                                  fishmeal) have low value added, resulting
                                                                                  in modest onshore employment and limited
                                Jobs, 80% of which                                offloading from foreign vessels. Only 5-
          40,000*               are in the artisanal                              10% of the fish caught are unloaded at
                                segment                                           Mauritanian ports, and a much smaller
     *Numbers
      38        for revenue in foreign currencies and                             percentage is processed locally.
     jobs taken from DTIS, 2016
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on National Statistic Office, Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) Update, 2016   Photo credit: WFP / Agron Dragaj
Urbanization Potential
Rapid growth, but limited positive agglomeration effects

Mauritania has the second largest urbanization rate on the continent
(after South Africa)


              Urban population in                  Urban population in
   60%                                   38%
              Mauritania                           Sub-Saharan Africa


And has experienced a dramatic structural change in its population composition


              Nomadic population                   Nomadic population
   75%                                    2%
              in 1960s                             today


These demographic and lifestyle changes seem largely a result of push
factors associated with coping strategies against adverse climatic shocks.

Due to high informality, poor infrastructure, uneven service coverage, and
weak human capital, urbanization has not brought positive agglomeration
39
effects normally associated with increased economic productivity per capita.
                                                                                 Photo credit: Ouad Naga Photo (http://mr.worldmapz.com)
Growth Diagnostic Summary (1/2)
Volatile, extractives-dominated, and state-driven growth with limited job creation and weak private sector diversification
                                                                         Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

  Accelerated growth largely driven by extractive resource revenues and public investment, which helped
     Mauritania ride the commodities super-cycle; growth vulnerable to terms-of-trade shocks and weakened by
     political uncertainty, droughts, the decline in labor force participation, and poor macroeconomic management.
  On the back of the mining boom, solid performance of non-tradable sectors, weaker performance of
     traditional productive sectors, and no structural transformation despite high urbanization rates.
  Dominance of the State in key economic sectors, such as extractives, fisheries, and construction, with
     associated negative externalities, notably the rise of public debt, weak competition and private sector
     development, and limited job creation.
  In light of the new normal in commodity prices, inclusive growth in the short to medium term can be
     achieved by leveraging existing comparative advantages in extractives, as well as fisheries and
     livestock, both of which have high potential in promoting job-intensive growth, and gradually shifting
     towards private sector-led diversification in urban-based competitive and labor intensive sectors in
40   the long-term.
 Growth Diagnostic Summary (2/2)
 Priority constraints relate to managing natural endowments and triggering structural transformation in urban centers
                                                                        Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability      Constraints




PRIORITY BINDING CONSTRAINT AREAS




      Weak Management             Failure to Harness            Failure to Harness           Rapid and Outpaced
        of Extractives           Potential in Livestock        Potential in Fisheries           Urbanization
                                                                                                               Photo credit: WFP / Agron Dragaj




 41
                                                POVERTY & SHARED
                                                   PROSPERITY
                                             Significant reduction in poverty and inequality in
                                             the past decade was primarily driven by elative
                                             price shifts that benefitted poor rural producers,
                                              rather than gains in productivity or structural
                                                 mechanisms to build the human capital,
                                             productive and financial assets of the poor over
                                                              the longer term


     42        © 2015 Ipsos.
Photo credit: Kinross Gold from mining.com
      Poverty Trends
      During the commodity super cycle Mauritania experienced a significant reduction in poverty, especially extreme poverty
                                                                                                                                                                       Growth             Poverty          Governance    Sustainability     Constraints

      Before the commodity super-cycle (1990s - early 2000s),                                                                                      … with an average rate of reduction increasing to around 1.5
           Mauritania had been on a steady but slow poverty reduction                                                                                      percentage points per year for the 2004-2014 period and
           trajectory with a modest annual rate of poverty reduction of                                                                                    being particularly high during 2008-2014 sub-period.
           slightly less than one percentage point per year.                                                                                        The extreme poor have done particularly well with their
      During the commodity boom poverty reduction accelerated…                                                                                            number almost halving between 2008 and 2014.
                      Figure 2.1. Official poverty rates, 1996-2008 - old poverty line (light                                                                            Figure 2.2. Extreme poverty rates as defined by National food
                                 bars) ; 2008-2014 new poverty line (dark bars)                                                                                                             poverty line, 1996-2014
                            Old poverty line - 32,800 MRO at 1988 prices                                   New poverty line - 177,200                                                                                   New national food poverty
                                                                                                                                                                          Old national food poverty line
                                                                                                             MRO at 2014 prices                                                                                                   line
               54.3
                                         51                                                                                                                     44.4
                                                                                                                                                                                   42.7
                                                                 46.7
                                                                                          44.5                                                                                                         39



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        22.1

                                                                                           42                                                                                                                                             12.9
                                                                                                                    33




               1996                     2000                     2004                     2008                     2014                                         1996               2000               2004              2008              2014
      43

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Trends
      The estimates of large poverty reduction in the recent period are robust across various poverty lines or indicators
                                                                                                                                                                            Growth           Poverty        Governance      Sustainability       Constraints


       Across the various extreme poverty lines (International                                                                                     Across the absolute poverty lines (International and
           extreme poverty and national food poverty lines) and all the                                                                                    national absolute poverty lines), poverty declined by about a
           three poverty measures (poverty rate, poverty gap and                                                                                           third for all three measures, confirming particular progress on
           severity of poverty) poverty halved between 2008 and 2014.                                                                                      the alleviation of extreme poverty.

                                                                                                         Figure 2.3. Various Poverty measures, 2008-2014

                                                                                                                                                                     International Absolute (3.1 USD /         44.5          National Absolute
               International Absolute Extreme (1.9                       22.1                  National Food
                           USD / PPP)                                                                                                                                              PPP)


                                                                                                                                                              33.2                                                    33                             2008
                                                                                                                              2008

                                                                                12.9                                          2014                                                                                                                   2014
        10.8                                                                                                                                                         21.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15.4
               5.6                                                                              6.2
                                                                                                                                                                                10.1                                                 9.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7.3
                               2.8                                                                    3.2             2.6                                                              5.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                4.4                                                4.1
                                     1.3            1.1 0.5                                                                 1.2                                                                       2.3


     Poverty rate           Poverty gap Poverty severity Poverty rate                        Poverty gap Poverty severity                                   Poverty rate       Poverty gap      Poverty      Poverty rate   Poverty gap      Poverty
                                                                                                                                                                                                severity                                     severity
      44

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Trends
      However, the current national poverty line makes the poverty decline particularly large
                                                                                                                                                                       Growth          Poverty        Governance    Sustainability   Constraints

                                                                                                                                                               Figure 2.4. Cumulative Distribution Function (censored at 250K)
         Sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the particular
                                                                                                                                                                                          Poverty lines
              absolute poverty line chosen for Mauritania is positioned in
              a part of the cumulative distribution functions for 2008 and
              2014, where the distance between the two curves is the
              highest (i.e. poverty decline is the largest).




                                                                                                                                               Poverty rates
         If the poverty line is moved to the right or to the left, the                                                                                                                                                                2008

              decline in poverty and the elasticity to growth indicators                                                                                                                                                               2014

              would be smaller.

         However, shifting the poverty line around this threshold
              would still result in poverty declines within a 9-12
              percentage points range, hence the poverty change cannot
              simply be attributed to the poverty line.

      45

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Trends
      Based on the current poverty line, Mauritania is a leading performer in poverty reduction in the region
                                                                                                                                      Growth          Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

                    Mauritania’s rank in poverty elasticity to GDP in SSA
                                     Mauritania performs well vis-à-vis other African countries in terms of poverty elasticity to GDP, ranking 4th after
                 4th                 South Africa, Madagascar and Botswana. This cross-country benchmarking confirms that Mauritania’s poverty
                                     performance has been above-average.
             5
                                                                                    Figure 2.5. Average Poverty Elasticity to GDP Growth (SSA), 2008-2014
             4

             3

             2

             1

             0
                   ZAF MDG BWA MRT COG GHA CMR ETH NER MWI SWZ NAM TGO UGA SEN CPV BEN COD BFA RWA MOZ MUS LSO SLE NGA AGO CIV MLI ZMB STP GNB TZA GIN SYC
            -1

            -2

            -3


      46 -4

Source: World Bank, Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility in Mauritania, July 2016
      Poverty Trends
      Poverty reduction has been accompanied by improvements in vulnerability…
                                                                                                                                                                       Growth              Poverty          Governance       Sustainability   Constraints


         According to various estimation methods, vulnerability to                                                                                 The group of hard-core poor (both poor and vulnerable to
              poverty* has also decreased, indicating that the assets                                                                                      poverty in the near future) has declined substantially from
              base of the lowest quintiles has improved over time (see                                                                                     32.8 to 15.6 percent while the group of hard-core non-poor
              Annex for further technical details).                                                                                                        has increased from 43.8 to 60.4 percent, which signals
                                                                                                                                                           potential for a further reduction in poverty in the future.
                                   Figure 2.6. Vulnerability Indices, 2008-2014
               44.52                                      44.49
                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 2.7. Poverty and Vulnerability, 2008-2014
                                                                                                      44.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60.4

                        32.97     32.97

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      43.8
                                                                              24.23                             23.35
                                                                    22.22                                                21.67
                                                                                                                                                                   32.8



                                                                                                                                                                            15.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     11.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                               6.7
                Headcount Index                        Vulnerability Index (m1)                    Vulnerability Index (m2)
                        2008                      2014 (cross-section)                         2014 (pseudo-panel)
                                                                                                                                                            Poor & vulnerable (hard-core    Non-poor, but still vulnerable     Non-poor & non-vulnerable
            *Vulnerability to poverty is the probability of being poor in the future, measured by predicting poverty
                                                                                                                                                                       poor)                                                     (hard-core non-poor)
            using individual or household endowments (If an individual is observed to be poor but his/her endowments                                                                                 2008      2014
      47 are associated with higher welfare, the risk of being poor in the near future is expected to be lower).

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
           Poverty Trends
             …and inequality, which has also significantly decreased in the most recent period
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Growth          Poverty       Governance    Sustainability   Constraints


                         Household expenditure growth has been positive for all                                                                As a result, overall inequality, as measured by the Gini index,
                                                percentiles with no exceptions, although it has been                                                                                             declined from 35.3 to 31.9 percent in 2008-2014. Comparing
                                                much higher for the lower percentiles.                                                                                                           the two Lorenz curves shows that they are apart all along the
                                                                                                                                                                                                 distribution, indicating a robust inequality decrease.

                                                       Figure 2.8. Growth Incidence Curve, 2008-2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 2.9. Lorenz Curves, 2008-2014
    Annualized mean growth rate of per capita




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (95% confidence intervals)




                                                                                                                                                Cumulative percentage of total national income
             household expenditure




             48

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Trends
      Social mobility indicators have demonstrated equally positive dynamics
                                                                                                                                                         Growth         Poverty                 Governance         Sustainability        Constraints


                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 2.8. Social mobility by region, %, 2014
           Exited poverty
                                                                                                                                               Hodh El Charghi                      9.71
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    36.67
                                                     versus 12.07% of those who entered
             23.2%                                   poverty and 20.89% of those who stayed
                                                                                                                                                       Gorgol

                                                                                                                                                       Tagant
                                                                                                                                                                             7.45

                                                                                                                                                                                        10.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                34.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             32.4
                                                     poor (chronic poverty)
                                                                                                                                                 Guidimangha                                              17.54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30.49

         Over the past six years more than one third of the Mauritanian                                                                               Brakna                     9.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     29.92

              population transited to / from poverty with more than 65 percent                                                                          Adrar                              12.09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25.38
              of them exiting, rather than entering, poverty.                                                                                   Hodh El Ghabi                                           16.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        23.22

                                                                                                                                                       Assaba                              12.18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  21.39
         The exit rate has been significantly higher in predominantly rural                                                                                                                        15.12
                                                                                                                                                        Trarza                                                  19.98
              areas, particularly in the “poverty triangle” of Mauritania: Hodh                                                                                                  8.11
                                                                                                                                                      Dakhlet…                                          16.79
              EL Charghi with 36 percent, Gorgol with 34 percent, Tagant with
                                                                                                                                                  Nouakchott                                 12.72
                                                                                                                                                                                           11.83
              32 percent, Guidimanka and Brakna with 30 percent.
                                                                                                                                                        Inchiri              7.47                                               Entered poverty
                                                                                                                                                                                 9.18

                                                                                                                                                Titis Zemmour                                   13.01                           Exited poverty
                                                                                                                                                                          6.05


      49

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, July 2016
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      In 2008, most of the poor were concentrated in rural areas and engaged in agriculture and livestock
                                                                                                                                            Growth          Poverty       Governance    Sustainability      Constraints


   Contribution of rural areas to poverty                                                                         Most of the rural households were engaged in agriculture and livestock
                                                                                                                   and experienced the highest poverty rates, ranging between 60 and 75
                                     Poor living in                                                                percent.
                   78%
                                     rural areas
                                                                                                                  80   75.1          Figure 2.10. Poverty rates by occupation of the household head, 2008
                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                              60.9
                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                                          51.2
                                     Extreme poor                                                                 50
                   86%
                                     living in rural areas                                                                                           38.9    38.1      37.9      37
                                                                                                                  40                                                                      35.7

                                                                                                                  30
      2008, according to EPVC 2008                                                                                                                                                                  22
                                                                                                                  20                                                                                           15.3
       Vast majority of the poor and extreme poor were
                                                                                                                  10
        concentrated in rural areas.
                                                                                                                   0

       More than half of all the poor (54 percent) were in
        four southern wilayas: Brakna, Gorgol, Hodh El
        Charghi, and Assaba).

      50

Source: Mauritanian Office of National Statistics based on EPCV 2008, Profil de la Pauvrete en Mauritanie 2008
                                       Poverty Reduction Drivers
                                           Since 2008 rural areas have witnessed the strongest increase in household expenditure
                                                                                                                                                                      Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


                                            Rural areas performance                                                                                            Nouakchott performance

                                                               Changes in household expenditure have                                                                            In Nouakchott, however, most of the
                                                                 been asymmetric in favor of rural                                                                                households experienced a decrease in
                                                                 areas, where all percentiles of the                                                                              mean expenditures with only a small
                                            distribution have done very well.                                                                                   Fraction of the poor showing positive developments.

                                                                                                          Figure 2.11. Growth Incidence Curves by Area, 2014
Mean growth rate of per capita household
     expenditure (non-annualized)




                                           51

    Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      Closer spacial analysis confirms that the poorest rural regions have experienced the largest progress in poverty reduction
                                                                                                                                                           Growth        Poverty      Governance     Sustainability    Constraints

                                                                                                                                  4                        Figure 2.12. Poverty Measures by Region, 2008-2014
         Cross-regional changes in poverty confirm that
             predominantly rural regions (Hodh El Charghi,
                                                                                                                                 -1
             Gorgol, Brakna, Adrar and Tagant) have done
             much better than predominantly urban regions
                                                                                                                                 -6
             in terms of poverty reduction, experiencing
             significant declines in poverty.
                                                                                                                               -11

         The progress of Gorgol and Tagant is
             particularly encouraging, as these regions had                                                                    -16

             the highest level of poverty in 2008.                                                                                                                                                           Poverty Rate
                                                                                                                               -21                                                                           Poverty Gap
         By contrast, Nouakchott experienced an
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Poverty Severity
             increase in poverty, which combined with the
                                                                                                                               -26
             growth of the urban population, has increased
             the share of the poor living in the capital.
      52                                                                                                                       -31
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      Thus, rural areas have the largest contribution to the overall poverty reduction
                                                                                                                                                                   Growth             Poverty       Governance     Sustainability     Constraints

                       Share of total poverty reduction explained
                                                                                                                                                            Changes within areas are due mostly to changes in rural
                       by improvements within rural areas
                                                                                                                                                             areas that explain 78 percent of the total within area effect
                                        Versus 13.6 percent of poverty reduction                                                                             of 88.4 percent.
                 78%                    explained by population shifts
                                                                                                                                                            And within rural areas consumption growth played a more
                                                                                                                                                             important role than redistribution.
                         Figure 2.13. Poverty Change Decomposition into Population
                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 2.14. Shapley poverty decomposition, 2008-2014
                                              and Areas Effects
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2.8
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.6
                          Interaction effect           -2
                                                                                                                                                                   All                   Rural           Other urban           Nouakchott
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1.2
                    Population-shift effect                      13.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -3.5
                                                                                                                                                                         -5.1
                           Total Intra effect                                                                              88.4                                 -6.5                                             -6.3


                                           Rural                                                                   78


                                 Other urban                      14.2                                                                                                                                                        Growth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Redistribution
                                                                                                                                                                                      -17.9
                                  Nouakchott           -3.8
      53

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      Increase in rural household expenditure benefitted mostly livestock and agriculture producers
                                                                                                                                                             Growth            Poverty      Governance         Sustainability   Constraints

                    Expenditure increase of food producers                                                                                  Households engaged in agriculture and livestock demonstrated
                                                                                                                                            the biggest decrease in poverty rate over 2008-2014 period.
                                     Versus 1.4% of household expenditure
                                                                                                                                             Table 2.1. Poverty Decomposition into Economic Sectors, 2008-2014
                33%                  per capita increase for non-producers                                                                                             2008                      2014               Pop.        Poverty
                                                                                                                                             Economic
                                                                                                                                                               Pop.      Poverty         Pop.       Povert          Share       change
                                                                                                                                             Sector
                                                                                                                                                               share      rate           share      y rate         change       2008-14
                                       Figure 2.15. Average Expenditure Growth,
                                                                                                                                             Agriculture        7.7           75.1        3.8           57.5         -3.9       -17.57
                                            32.2
                                                       2008-2014
                                                                                                                                             Livestock          8.8           60.9       14.0           44.0         5.4        -16.88
                                                                                                                                             Construction       4.5           51.2        4.7           35.5         0.2        -15.64
                                  22.3                                           Non-producers                                               Transport &
                                                                                                                                                                3.0           37.0        3.3           22.1         0.3        -14.84
                                                                                 Producers                                                   Comms
                                                                                                                                             Fishing            2.2           38.9        2.2           27.8          0         -11.13
                                                                                                                                             Industry           1.7           37.9        2.2           26.9         0.5        -11.00

                                                                                            3.8                                              Services           13.1          38.1       12.8           29.3         -0.3        -8.77
                                                                               -4.6                                                          Commerce           16.8          35.7       25.0           31.9         8.2         -3.84

                                        Rural                                      Urban                                                     Admin              9.5           22.0        4.8           18.4         -4.7        -3.59
                                                                                                                                             Mining             1.3           15.3        1.3           20.4          0          5.01
                                                                                                                                             Others             31.4          48.3       25.7           31.3         -5.7       -16.98
      54                                                                                                                                     Total             100.0      44.50          100.0          33.0         n/a        -11.55
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      This, however, has been accompanied by a significant structural employment reallocation out of agriculture
                                                                                                                                                                     Growth           Poverty           Governance   Sustainability      Constraints

          The analysis of the welfare of employed population confirms a strong                                                                                     This, however, has been accompanied by a
              performance of agriculture and livestock in terms of increases in                                                                                      structural labor outflow from the agriculture sector.
              mean household expenditures.
                                                                                                                                                                              Population share decrease in agriculture vs.
                                                                                                                                                                   -3.9% +5.4% population share increase in livestock
                          Figure 2.16. Mean Expenditure Change, Employed Population (15+), 2008-2014

                  31.9
                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 2.17. Population share, engaged in agriculture and
                                 26.2                                                                                                                                                            livestock, 2008-2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14.0


                                                                                                                                                                              2008         2014
                                                11.8           11.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8.8
                                                                               8.3            7.8                                                                                    7.7
                                                                                                             6.6

                                                                                                                            0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.8


                                                                                                                                           -4.9


                                                                                                                                                                                      Agriculture                          Lvestock
                                                                                                                                                           -15.9
      55

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
Poverty Reduction Drivers
Strong performance in poverty reduction of agriculture and livestock has been largely driven by rising prices
                                                                                           Growth          Poverty       Governance   Sustainability     Constraints

  Real GDP growth for both agriculture and livestock has                      Strong performance of these sectors in terms of poverty
      been modest and much lower in 2008-2014 compared                          reduction is largely a result of favorable relative price shifts,
      to 2004-2008. Thus the expansion of output played a                       benefitting rural producers.
      small, but less significant role in poverty reduction.
             Figure 2.18. Average Annual Real GDP Growth in Agriculture and
                           Livestock, 2004-2008 and 2008-2014                           Figure 2.19. Prices by Category: Cumulative Growth 2008-2014
     14.0%                                                                       70%

     12.0%                                                                       60%

     10.0%                                                                       50%

      8.0%                                                                       40%

      6.0%                                                                       30%

      4.0%                                                                       20%

      2.0%
                                                                                 10%
      0.0%
                                                                                  0%
                       2004-2008                         2008-2014
                                                                                         Aggregate index       Primary sector index      Fresh products index
                              Agriculture    Livestock
56
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      More specifically, livestock producers benefitted the most due to high meat prices
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Growth                                       Poverty                             Governance                                Sustainability                                 Constraints

                    Increase in meat prices                                                                                        260.0                                         Figure 2.21. Meat Price Indices and Consumer Price Index (CPI), 2008-2014

                                     More inflation for meat (beef and
                15%                                                                                                                240.0
                                     camel) than for overall CPI

                                                                                                                                   220.0

                     Figure 2.20. Cumulative Price Increase over CPI inflation

    20.0%                                                                                                                          200.0

    15.0%
                                                                                                                                   180.0
    10.0%

      5.0%
                                                                                                                                   160.0
      0.0%
                                   2004-2008                                              2008-2014                                                                                                                                                                       * Note: The data is based on Nouackhott prices (as prices in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          regions for the CPI were only collected starting from 2015)
     -5.0%                                                                                                                         140.0




                                                                                                                                                              Jul-08
                                                                                                                                                                       Oct-08



                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct-09



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-10
                                                                                                                                                     Apr-08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct-10



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-11
                                                                                                                                                                                         Apr-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct-11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct-12



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct-13



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct-14
                                                                                                                                            Jan-08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr-12
                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Apr-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Apr-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-14
                                   Increase in real price of beef meat (w/r CPI)

                                   Iincrease in real price of camel meat (w/r CPI)
                                                                                                                                                                           Aggregate index                                                              Beef meat(kg)                                                      Camel meat(kg)

      57

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, July 2016; prices – World Bank staff calculations based on Central Bank data
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      Internal migration and rapid urbanization have also contributed to asymmetric poverty reduction
                                                                                                                                                                     Growth          Poverty      Governance     Sustainability   Constraints

   The population of Mauritania has become more urbanized and                                                                                      Although there is a lack of data to conclude confidently, it is
        sedentary with the share of nomadic people decreasing from                                                                                         likely that migrating people were predominantly poor,
        5.1 to 1.9 percent between 2000 and 2013                                                                                                           resulting in a shift of poverty from rural to urban areas. This
   Nouakchott has increased its share of population from 22.3 to                                                                                          appears highly probable given that incomes and productivity
        27.1 percent, explaining about half of the urbanization process.                                                                                   have been increasing in rural areas but not employment.
                                                                                                                                                30
                              Figure 2.22. Population changes, 2000-2013                                                                                                   Figure 2.23. Population changes by region, 2000-2013

                                                                                1.9                                                             25
                                     5.1                                                                                                                     2000   2013

                                                                                                                                                20
                                    38.1                                       48.3
                                                                                                        Nomads                                  15

                                                                                                        Urban
                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                        Rural

                                    56.8                                                                                                          5
                                                                               49.8
                                                                                                                                                  0


                                    2000                                       2013
      58

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
    Nouakchott
     What explains the increase in poverty?

    MIGRATION
     Analysis of asset ownership (2008-2014) shows that the share of
           households with proper roof and floor has declined in Nouakchott,
           which combined with the growth in the capital’s population confirms
           that those who migrated were likely to be predominantly poor.
           Moreover, social mobility indicators demonstrate that more people
           entered rather than exited poverty in Nouakchott (12.72 percent
           versus 11.83 percent respectively).
    FOOD PRICES                                                               Food constitutes 54 percent of
                                                                                  the household consumption
      Price of wheat in Nouakchott
                                                                                  basket in Nouakchott and is by
                          Higher than the world
           73%                                                                    far the largest bundle. Hence,
                          price
                                                                                  higher domestic and imported
      Price of wheat flour                                                        food prices contributed to the
                                                                                  deterioration of purchasing
                              Higher than the
           130%                                                                   power for net food purchasers,
                              world price
      59                                                                          especially urban populations.
Source: World Bank, Mauritania Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, July 2016                              Photo credit: Wikimedia / Bertranz
      Poverty Reduction Drivers
      Government investment program also contributed to poverty reduction
                                                                                                                                                                    Growth                          Poverty                   Governance                   Sustainability                Constraints

          Public capital investment increased
                                                                                                                                                           Figure 2.24. EMEL coverage and poverty rate by region
                                           And contributed to improved access to
             34%                           services and infrastructure and poverty




                                                                                                                                                              75
                                                                                                                                                              60
                                           reduction in general




                                                                                                                                                              45
          EMEL Program




                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                              15
           Created in 2011 in response to a major drought and food crisis.                                                                                                                Taille des bulles proportionnelle au nombre de personnes




                                                                                                                                                              0
           Consisted primarily in selling subsidized food (wheat flour, rice,                                                                                  kch
                                                                                                                                                                   ott
                                                                                                                                                                                      rba
                                                                                                                                                                                         ins
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ru
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ra l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a,I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            nc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               hir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ott
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   em
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 au
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   vre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                uv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  re
                                                                                                                                                             oua               es
                                                                                                                                                                                  u                                    h                      o                   Z           onp
                                                                                                                                                           N               ntr                                     ag                      ,N                iris           N
            vegetable oil, sugar and pasta) and supporting livestock-raising.                                                                                          e                                      im                      ra r               u,T
                                                                                                                                                                     sc                                    uid                   ,Ad
                                                                                                                                                                 t re                                  t,G                    ba                   h ibo
                                                                                                                                                               Au                                   a n                  ss  a                  ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ag                 i,A                     ou
                                                                                                                                                                                               a,T
           Relatively good targeting in relative, but not in absolute                                                                                                               l,B
                                                                                                                                                                                        r a kn
                                                                                                                                                                                                          C ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                               rg h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a k  hle
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tN
                                                                                                                                                                                                       El                   a,D
                                                                                                                                                                                 rgo                dh                  a rz
            terms: 4% increase of food consumption for the poorest 30%                                                                                                         Go                Ho                i,Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                                               r b
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                         lG
            versus 2% increase for the richest 30%, while annual per person                                                                                                                      Ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                   d hE

            benefit was MRO 2,420 for the bottom 30% and MRO 4,990 for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                 couverture Emel (%)                             Taux de pauvrete (%)
            top 30%.
          However, contribution to reducing overall headcount poverty
           was limited, around 1 percent* (reducing poverty further from
      60
           33% to 32.2%).
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Where are the poor now?
      Poverty in Mauritania is still overwhelmingly a rural phenomenon, quite concentrated geographically
                                                                                                                                                 Growth        Poverty     Governance     Sustainability   Constraints

                    Contribution of rural areas to poverty                                                                                     Map 2.1. Chronic Poverty by Wilaya, 2014



               70%                  Poor living in rural areas



         The areas with the highest poverty rates are concentrated in
              the southern part of the country, while the urban coastal
              areas have the lowest poverty rates.

         Correspondingly, highest poverty rates still affect households
              engaged in primary sectors: agriculture - 57.4 percent and
              livestock – 44 percent.

         Hence, continued focus on these sectors is warranted in light
              of their importance for poverty reduction.



      61

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, July 2016
      Non-monetary Poverty Trends
      The wellbeing of Mauritanians has also improved, as reflected in the non-monetary poverty indicators
                                                                                                                                                                Growth              Poverty          Governance     Sustainability      Constraints


       Multidimensional poverty index (MPI) improved by 7                                                                                     Human Opportunity Index (HOI), measuring the availability of
            percentage points over 2008-2014.                                                                                                       opportunities and their equitable distribution, shows progress in
                                                                                                                                                    education, health and water, but deterioration in labor
       Its decomposition into the various components (Shapley
                                                                                                                                                    (access), signaling that labor markets fail to meet demand and
            decomposition) shows that most components performed
                                                                                                                                                    tend to disproportionately affect poorest quintiles.
            well, with the exception of water.
                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 2.25. Human Opportunity Index (HOI) for selected
                             Figure 2.24. Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI), 2008-2014                                                                                                    indicators, 2008-2014
               0.14                                                                                                                                                                           94.1
                                                                                                                                                                                       90.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2008
                                                                                                                                                                      76.7
                      0.13                                                                                                                                     75.5                                                                            2014




                                0.043                                                  0.044
                                                                                                         0.038
                                                                    0.034
                                        0.038                                                                              0.028                                                                                    16               17.3
                                                                                            0.037                                                                                                            13.2                           14.6
                                                                          0.029                               0.034
                                                 0.009
                                                          0.012
                                                                                                                                   0.014
           Literacy            Electricity          Water          Sanitation       Safe energy          Housing            Assets                         Literacy (age 10-20)       Good health        Piped water access   Work (past 7 days)
         (household                                                                 for cooking
      62 average)

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
     Human Development Outcomes
      However, Mauritania still exhibits limited progress in human development outcomes
                                                                                                                 Growth           Poverty   Governance   Sustainability    Constraints

                                                                             Table 2.2. Mauritania’s Progress on the Main Millennium Development Goals

                 Mauritania’s HDI rank (2014)                                 MDG
                                                                                                                                            Actual performance              MDG
                                                                                                                                             1990          2014            target
                                                                              1. Eliminate extreme poverty and hunger
                                  Out of 186; classified as a low                                                                            56.6          31.0           28.3 (✗)
           153rd                                                              Poverty incidence (%)
                                  Human Development country                   2. Ensure education for all
                                                                                                                                             49.0         81.1%           100 (✗)
                                                                              Net primary enrollment rate (%)
      Progress has been made, but the goals now                              3. Promote equaity between the sexes
                                                                                                                                             0.73          1.03           1.00 (✔)
                                                                              Girl/boy enrollment in primary school
           appear to have been too ambitious and
                                                                              4. Reduce maternal mortality
           most of them were not met in 2015.                                                                                                137           115            45.0 (✗)
                                                                              Mortality rate for children under five (of every 1000)

      The notable exceptions are child                                       5. Improve maternal health
                                                                                                                                             930           582            232 (✗)
                                                                              Maternal mortality rate (of every 1000,000 live births)
           malnutrition and gender parity in primary
           education. Progress was also achieved in                           6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
                                                                                                                                             128            61*            44 (✔)
           the control of malaria, though no                                  Tuberculosis incidence (TP+) per 100 000 inhabitants

           quantitative target was set.                                       7. Ensure environmental sustainability
                                                                              Proportion of the population using an improved potable          37            65            68.5 (✗)
                                                                              drinking water source (%)
      63

Source: World Bank staff estimations; Human Development Report, UNDP, 2015
      Education
      Access: Decreasing enrolment in primary schools with limited progress for pre-school and secondary
                                                                                                               Growth             Poverty        Governance       Sustainability     Constraints


         Gross enrolment rates (GER) for primary school demonstrate
                                                                                                                              Figure 2.26. Gross Enrollment Rates, 2005-2014
              concerning dynamics: according to official data, primary GER
              decreased from 104.6 to 100.4 percent between 2010 and 2014.*                                                                      104.6
                                                                                                                                                          100.4                      2005
                                                                                                                                            98
              However, net enrollment rates improved for all ages between 2008
                                                                                                                                                                                     2010
              and 2014, with no exceptions.
                                                                                                                                                                                     2014

         For the poorest 20 percent, almost two-thirds of children aged
              6 to 11 are not in school. Many of them attend traditional religious
              educational institutions, Mahadras, for which attendance is not
                                                                                                                                                                                   32.7
              included in the official enrollment figures, as Mahadras do not                                                                                         24.3
                                                                                                                                                                             22
              provide the basic curriculum.
                                                                                                                     8.6   8.8
         * GER has fluctuated above the 100 percent mark since 2008 and there is some concern regarding        5.1
         the reliability of administrative data: see Mauritania, Ministry of National Education (2015),
         Rapport d’État sur le Système Éducatif National (RESEN). Although the household surveys include         Pre-school                      Pimary                  Secondary
         data on attendance rates, these do not produce more reliable statistics on attendance or enrollment
         rates: World Bank 2016. Islamic Republic of Mauritania: Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility 2008-
      64 2014, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Source: Rapport d’État sur le Système Éducatif National (RESEN), August 2015
      Education: Islamic Schools in Mauritania
      Unprecedented expansion, yet still under-regulated
                                                                                 Varying levels of education: from Quran
     Number of schools:                                                               recitations to studying various subjects and
                                                                                      religious reference works (pre-primary to
                                                                                      tertiary levels).
           3,098                             9,170                               Many students (46% in 2010) follow in
               2001
                                                    2010
                                                                                      parallel both informal Islamic and formal
                                                                                      modern systems of education.
     Number of students:
                                                                                 Potential benefit: recitation may contribute
      Religious schools (21% of all schools):
                                                                                      to the eradication of illiteracy at a relatively
                                                                                      low cost (less than 1 percent of the
         78,915                            167,152
              2001
                                                                                      education budget).
                                                 2010
                                                                       30%  Key weaknesses: (i) minimizing the
      Non- religious primary + secondary schools
      (79% of all schools):
                                                                                      importance of scientific disciplines; (ii)
                                                                                      providing limited scope for developing
                                           644,212                                    analytical problem-solving and
                                              2009-10                                 synthesizing skills; (iii) low employability
      65
                                                                                      prospects; (iv) vulnerability to extremism.                     Photo credit: Wikimedia / Ferdinand Reus
Source: UNICEF 2016, L’Enseignement Originel en Mauritanie: Contribution de la Mahadra a la Realisation de Droits des Enfants; based on 2010 census
      Education
      Quality: Serious issues persist at all levels
                                                                                                                                 Growth            Poverty          Governance    Sustainability      Constraints


         Learning outcomes across all educational levels are low,                                           Standardized tests in math, French, and Arabic in primary
              although primary education is particularly affected,                                              schools have shown that students’ learning achievements are
              owing to early drop-outs and inadequate learning                                                  not only low, but have stagnated or deteriorated over the past
              conditions (UNICEF, 2014).                                                                        15 years, with the exception of improvements in Arabic
                                                                                                                (RESEN, 2015)
                                     Figure 2.27. Level of Academic Proficiency,
                                        Grade 5 of Primary School, 2003-2014
                                                                                                                Figure 2.28. Pass rate of secondary school final exam (BAC) for Francophone Africa
                                                                                           2003   81.9
                                        40
                                                                                           2011
                          32                                                               2014
                                29                                                                       53.1
                                                                                                                49   47.6   45   43.1   42
                                                                                                                                              37     36.2    35.2
                                                            18                                                                                                       32.4   31
                                                      16          16                                                                                                             25.4
                                                                                                                                                                                        16.2
                                                                               11                                                                                                              10.5   9
                                                                                           9                                                                                                                8
                                                                                     8



                               Arabic                    French                     Math
      66

Source: Rapport d’État sur le Système Éducatif National (RESEN), August 2015
      Education
      Particularly worrisome are declining literacy rates of children under 15
                                                                                                                                                                       Growth           Poverty        Governance     Sustainability          Constraints



         Literacy rates for children under 15 have declined across gender groups between 2008 and 2014.

         The deterioration coincides with the introduction of bilingualism and structural changes to the secondary cycle. These issues
              require further analysis to understand the underlying causes of this alarming trend.


                                            Figure 2.29 Literacy rate by age for boys, 2008-2014                                                                                Figure 2.30. Literacy rate by age for girls, 2008-2014
                       0.9                                                                                                                                  0.9


                     0.85                                                                                                                                  0.85


                       0.8                                                                                                                                  0.8


                     0.75                                                                                                                                  0.75


                       0.7                                                                                                                                  0.7


                     0.65                                                                                           2008                                   0.65                                                                   2008

                                                                                                                    2014                                                                                                          2014
                       0.6                                                                                                                                  0.6
                             10       11        12        13         14        15        16        17         18        19        20                              10    11      12      13     14      15     16     17      18          19     20
      67

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, World Bank, July 2016
      Education
      Education services are inequitably distributed with marked distortions between rural and urban areas and gender groups
                                                                                                                                                                               Growth                Poverty         Governance        Sustainability         Constraints


         There is a clear divide between rural and urban areas                                                                            Although boys and girls start on par, the gap between them
              across the education value chain with the primary                                                                             increases after primary school with boys being almost
              completion and secondary access rates in                                                                                      twice as likely to access secondary school as
              urban areas double those in rural areas                                                                                       girls.

                                                      Figure 2.31. Probability to access and complete primary and                                                                        Figure 2.32. Probability to access and complete primary and
                                                 87   1st level of secondary school by the place of residence, 2010                                                                              1st level of secondary school by gender, 2010
                                                                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                                               Probability of access (in %)
                                                 74
                                                                                                                                                                               78
              Probability of access (in %)




                                                                                                                                Urbain
                                                               57                                                                                                                                                                                                 Garçons
                                                                               51                                               Rural                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Filles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                43
                                                                                               39
                                                                                                               32                                                                                                               31               30
                                                               25
                                                                                                                                22                                                              36                                                               21
                                                                               18                                                                                                                               29
                                                                                               13
                                                                                                               11                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
                                             Accès fond.   Achèv fond.   Accès 1er cycle Achèv. 1er cycle Accès 2nd cycle   Achèv. 2nd
                                                                                                                                                                   Accès fond.              Achèv fond.   Accès 1er cycle Achèv. 1er cycle Accès 2nd cycle Achèv. 2nd cycle
                                                                              sec.            sec.             sec.          cycle sec.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               sec.            sec.             sec.             sec.
      68                                                                   Level of Education                                                                                 Level of Education

Source: Rapport d’État sur le Système Éducatif National (RESEN), August 2015
      Education
      Inequality is particularly evident between income groups, with education being one of the main correlates of poverty
                                                                                                                                                           Growth             Poverty          Governance      Sustainability            Constraints


         Poverty is highly correlated with the level of education,                                                                             Both enrollment and completion rates are decreasing
              being the highest among those who never went to school or                                                                          linearly with poverty, the lowest quintile reaching less
              have an incomplete primary education.                                                                                              than one third of the completion rates of the richest
                                                                                                                                                 quintile.

      60.0
                             Figure 2.44. Poverty by education of household head, 2008-2014                                                                  Figure 2.45. Education access and completion by income quintile,
                                                                                                                                                     94                                    2010
      50.0
                                                                                                                                    2008                                 77                                                   Poorest

      40.0                                                                                                                                      68                                   67                                       Least poor
                                                                                                                                    2014
                                                                                                                                                                                                          52
      30.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          34
      20.0

                                                                                                                                                                    20
      10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                                                      5         3                    2
       0.0
                 No Education      Pre-school/Primary Completed primary,      Completed lower      Completed upper        University and        Access          Completion      Access           Completion     Access          Completion
                                      uncompleted       uncompleted             secondary             secondary               higher
                                                         secondary                                                                                        Primary                         Lower Sec                      Upper Sec

      69

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, July 2016
      Employment
      Labor market performance is weak, especially for the youth, the majority of whom are inactive or unemployed
                                                                                                                                                                   Growth       Poverty      Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

       It is estimated that there are more than half a million unemployed out-of-school youth (15-25) without any employable skills.

       Generally, unemployment remains predominantly a youth problem with unemployment rate for 14-34 year olds standing at 21
           percent against only 3 percent for those aged 35-64.

       The same is relevant for informality, with its rate being particularly high among young graduates (informality among primary
           school graduates is 85 percent, while among TVET graduates it reaches as high as 99 percent).
                                                                                                            Youth Population
                                                                                                             33% - 1.36 million
                                    Inactive Labor Force                                                                                                              Active Labor Force
                                             67% - 911,200                                                                                                              33% - 1.36 million
                                                                                                                                        Unemployed                            Employed                    Study-employed
                       In school                                     NEET – Not in Education,
                                                                     Employment or Training                                            17% - 76,296                         77% - 345,576                    6% - 26,928
                   42% - 382,704                                         58% - 528,496
                                                                                                                                         Agriculture                        Non-agriculture               Wage employment
         *For further information on the labor market profile and dynamics in Mauritania,
         including profile of women, please refer to World Bank (2016), Transforming the                                                 41% - 141,686                        28% - 96,761                   31% - 107,128
      70 Trajectory of the Youth, Labor Market Dynamics and Growth, Brief.

Source: World Bank staff calculations for 2015 population estimates using labor force indicators based on 2012 Mauritania Labor Force and Informal Sector Survey
      Employment
      Another key problem is inequitable access to jobs
                                                                                                                                                                    Growth            Poverty   Governance      Sustainability       Constraints


         1 out of 2 Mauritanians has an education level of                                                                                Particularly worrying is the deteriorating equity of labor
              primary or less, which mostly affects the poorest                                                                                market opportunities (reflected in the increased HOI dissimilarity
              groups of the population.                                                                                                        index). Not only do labor markets fail to meet demand, but they
                                                                                                                                               increasingly discriminate against the least well-off.


                     Figure 2.46. Distribution of unemployment by the level of                                                                       Figure 2.47. Human capital                         Figure 2.48. HOI for labor, 2008-
                                        education (14-64 y.o.)                                                                                       outcome indicators (age 30-                                      2014
                                                                                                                                                              59), 2014
                                                    13%                                                                                                                      Bottom 40                                                    2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        36.8
                                                                                                                                                                             Top 60                                                       2014
                                                                                                     35%                                                 67.4                                                    33.3
                          15%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  26
                                                                                                                                                                             47.3
                                                                                                                                                  42.4                                                 23.1
                                                                                                                                                                      38
                         7%                                                                                                                                                                                                       17.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14.6


                                                                  30%



                                                                                                                                               Can read and write     Is working                 Coverage      Dissimilarity     Opportunity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Index (HOI)
      71        Primary           Secondary            University           Illiterate        Can read & write

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPCV 2008 and 2014, as reported in the Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility Report, July 2016
                               Employment / Demographic Dividend
                                  Negative employment dynamics prevent Mauritania from reaping the full benefits of its emerging demographic dividend
                                                                                                                                                                         Growth        Poverty       Governance     Sustainability      Constraints

   Mauritania is experiencing a demographic shift that has a potential                                                                            But the surplus of the economically independent group is
                                            to initiate a demographic dividend with total dependency ratio                                                      not enough to cover the deficit of the young and aged.
                                            (TDR) decreasing from 85% in 2000 to 76% in 2015, driven by                                            This is likely to change with the growth of the working age
                                            increasing life expectancy (LE) and decreasing total fertility rate                                                 population and increase in support ratio (currently 45%).
                                            (TFR).
                                             9                                                                                                                  25
                                                      Figure 2.33. Demographic dividend positioning based on fertility rates and                                                   Figure 2.34. Aggregated consumption and labor income
                                             8                                     life expectancy                                                                                                 across age groups, 2014
                                                                                                                                                                20
  Total Fertility Rate (births per woman)




                                             7
                                                                                                                                                                                        Deficit of the
                                                                                                                          Mauritania                            15                     young of 496,30
                                             6
                                                                                                                          TFR 4.6
                                                                                                                          LE 63                                 10




                                                                                                                                                  Billion MRO
                                             5

                                             4                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Deficit of the aged
                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                0
                                             2                                                                                                                       0      10    20        30       40    50        60       70        80        90
                                                                                                                                                                -5                                                                                    Age
                                             1                                                                                                                                                                    Surplus of 226,33
                                                       Pre-dividend        Early-dividend            Late-dividend           Post-dividend
                                             0                                                                                                              -10
                                                 45      50           55      60            65         70            75        80            85
                                  72                                       Life expectancy (years)                                                          -15
Source: UNFPA (2016), Rapport de l’Atelier de Formation Sur la Mesure du Dividende Demographiique en Mauritanie, Version Provisoire
     Health
      Performance has been mixed with successes in increasing life expectancy, immunization rates and tuberculosis control
                                                                                          Growth              Poverty          Governance    Sustainability   Constraints

        Mauritania demonstrates some positive outcomes
                                                                                     Figure 2.35. Selected health indicators for Mauritania, 2005-2015
            in selected health outcomes, starting with life
                                                                                            181
            expectancy, currently standing at 63 years vis-à-
                                                                                                                                                                   2005
            vis 59 on average in SSA.
                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                  135
        Positive dynamics can be also observed in                                                                                                                 2015
            controlling tuberculosis, the incidence of which                                            111

            has significantly decreased from 181 cases in 2005
            (per 100,000 people) to 111 cases in 2014 and is                                                                          84                      84

                                                                                                                          71
            currently below SSA average of 281.                                                                                  64                65    67
                                                                   60.7   62   63


        More children are now vaccinated against measles
            as well as against diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus
            (DPT) – both rates currently reach 84 percent in
            Mauritania (up from 65 and 71 respectively in 2005)
                                                                   Life expectancy           TB incidence                 Immunization         Immunizaiton, measles
            versus 73 and 77 percent respectively in SSA.                                                               DTP (12-23 months)


      73

Source: World Development Indicators
      Health
      However, infant and maternal health outcomes remain weak
                                                                                                                    Growth          Poverty      Governance     Sustainability         Constraints

        Despite improvements, child mortality remains a serious                                        …maternal mortality remaining high, contraception use
            issue with both infant mortality and mortality under five                                    relatively low (11.4 percent in 2011) and fertility still rather high.
            (per 1,000 live births) higher in Mauritania than in SSA                                    Despite reforms, child marriage is still widely practiced, and,
        Maternal and reproductive health is particularly poor and                                       according to UNICEF, 14 percent of children are married before
            improvements have been slow-paced with…                                                      the age of 15, and 34 percent before the age of 18.

                             Figure 2.36. Child mortality, under 5 (per 1,000 live births)                                    Figure 2.37. Maternal mortality, modeled estimate (per
                                                                                                                                                100,000 live births)
                                                                                                 115                                                                                      645
                                                                                                                                                                       587       602
                                                                                                                                                               547
                                                                                            93                                                          510
                                                                                       89
                                                                     83           85
                                                           78
                                                                                                                                          368    371
                                                62                                                                           315   319
                                      53                                                                             251
                 47        49




      74

Source: World Development Indicators; UNICEF State of the World’s Children 2016
     Female Genital Mutilation in Mauritania
      Still an acute problem

     Two out of every three women                                           Despite the 2010 fatwa, less than
     in has been subjected to FGM                                           fifth of men favor the ban
                    Women (15-49 y.o.) who have undergone                            Men (15-49 y.o.) who heard about
                             FGM, %, 2004-2015                                      FGM and think it should end, %, 2000-
                                                                                                    2015
                   Somalia                                             98           Togo                                         96
                    Guinea                                             97
                                                                                    Niger                                        91
              Sierre Leone                                             90
                                                                                   Benin                                         89
                       Mali                                            89
                                                                                   Kenya                                         89
                      Egypt                                            87
                                                                                Tanzania                                         89
                     Sudan                                             87
                   Erithrea                                                 Burkina Faso                                         87
                                                                      83
              Burkina Faso                                       76           Cameroon                                           85
                   Gambia                                        75             Erithrea                                         85
                   Ethiopia                                      74         Cote d'Ivoire                                    82
                Mauritania                                      69%              Senegal                                    79
                    Liberia                                50                     Sudan                                64
             Guinea Bissau                            45                          Nigeria                              62
                      Chad                            44
                                                                                    Chad                          49
             Cote d'Ivoire                       38
                                                                            Sierra Leone                     40
                    Nigeria                 25
                                                                                  Guinea                     38
                   Senegal                  25
                                                                                   Egypt                28
                       CAR              24
                     Kenya                                                          Mali           21
                                       21
      75
                    Yemen              19                                     Mauritania          18%
                                                                                                                                      Photo credit: UNICEF
Source: UNICEF, FGM/C Brochure, 2016
      Health
      Another critical issue is nutrition, which has deteriorated over time
                                                                                                                                      Growth              Poverty      Governance          Sustainability   Constraints


        Global Acute Malnutrition (GAM) rates in many (6 out of 15) regions of Mauritania are above 15 percent, and in some
             cases up to 28 percent, almost double the WHO’s critical emergency threshold (WFP, 2015). Across the country, GAM rate
             increased by over 4 percent in a year, reaching 14 percent in 2015 (the highest rate since 2012).
        Mauritania performs worse than most of other countries in the region in terms of key nutrition indicators, particularly worrisome
             is the level of wasting, for which Mauritania ranks 114th out of 130 countries with a prevalence of 11.6 percent (Global
             Nutrition Report, 2016)

                                                                            Figure 2.38. Selected nutrition indicators for Mauritania and comparators, 2015
                                           32.9
                                                  29.6
                                                         27.6
                                                                26                                                                                26.2
                                    22.0
                                                                     19.4 18.8                                                             19.5
                                                                                                                                                          15.7 17.0
                                                                                        11.6 10.9                                                                            12.8
                                                                                                                                                                      11            11.0
                                                                                                    7.6
                                                                                                            6.0           5.8   4.7
                                                                                                                     4


                                                     Stunting                                             Wasting                                    Underweight (under 5)
                                                     Mauritania          Burkina Faso      Cote d'Ivoire            Guinea Bissau     Stunting           Senegal       Ghana
      76

Source: Global Nutrition Report, 2016
     Health
     Problems in health sector are underscored by important distortions with the poorest having the least access to services
                                                                                                                                   Growth         Poverty      Governance    Sustainability    Constraints

        The poorest group of the population has the lowest access to healthcare services, as demonstrated by selected maternal and
            infant medical services, which results in higher infant and under 5 mortality rate among the lowest wealth quintiles and those
            living in rural areas
                            Figure 2.49. Selected maternal and infant health indicators by Income Quintile, 2011
                                                                                                                                                      Figure 2.50. Under 5 Mortality Rate (per 1,000
     100                                                                                                                                               live births) by Place of Residence and Wealth
                                                                                                                                            140                         Quintile, 2011
       90                                                                                                            Lowest quintile

       80                                                                                                            Highest quintile       120

       70
                                                                                                                                            100
       60
                                                                                                                                             80
       50

       40                                                                                                                                    60

       30
                                                                                                                                             40

       20
                                                                                                                                             20
       10

        0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                       Urban     Urban              Highest   Lowest
               Any antenatal care (ATC)     Skilled attendant at birth   Delivery at medical facility   Under five with diarrhea who
                                                                                                                received ORT                          Place of residence             Wealth quintile

     77

Source: WHO based on MICS 2011
      Water & Sanitation
      Access to piped water and sanitation remains limited, exacerbating health problems and facilitating the spread of disease
                                                                                                                                               Growth              Poverty          Governance         Sustainability          Constraints

        Mauritania features the lowest overall rate of access to improved water in the region at 57 percent. Water
              coverage is exceptionally low in urban areas (58 percent), a sign of urbanization outpacing infrastructure development.

        Regional comparison in sanitation is less drastic, but the rural-urban gap is much more pronounced: only 14 percent of
              rural areas have access to sanitation versus 58 percent of urban areas.
   Water                                                                                                                        Sanitation
                                                                                                                                        Figure 2.41. Sanitation                       Figure 2.42. Access to improved
             Figure 2.39. Drinking                              Figure 2.40. Access to improved water                                   facilities coverage (%)                    sanitation, regional comparison, 2015
              water coverage (%)                                  source, regional comparison, 2015
                          4                 1                                                                                                                                                                                      65%
        6                                                                                                100%                                                                58%
                                                                        97%                97%
                                                                                                                    93%
                                                                                                                                                                  35                     50%
                                           41                                 82%                                                                 46                                                                                  48%
                                                                            76%                  77%                      79%      53
                         54                                                                                                                                                        40%
                                                                                             64%                      67%                                                                              38%         38%
        65                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                         58% 58%                                              58%                                                                                                                  34%
                                                             57%                                            49%                                                   14
                                           25                                                                                                     22                                                         25%
                                                                                                                                   25                                                          20%
                         25                                                                                                                        8                                                     16%
                                                                                                                                                                                14%
                                                                                                                                                                  40                                                      11%
        23                                                                                                                          6                                                       7%
                                           33                                                                                                                                                                           5%
                                                                                                                                                  24
                         17                                                                                                        16
        6
     1990               2000          2015              Mauritania Burkina Faso             Mali           Niger    Senegal        1990          2000            2015        Mauritania Burkina Faso     Mali          Niger      Senegal
    Surface water              Unimproved                                                                                         Improved              Shared                                                 Urban     Rural    Total
                                                                                  Urban          Rural    Total                   Unimproved            Open defecation
     78 improved
    Other                      Piped on premises

Source: WHO / UNICEF 2015, as reported in the IFPRI Country Profile for Mauritania, 2015
      Energy
      The poor also have disproportionately less access to energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Growth              Poverty            Governance     Sustainability   Constraints


        The richest 30% receive 62 percent of gas subsidies - 10 times more than the poorest 30% (6 percent), and 52 percent of
        electricity subsidies - 5 times more than the poorest 30% (11 percent). Thus, the distribution of both electricity and gas
        subsidies is more unequal than general distribution of wealth in the country, as depicted in the Lorenz curve.
                                                                               Figure 2.51. Distribution of Gas Subsidies,                                                                                                 Figure 2.51. Distribution of Electricity Subsidies,
                                                                                          Lorenz Curve, 2014                                                                                               g              p g             Lorenz Curve, 2014         p
                                                      1                                                                                                                                           1
                                                               ligne de 45?                                                                                                                                ligne de 45
                                                               L(p): Lorenz                                                                                                                                L(p): Lorenz
                                                               C(p): Butane                                                                                                                                C(p): Electricite
             Courbes de Lorenz et de concentrations




                                                                                                                                                         Courbes de Lorenz et de concentrations
                                                      .8                                                                                                                                          .8




                                                      .6                                                                                                                                          .6




                                                      .4                                                                                                                                          .4




                                                      .2                                                                                                                                          .2




                                                      0                                                                                                                                           0
                                                           0              .2               .4                     .6     .8        1                                                                   0                 .2              .4                     .6         .8             1

                                                                                                Les percentiles (p)                                                                                                                           Les percentiles (p)
      79

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on EPVC 2014, as reported in Mauritania: Financing Social Protection (and Analyzing the Impact of Subsidies), World Bank, November 2016
       Land
        Qualitative evidence also suggests that arable land assets are inequitably distributed, particularly disadvantaging women
                                                                                                                                                         Growth      Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

          In the absence of a land cadaster in the Senegal River Valley and
                                                                                                                                                     Other critical problems include:
          limitations of the household survey data on land ownership, it is
          impossible to quantitatively determine the distribution of land                                                                             Limited access to land and other productive
          assets across wealth quintiles. However, extensive consultations                                                                             inputs by women
          have highlighted significant distortions in the distribution of arable
          land in the Senegal River valley, in particular:                                                                                                        Of women own land and have access
                                                                                                                                                       18.7%      to financial and technical resources
           Capture of land by urban and tribal elite, restricting                                                                                                (CPIA, 2016)
                 access for poorer households
                                                                                                                                                       Conflict-provoking shrinking average size of
           Unresolved situation of former landholders expelled from
                                                                                                                                                        plots for poor small-scale farmers; partly
                 Mauritania in 1989
                                                                                                                                                        due to the fragmentation of land holdings following
           Increasing difficulties faced by transhumant pastoralists                                                                                   inheritance and partly due to the promotion of
                 and outsiders from other areas, with the declining recognition of                                                                      commercial agriculture ventures.
                 customary “secondary land rights”.

        80

Source: République de Mauritanie 2014: Plan National de développement agricole 2015-2025 (version provisoire Novembre), Ministère de l’Agriculture
      Land ownership by women
      Women remain particularly under-represented among land owners



                                        Women who hold some form of property or
               8%                       land title across country


         In practice, national laws are often ignored in rural areas in favor of
              customary laws that rarely favor women.
         Rural women typically rely on membership in a broader cooperative
              to exploit collective land. They are often granted poorer land
              on the periphery of larger tracts worked by men.
         Women also face considerable challenges in retaining
              property after divorce and widowhood or during market
              transfers and government redistribution schemes while there are
              few, if any, legal protections.

      81
                                                                                                         Photo credit: Africa Agribusiness magazine
Source: World Bank 2015: Women’s Access to Land in Mauritania. A Case Study in Preparation for the COP
Poverty Diagnostic Summary (1/2)
Improved poverty indicators, but uneven and slow progress in human development outcomes
                                                                      Growth    Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

 Mauritania achieved accelerated rates of poverty reduction in the last ten years, extreme poverty halved and
     vulnerability, social mobility, and inequality indicators improved. However, progress has been uneven with
     poverty levels increasing slightly in Nouakchott driven by urbanization and increased food prices.
 Poverty reduction occurred principally in rural areas and was largely driven by increases in relative prices that
     benefitted rural producers over urban consumers. Livestock producers did particularly well with marked pro-
     poor improvements in livestock ownership and high prices.
 While non-monetary poverty indicators also improved, progress towards human development outcomes
     remains slow and uneven. Of particular concern are declining literacy rates among children, low completion
     rates, poor nutrition and worsening employment indicators especially, which disproportionately affect the poor,
     especially women and youth.
 The bottom 40 percent of Mauritanians are predominantly rural livestock and agricultural producers that are
     concentrated in the southern regions. Inequitable access to basic services and distortions in land allocations
     and food prices, combined with declining employment opportunities ultimately limit the asset base and the
82   returns on assets of the poor in Mauritania.
 Poverty Diagnostic Summary (2/2)
  Priority constraint areas - low access to social services, unaffordable food staples and inequitable land distribution
                                                                                                                 Growth   Poverty     Governance   Sustainability   Constraints




PRIORITY BINDING CONSTRAINT AREAS




                           Inequitable access                                            Inequitable                                 Distorted
                           to social services*                                        land distribution                             food prices

 Sustaining poverty reduction in the context of a weaker economic outlook will require renewed efforts to
   build and protect the asset base of the poor, which is currently affected by distributional distortions in
                                                   service delivery, food prices and land management
*Social services are defined as including health, education, social protection and energy and water provision.
  83
                                                                                                                      GOVERNANCE
                                                                                                                   The narrow political settlement has
                                                                                                                 brought political stability but has not yet
                                                                                                                 succeeded in removing hierarchical and
                                                                                                                 discriminatory conceptions of traditional
                                                                                                                      societal organization, creating
                                                                                                                    foundational obstacles to inclusive
                                                                                                                               development.


     84         © 2015 Ipsos.
      credit: Kinross
Photo credit:
Photo         SARD-SC      from (Support
                       website
                      Gold               to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa
                                mining.com
Governance Trends
Formal rule-based institutions and governance arrangements have been undermined by entrenched informal institutions
                                                                                          Growth   Poverty    Governance    Sustainability   Constraints



                                                            INFLUENCE OF TRIBAL                      PREVALENCE OF INFORMAL
      INFLUENCE OF EXTRACTIVE                               NATURE OF SOCIETAL                          INSTITUTIONS POST-
          COLONIAL SYSTEM                           1           ORGANIZATION                  2           INDEPENDENCE                          3

 The trajectory that Mauritania has                     The formation of the State was            Informal relationships of loyalty and
      followed since independence                         anchored in the supremacy of family         dependence have traditionally
      epitomizes that of other Sahelian                   or tribal authority figures.                permeated the formal political and
      countries that were hampered by a                                                               administrative systems in Mauritania.
                                                         The Constitution gives overwhelming
      colonial legacy that institutionalized                                                                 Wealth has customarily been
                                                          power to the President and to the
                                                                                                             redistributed towards a clientele chosen
      political privilege of a selected
                                                          presidential political party.                      because of “ethnicity”, “tribalism” or
      ethnicity.                                                                                             “status” within the system of Mauritanian
                                                                                                             society. Tribal leaders were rewarded for
                                                         Concentration of political power has               their loyalty with positions in government
     Acemoglu, S. Johnson, and J. Robinson, “The          in turn enabled the distortion of                  and key sectors of the economy that
     Colonial Origins of Comparative Development:                                                            conferred access to public resources to
     An Empirical Investigation”, The American            formal institutions and regulations to             reward their constituencies.
     Economic Review 91(5):1369-1401 (2001)
                                                          benefit privileged interests.                      World Bank, 2008, Mauritania Anti-Corruption
                                                                                                                                  Study, Washington DC
85
Governance Trends
Historically, political instability has done little to enhance governance or shift the political economy dynamic
                                                                                 Growth        Poverty     Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


  Political contestation has traditionally been confined.
     Periods of political instability and military coups have   Figure 3.1. Mauritania’s GDP growth and underlying political and economic triggers
     resulted in the interchange of power between a
     small subset of tribal groups.



            Each government change is typically
            accompanied by a “spoil system” whereby the
            networks created by the previous regime are
            ousted and replaced by new ones close to the
            new regime. While the purge of old elites is
            often portrayed, in Mauritania as elsewhere, as
            an “anti-corruption drive”, changes in power
            have tended to shift patronage structures
            rather than eliminate them
                   Diagnostic Trade Integration Study, 2016
86
Governance Trends
The recent period of political stability has facilitated robust performance in growth and poverty reduction
                                                                         Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


 Notwithstanding the restive character of the surrounding region, the political leadership has
  forged a period of political stability during the mining boom.
 The tightly controlled political settlement continues to reflect traditional, hierarchical and
  stratified conceptions of societal order.
 It remains concentrated on an ethnically homogenous minority who are connected with
  the political leadership and who control the principal centers of economic activity and occupy
  senior positions in the military, the administration and the judiciary. Beyond this inner circle,
  the political leadership relies upon a secondary layer of co-optation in which the leaders of the
  broad array of societal groupings are granted access to economic and administrative
  opportunities in return for their loyalty.
  The influx of extractive rents has helped to reinforce the loyalty of co-opted interests
87 and consolidate the political bargain.
     Governance Trends
      However, governance indicators reveal uneven performance, while perceptions have stagnated and deteriorated over time
                                                                                    Growth         Poverty    Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

       The country’s CPIA scores for Public Sector Management have          According to the World Governance Indicators (WGI),
        shown signs of improvement, increasing from 3.0 in 2008 to 3.2        perceptions with respect to all six dimensions of
        in 2015 and marginally surpassing SSA average of 3.0.                 governance in Mauritania have stagnated or declined
                                                                              since 2006.
       Mauritania scores 43.0 (out of 100) in overall governance,
                                                                            Figure 3.2. Mauritania’s WGI ranks, 2006, 2009 and 2015
        ranking 41st (out of 54) in Africa in the Mo Ibrahim Index, being
        below the African and the regional North African averages
            Table 3.1. Mauritania’s Mo Ibrahim Index, 2015




      88

Source: Worldwide Governance Indicators
     Governance Trends
      Mauritania now scores below country comparators in all dimensions of governance in the World Governance Indicators
                                                                                                           Growth   Poverty      Governance        Sustainability        Constraints

   Figure 3.3. WGI Voice & Accountability, 2015               Figure 3.4. WGI Political Stability, 2015             Figure 3.5. WGI Government Effectiveness, 2015
        Senegal                                                    Senegal
                                                                                                                        Morocco
         Tunisia                                                 Morocco
                                                                                                                           Tunisia
             Mali                                                      SSA
                                                                                                                          Senegal
             SSA                                               Mauritania
                                                                                                                          Algeria
    Cotê d'Ivoire                                             Cotê d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                              SSA
       Morocco                                                      Tunisia
                                                                                                                     Cotê d'Ivoire
     Mauritania                                                       Chad                                                    Mali
         Algeria                                                    Algeria                                           Mauritania
           Chad                                                        Mali                                                  Chad
                        0       10   20   30   40   50   60                   0   10   20   30   40   50    60                       0        20            40             60
   Figure 3.6. WGI Regulatory Quality, 2015                   Figure 3.7. WGI Rule of Law, 2015                     Figure 3.8. WGI Control of Corruption, 2015

       Morocco                                                     Tunisia                                                Senegal
         Senegal                                                 Morocco                                                   Tunisia
          Tunisia                                                  Senegal                                              Morocco
    Cotê d'Ivoire                                             Cotê d'Ivoire                                          Cotê d'Ivoire
             SSA                                                       SSA                                                    SSA
            Mali                                                       Mali                                                   Mali
     Mauritania                                                Mauritania                                                  Algeria
          Algeria                                                  Algeria                                            Mauritania
            Chad                                                     Chad                                                   Chad
      89                0       10   20   30   40   50   60                   0   10   20   30   40   50    60                       0   10   20      30    40      50      60

Source: World Bank, WGI, 2014
                                                                                                               INDICATIONS OF A RENTIER ECONOMY:




                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                      SHORTCOMINGS IN THE PROCUREMENT
                                                                    The surge in                                      OF PUBLIC INVESTMENT CONTRACTS
                                                                    resource-based                                    that create opportunities for the preferential
                                                                                                                      selection of well-connected private sector interests
                                                                    revenues and the
                                                                                                                      LACK OF TRANSPARENCY ASSOCIATED WITH STATE
                                                                    adoption of a
                                                                    state-driven                               2      INTERVENTIONS THROUGH PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
                                                                                                                      despite advancing with reforms to improve controls
                                                                                                                      over the parastatal sector
                                                                    development
                                                                    model appear to
                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                      DOMINATION OF OLIGOPOLISTIC STRUCTURES
                                                                                                                      in some prominent product markets
                                                                    have reinforced
                                                                    the rentier                                       OPAQUE AND DISCRETIONARY GOVERNMENT
                                                                    economy
                                                                                                               4      EXPENDITURES
                                                                                                                      that put them at risk of being misallocated or
                                                                                                                      misappropriated to private interests


     90
Photo credit: SARD-SC website (Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa
     Governance Trends Drivers
      Weak procurement processes for capital investment contracts
                                                                                                                       Growth          Poverty        Governance       Sustainability    Constraints


       Shortcomings in the application of Mauritania’s progressive legal                                                       Figure 3.9. Sectorial Distribution of the Consolidated
                                                                                                                                     Investment Budget, 2010–14 (MRO billion)
        framework on procurement create opportunities for politically                                            250
        connected interests to dominate lucrative state procurement contracts.
       National procurement systems are sometimes by-passed through the                                         200

        use of public enterprises for large-scale investments (e.g. significant
        investments are channeled through SOMELEC, ENER, ISKAN,                                                  150
        SONIMEX and operational agencies, such as CSA and Apaus). This
        limits competitiveness and crowds out private sector operators (ARMP,
                                                                                                                 100
        2016).
       The processes used by public enterprises to sub-contract to the                                          50
        private sector are often outside the legal framework and contribute to
        perceptions of capture (PER, 2016).
                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                           2010          2011         2012         2013         2014         2015
       Procurement contracts managed through the military that are non-
                                                                                                                  Rural Development              Industrial Development      Territorial Development
        military in nature (e.g. vehicle purchases and construction of military
                                                                                                                  Human Resources                Institutional Development   Multi-Sector Projects
        barracks) are not controlled by the procurement regulatory authority.                                     SNIM

      91

Source: World Bank, Public Expenditure Review 2016, based on the data from the Ministry of Economy and Finance
Governance Trends Drivers
Reliance on an expanded and poorly regulated para-statal sector
                                                                               Growth          Poverty       Governance     Sustainability    Constraints

 State intervention has led to the proliferation of public and
  para-public entities. There are now approximately 150           140          Figure 3.10. Number of commercial SOEs with full / partial state
  state owned enterprises and autonomous agencies in                                      ownership and their turnover as % of GDP

  Mauritania.                                                     120


 A significant proportion of subsidies and other budget
                                                                  100
  transfers are invested in the sector: Around 26.8 Bn MRO              SOE number

  (US$ 89 million) was spent on capital injections to state             Turnover as % of GDP
                                                                  80
  owned enterprises through share purchases (19 Bn MRO
  – US$ 63 million) or as loans or advances (7.8 Bn MRO –         60

  US$ 26 million) in 2011-13.
                                                                  40
 Though the Government is taking concerted efforts to
  strengthen oversight in the parastatal sector, there are        20
  indications to suggest that public enterprises have been
  used as channels to finance public projects, or take             0

  participations in weaker ventures to benefit specific
  groups.
92
Governance Trends Drivers
Parastatal sector: The example of the National Iron Ore Company (Société Nationale Industrielle et Minière, SNIM)
                                                                                     Growth          Poverty       Governance      Sustainability   Constraints

  Despite continued access to cheap credit, productivity has                              Figure 3.11. Evolution of production (1000 t) / worker
                                                                         3.5
     decreased since 2001 as measured by tons produced per               3.0

     worker and production costs have increased. On-lending and          2.5
                                                                         2.0
     grants averaged 3.4 percent of the investment budget for the        1.5
     period 2010–14. There is little information available on the use    1.0
                                                                         0.5
     of these resources (PER, 2016).                                      -
                                                                                   2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
  There has been an increase in investments and capital
                                                                        450,000             Figure 3.12. SNIM’s turnover (million MRO), 2001-2015
     undertakings with limited transparency and limited returns.        400,000
     Depreciation of equity investments and loans to subsidiaries       350,000
                                                                        300,000
     totaled 29.7 billion MRO to 31/12/2015 (SNIM audit report,
                                                                        250,000
     2015).                                                             200,000
                                                                        150,000
  Weak internal controls, the absence of external controls and         100,000
                                                                         50,000
     the high rate of turnover of Director Generals creates the
                                                                               0
     perception that the position may be exposed to political                       2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

93   interference.
Governance Trends Drivers
Some product markets are still dominated by oligopolistic structures
                                                                                      Growth             Poverty           Governance         Sustainability   Constraints
Although the 2012 Investment Code revision improved the
country’s competition regime, a few powerful groups remain in de                           Figure 3.13. Most problematic factors for doing business, WEF

facto control of large businesses in trade, commerce and banking.                        Access to finance                                                             30.4

                                                                                               Corruption                                       13.8
 Oligopolistic structures exist in a number of non-tradable
                                                                                                  Inflation                               8
  sectors, including construction and hotels, as well as in the
                                                                       Inefficient government bureaucracy                           6.8
  rapidly expanding fishmeal industry (DTIS, 2016).
                                                                         Inadequate infrastructure supply                       6.3
 The cost structure of imported rice reveals that more than half       Inadequately educated workforce                         6
  of the high domestic retail prices for rice are attributed to                    Government instability                      5.6
  distributor gross margins – indicating that certain interests have                      Policy instability                   5.6
  obtained lucrative import monopolies in rice (Brunelin, 2016).                          Poor work ethic                 4.2

 In banking, there is evidence of credit concentration - several                                 Tax rates              3.8

   banks are associated with multi-sectoral conglomerates; while          Insufficient capacity to innovate        2.3

   there are prudential limits on banks’ credit to other entities in          Foreign currency regulations      2.1

   their group, supervision is weak and high balance sheet                              Poor public health         2

   concentration is observed (IMF Financial Assessment Stability            Complexity of tax regulations      1.6

   Model, 2015). The GoS has taken steps to address this since                             Crime and theft     1.5

94 2015, strengthening supervision and sanctions.
      Governance Trends Drivers
      A quarter of government spending is highly discretionary and is not properly categorized
                                                                                                 Growth              Poverty         Governance     Sustainability      Constraints

       A large proportion of government expenditure             Table 3.2. Public Spending by Sector, 2010–13 (percentage of non-oil GDP)
                                                                                                                   2010       2011       2012    2013        2014     2015     Avg
        remains opaque and discretionary, putting it at risk
                                                                  High constitutional offices                      3.5%       3.3%       2.8%   3.2%        5.0%     6.7%     4.1%
        of being misallocated or misappropriated to
                                                                  Central public sector                            2.5%       2.7%       2.3%   2.4%        2.8%     3.1%     2.6%
        private interests.
                                                                  Decentralization & regional development         11.7%     12.6%      12.9%    13.1%       12.8%    8.8%    12.0%
       Data on the functional classification of spending
                                                                  Defense                                         13.0%     12.1%      10.8%    10.9%       10.6%    10.3%   11.3%
        indicates that the single largest category is “other
                                                                  Economic and sector ministries                   6.6%       4.5%      7.3%    5.1%        5.7%     3.5%     5.4%
        expenses” which makes up a remarkable 27.4                Education                                      13.1%      14.3%      11.9%    12.5%       10.3%    10.4%   12.5%
        percent of total expenditures.                            Emergency programs and food security             0.5%       5.3%      8.8%    10.5%       8.1%     8.6%     7.0%

       The management of the National Oil Fund has               External affairs                                 2.7%       2.2%      1.9%    2.0%        1.9%     1.8%     2.1%

        also raised governance concerns: the absence of           Health and social affairs                        7.4%       7.8%      5.7%    7.1%    -                     7.0%

        any audit, the lack of clear rules governing the          Infrastructure                                   5.9%       5.9%       6.1%   7.3%        7.5%     8.7%     6.9%

        draw-down of resources or transparent criteria for        Justice and Islamic affairs                      2.8%       2.3%       2.0%   2.1%        2.0%     2.0%     2.2%

        the selection of projects have limited the utility and    Other public agencies                            1.4%       0.8%       1.0%   2.5%        1.0%     0.8%     1.3%

        effective management of the Fund. (PER, 2016).            Youth, culture and employment                    2.0%       0.6%      0.5%    0.6%        1.7%     1.5%     1.1%

                                                                  Other expenses                                 30.2%      28.8%      27.8%    22.6%       26.3%    28.4%   27.4%

                                                                 *Note: Economic and sector ministries include Fisheries, Mining, and Trade.
      95

Source: BOOST data and World Bank staff calculations
    Governance Diagnostic Summary
    Lack of transparency and accountability in public expenditure management represents a priority binding constraint
                                                                                     Growth      Poverty    Governance   Sustainability   Constraints




    Governance challenges cut across Mauritania’s development problematic and
                                                                                                PRIORITY BINDING CONSTRAINT
     are underscored by a narrow political settlement that relies upon a rentier
                                                                                                            AREA
     economy.
    Despite efforts to strengthen fiscal transparency and improve procurement
     and public investment processes, opacities in the management of public
     resources have created the enabling conditions for rent-seeking.
    The creation of a more inclusive political bargain to achieve the twin goals will
     require transparency and accountability in the management of public                             Limited transparency &
     expenditures in the short term and sustained efforts to develop modern, rule-                   accountability in public
     based institutions and more effective modalities for citizen engagement over                           spending
                                                                                         *Note that governance constraints are integrated into the
     the medium term.                                                                             analysis of all priority constraint areas




    96
                                                                                                                     SUSTAINABILITY
                                                                                                                  Underlying fragility stresses associated
                                                                                                                  with Mauritania’s delicate and complex
                                                                                                                  social structures and the environmental
                                                                                                                  challenges of an encroaching coastline
                                                                                                                 and an expanding desert risk undermining
                                                                                                                     development gains made to date.


     97         © 2015 Ipsos.
Photo
Photo credit:
Photo credit: WFP   / Agron
      credit: Kinross
              SARD-SC   website
                      Gold  Dragaj
                           from (Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa
                                mining.com
                                                         KEY DRIVERS OF SOCIAL FRAGILITY:

                                   The Mauritanian              LIMITED SOCIAL COHESION

                                   State operates in
                                   the context of a
                                                         1      Despite National Social Inclusion Process: ethno-racial
                                                                divisions, historical grievances over state discriminatory
                                                                practices and slow progress in ensuring the inclusion of
                                                                marginalized groups.

                                   delicate and

                                                         2
                                                                POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC EXCLUSION
                                   evolving social              Significant improvements in political participation but
                                                                domination of privileged elites and patronage networks
                                   fabric that is also          aggravate social division and economic inequalities

                                   subject to                   LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES STRESSES
                                   emerging
                                   environmental
                                                         3      Increasing conflict between pastoralists and farmers in the
                                                                context of expanding desertification, including in oasis areas.



                                   and regional                 REGIONAL THREATS SPILLOVERS

                                   security stresses     4      Presence of cross-border terrorist groups, illegal trafficking
                                                                and informal networks, radicalization of the youth. Reinforced
                                                                security represents a factor of resilience.


     98
Photo credit: WFP / Agron Dragaj
      Social Fragility Drivers
      Weak Social cohesion
                                                                                                                                      Growth       Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

        Challenges in the application of the de jure prohibition on                                                             Historical grievances between main communities along
        slavery:                                                                                                                perceived ethnic lines:
         Slavery legally abolished in 1981, criminalized in 2007 with a                                                         Arabization policies, especially in education and justice
              new comprehensive anti-slavery law introduced in 2015. Yet                                                          system, are purported to have reinforced linguistic
              reports of ongoing enslavement of Haratines and Afro-                                                               discrimination
              Mauritanians highlight procedural barriers and sensitization and
                                                                                                                                 1989 border dispute resulted in exile of many (25,000
              enforcement challenges.
                                                                                                                                  refugees returned, as of 2013)
        Limited access to a fair, capable and independent justice
                                                                                                                                 Regulatory restrictions and practical complexity of
        system reinforces social fragmentation:
                                                                                                                                  nationality and civil registration, limiting access to social
         Judiciary is understaffed, under-capacitated, and concentrated                                                          services and benefits by certain vulnerable groups
              mostly in capitals / regional towns, informal (and often
              discriminatory) dispute resolution processes prevail                                                                Resilience Factors:
                                                                                                                                   • National Reconciliation Process;

                                          Mauritanians with a positive assessment of the                                           • 2016 National Dialogue on Social Cohesion;
                   19%
                                          quality of judicial and police systems                                                   • Program for the Prevention of Conflicts and the
      99
                                                                                                                                     Consolidation of Social Cohesion (Tadamoun)
Source: 2009 Mo Ibrahim survey; UNICEF, Every Child Birth Rights: Inequities and Trends in Birth Registration, New York, 2013
     Social Fragility Drivers
      Political and economic exclusion
                                                                                                  Growth      Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


        Rapid urbanization has created few economic opportunities                           Asymmetrical political equilibrium

         Emergence of informal and socially stratified settlements                          Despite improvements in political participation of civil
             Kebbés at the periphery of cities, mostly deprived of essential                  society, penetration of a privileged elite in the organs
             urban services: access to jobs, housing, clean water and                         of the modern state has limited opportunities to address
             sanitation.                                                                      social inequalities and created diffuse resentment over
                                                                                              sentiments of economic and political exclusion
        Particular vulnerability of the youth
                                                                                             Civil society is handicapped by weak capacity,
         High rate of youth unemployment, ruptured ties with ethnic,
             cultural and geographic origin, and insufficient prioritization of               fragmented and divided along political affiliation lines.

             youth-driven development in urban planning (lack of social
                                                                                             Resilience Factors:
             institutions and infrastructure to meet the needs of youth).
                                                                                              • Freedom of expression;
                                               Unemployment rate among 24-33 year-            • Significant improvements in ranking in Press
                                               olds, being the double of that among 34-43       Freedom Index by Reporters Without Borders;
                          15%
                                               year-olds (7.4 percent)                        • Government efforts to address religious radicalism
      100

Source: 2012 Mauritanian Labor Force and Informal Sector Survey
     Social Fragility Drivers
      Natural resource stresses have fueled conflict
                                                                                                                                 Growth      Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


     Rarefication of natural resources                                                                                 Increasing conflict between pastoralists and oasis
                                                                                                                       farmers
      Increasing scarcity of water resources, arable soil / pastures
            and growing population pressures, undermine food security,                                                  Erosion of traditional institutions for collective
            aggravate housing needs of local populations and refugees,                                                   management, expanding desertification, and growing
            and contribute to increasing social tensions between                                                         demand for meat and milk led oasis farmers to convert
            different groups of population.                                                                              to pastoralism activities and expand into new areas.

                                                                                                                        This resulted in disrupted social peace and increased
                                   People estimated to have been affected
            140,000                                                                                                      fragility in rural areas facing conflicts over communal
                                   by natural disasters
                                   (by February 2015)
                                                                                                                         land management and access to water points.


                                    People estimated to have been affected                                                           Land covered                         Land covered
            428,000                                                                                                       20%                                55%
                                    by food insecurity due to natural hazards                                                        by agriculture                       by pastoralism
                                    (by February 2015)


      101

Source: ReliefWeb humanitarian overview of Mauritania, February 2015; World Bank, Land Governance Study (CAGF), 2014
Social Fragility Drivers
Regional transnational stressors present high spillover risks
                                                                    Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


Mauritania is situated in an unstable region and                Resilience Factors:
currently faces the following regional threats:
                                                                • Modernization and reinforcement of military
 Rising presence of cross-border terrorist groups;
                                                                  hardware capacity and engagement in the
 Intensification of illegal trade and informal networks          UN peacekeeping force in Mali;
      (including arms, drugs, cigarettes, kidnapping for
      ransom);                                                  • Anti-terrorism legislation to facilitate the
                                                                  pursuit and imprisonment of individuals
 Growing trend of radicalization and extremism;
                                                                  suspected of violent extremism;
 Large numbers of refugees, fleeing into Eastern
      Mauritania from Mali;                                     • Delegitimization strategy, involving
                                                                  recruitment of more moderate Imams to
 Rising threat of Boko Haram (though Nigeria is father
                                                                  preach against extremism.
      away, current regional dynamics are still concerning).
102
      Environment & Climate Change
      Climate change exacerbates the effects of desertification and droughts as well as coastal erosion and erratic flooding
                                                                                                              Growth      Poverty    Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

                                 Extreme temperatures                                                         Declining annual rainfall
                                                                                                                              Mm/month per century –
                                        0.9°C
                                                              Mean annual temperatures                           - 21.96      reduction in Central region
                                                              increase since 1960

                                   1.3 – 3.8°C                                Projected increases             ‐65 to +28%            Range of projected
                                                                              by 2060 and the                  changes by the 2090s with ensemble
                                   1.8 – 6.0°C                                2090s respectively               means between ‐7 and -25%.


                                                                                                    CLIMATE
                                                                                                    CHANGE
                                 Intensifying droughts                                                        Rising sea levels
                                   12 episodes of droughts in 1900-2013,                                         21 cm Sea levels rise since 1880
                                   affecting 7,398,907 people                                                                         Rise projected by
                                                                                                              5.8 – 15.5 cm           2050 compared to
                                   One third of population at risk                                                                    1980-1999
      103
                                   of hunger                                                                  Increases coastal erosion, flooding, storms
Source: National Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Tool, World Bank, 2015
      Threat of rising sea in Mauritania
     Mauritanian 750 km of coastal line was virtually uninhabited prior to 1950.

     The development of economic activity along the coast, notably in
         Nouakchott and Nouadhibou, has placed a strain on the environment.

     Key environmental stressors : (i) deterioration of the protective dune ridges
         and risk of coastal flooding; (ii) flooding due to the saturation of the water
         table and sea water infiltration; (iii) pollution; (iv) salinization of water
         resources, and (v) coastal erosion linked to human pressures
         (infrastructure) and natural hazards.

    Nouakchott is under the triple menace of coastal flooding in the west,
    advance of sand dunes in the north and east, flooding by heavy rainfall in
    lowland areas. These risks are exacerbated by the fact that a large portion of
    this city is under the sea level and has recorded rapid unplanned spatial
    expansion.

            Even without climate change
                                   Nouakchott is at risk of flooding
      104
                                                                              Demba Marico, National Coordinator of Mauritania’s Adaptation
Source: National Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Tool, World Bank, 2015                  to Climate and Coastal Change Project, 2010      Photo credit: Photorator / George Steinmetz
      Environment & Climate Change
      Climate change has serious consequences for agriculture, marine ecosystems and residential areas (1/2)
                                                                                                                     Growth        Poverty    Governance   Sustainability   Constraints

      Table 4.1. Sectors most impacted by natural hazards and climate change


                                                                               AGRICULTURE              FISHERIES                   WATER
      POTENTIAL IMPACT
                                                                              Historical   Future   Historical   Future       Historical     Future
      Extreme temperatures
                                                                                                                                                           Impact Classification:
      Extreme precipitation & flooding
      Drought                                                                                                                                                        No
      Sea level rise
                                                                                                                                                                     Low
      Storm surge
                                                                                                                                                                     Moderate
      Strong winds
      Landslide                                                                                                                                                      High
      Overall potential impact
      Institutional readiness
      Overall risk
      105

Source: National Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Tool, World Bank, 2015
      Environment & Climate Change
      Climate change has serious consequences for agriculture, marine ecosystems and residential areas (2/2)
                                                                                                                            Growth      Poverty     Governance   Sustainability   Constraints




                     AGRICULTURE                                                       FISHERIES                    WATER SUPPLY                                 HEALTH
        Due to land                                                           Decline in waters’ oxygen       A general and significant decline    Today, over one third of the
         degradation/erosion and a                                              concentration and migration     in water resources by 10-15% is       country’s population is at risk
         southward expansion of the                                             of pelagic species towards      projected. This will entail:          of hunger, with large numbers
         arid zone, crop seasons                                                more oxygen-rich zones           A decrease in runoff by 10%         of severely malnourished
         duration and yields may greatly                                                                          between 2000 and 2020;              children;
                                                                               Spread of jellyfish and a
         diminish, in particular in arid
                                                                                recurring “colored-water”        A rise in evapotranspiration        Combined with climate change
         and semi-arid zones;
                                                                                phenomenon;                       and water quality degradation;       impacts, an increase in
        In the worst case scenario,                                                                             Higher water salinity in coastal     nutritional diseases prevalence
                                                                               Reduced fisheries
         rain-fed agriculture yield might                                                                         zones and decreased                  and infectious and parasitic
                                                                                productivity, as a result of
         be halved by 2020;                                                                                       piezometrical levels (ground         diseases, such as diarrheas
                                                                                storms (production decline,
                                                                                                                  water is particularly critical for   and acute respiratory
        Livestock productivity might                                           variations of chemico-
                                                                                                                  the rural poor’s livelihood)         infections, may occur.
          also decrease due to recurring                                        physical parameters,
          droughts, grazing land, and                                           difficulties of access due to    Warmer surface waters.
      106
          water points scarcity.                                                invasive plants).
Source: National Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Tool, World Bank, 2015
Fragility Diagnostic Summary (1/2)
The combined effects of social and environmental stresses create sustainability risks for poverty reduction prospects
                                                                           Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints


 Mauritania’s internal fragility stresses are embedded in the complex and hierarchical social structure in
      which ethnic groups, familial clans and tribes are intertwined and form a strict caste system. Slavery, though
      illegal, is still informally practiced, and its legacy maintains social inequalities and discrimination.
 Limited access to a fair, capable and independent justice system, along with the penetration of a privileged
      elite in the governance organs, contributes to mistrust and resentment against the State.
 Rapid urbanization phenomenon reinforce social division and economic inequalities, particularly for the
      youth that constitute a vulnerable target for violent extremism. This is further aggravated by growing
      regional security threats that penetrate the Northeastern border area and combined with domestic
      grievances and increased illegal trafficking, risk destabilizing the entire country.
 Climate change has exacerbated desertification and coastal erosion, increasing the frequency of severe
      droughts and floods that threaten livelihoods, deepen food and water insecurity, aggravate conflict over land
      management, and contribute to malnutrition and overall social instability in the country.
107
Fragility Diagnostic Summary (2/2)
Principal constraints - low access to social services, unaffordable food staples and inequitable land distribution
                                                                         Growth     Poverty   Governance   Sustainability   Constraints




 Mauritania faces a unique combination of environmental and                       PRIORITY BINDING CONSTRAINT
social fragility stresses that present a significant sustainability                           AREA
      risk to reaching inclusive growth and shared prosperity.
 Building on existing efforts, Mauritania has an opportunity to
      harness the richness of its cultural and social diversity by
                  strengthening the social contract.
 Strengthening the country’s resilience to climate change will
need to be integrated across all the dimensions of development                                Lack of Social
                                                                                                Cohesion
                               agenda.




108
Part A


CONCLUSION
                           Prioritized Constraint Areas
                                                       WORLD BANK TWIN GOALS


                        INCLUSIVE GROWTH                                                       S H AR E D P R O S P E R I T Y




    Weak               Failure to        Failure to        Rapid and           Low & inequitable          Inequitable            Distorted food
Management of           harness           harness          outpaced             access to social         distribution of             prices
 Extractives           livestock         fisheries        urbanization             services                   land
                       potential         potential
      Cross-cutting constraint area

            Li m i te d t r a ns pa rency i n publ ic s pe nding

      Cross-cutting constraint area

            S oc i a l f r a gility a nd l a c k of s oc i al c ohe s ion
110
      Note that cross-cutting governance and environmental fragility issues are addressed across all priority constraint areas
Part B


CONSTRAINTS &
SOLUTIONS
Overaching Analytical Framework
Is based upon multiple layers of analysis to arrive at principal constraint areas and prioritized potential solutions


  PART A. DIAGNOSTIC
                                                                                                               Priority
                                                                                                               Binding
                                                                                                             Constraints
                                                                                                                Areas
                  Growth                 Poverty             Governance           Sustainability
                     Constitutive dimensions                     Cross-cutting dimensions


  PART B. DEEP DIVE INTO EACH PRIORITY CONSTRAINT AREA
      1                                            2
          Detailed analysis of each constraint         Identification and assessment of solution
           area through the following lenses:            areas based on the following criteria:
                                                        Authorizing            Time required for             Solution
              $                                          environment             change
          $                                                                                                     areas
                                                        Implementation         Degree of
      Resources       Policies      Institutions         capacity                complementarity


112
Conceptual Framework for Analysing Priority Constraint Areas
Step 1: Each priority constraint area is analyzed through three lenses


PRIORITY CONSTRAINT AREAS                          ANALYTICAL LENSES

            Weak Management of Extractives
                                                                         Resources base: natural endowments,
            Failure to harness livestock                                 human capital, investments and financial flows
                                                    Resources            and their productivity, accumulation and
                                                                         allocation
            Failure to harness fisheries


            Rapid and outpaced urbanization                              Underlying policies: impact of policy design,
                                                       Policies          implementation, consistency and credibility of
            Distorted food prices                                        policies on the utilization of the resources


            Weak access to social services
                                                                         Institutional foundations: legal, regulatory
                                                                         and normative frameworks, institutional and
            Inequitable land distribution              Institutions      administrative capacity and the interface
                                                                         between institutions and political power
      $   $ Weak transparency of public spending                         (WDR, 2016)


            Lack of social cohesion
113
Conceptual Framework for Assessing Solution Areas
Step 2: Identification and assessment of potential solution areas


                                                                        Solutions assessment criteria
 Initial identification of solution areas
                                                                              AUTHORIZING ENVIRONMENT
  Solutions are identified using existing analytical and technical           Solution areas factor in the authorizing environment,
                                                                              including presence of domestic coalitions for change,
      work by the World Bank and other available sources, including           possibility of “win-win” solutions for elite and the poor, etc.

      evaluations of existing interventions and relevant lessons from         IMPLEMENTATION CAPACITY
      international experience. The SCD team organized thematic               They also take into account the implementation capacity
                                                                              at both national and local levels, presence of relevant
      focus group discussions with in-country, international, and             technologies, etc.

      World Bank Country Team stakeholders to shortlist the most
                                                                              TIME REQUIRED FOR CHANGE
      relevant solutions.                                                     Solution areas have been categorized depending on how
                                                                              fast they can have an impact on the twin goals,
                                                                              especially with reference to the 2030 horizon
 Assessment of solution areas
                                                                              COMPLEMENTARITIES
  Each solution is then assessed based on the four illustrated               The degree of complementarity and extent to which

      criteria, using a traffic light system:                                 solutions are mutually reinforcing for greater impact is also
                                                                              assessed
      low     - medium      - high     .
114
                      Deep Dive Into
                         Principal
                        Constraint
                          Areas


115   © 2015 Ipsos.
  Improving the Management of Extractives: Key Challenges

                                       Abundant and diversified resources, but access to electricity, water and transport affects
                                        competitiveness of investments
        RESOURCES
                              $   $    Water shortage exacerbated by climate change jeopardize future mineral production and
                                        access to fresh water for the population
                                       Despite legal revisions, the framework for attracting investment and managing exportation is
                                        restrictive (opaque and lengthy processes for awarding licenses, insecurity of finders’ rights
                                        tenure, uncertainty regarding mandatory state participation and the role of SMHPM*)
          POLICIES                     Lack of a harmonized tax code and absence of fiscal rules delimiting management of
                                        extractive revenues (no contribution of resources to diversification of economy). Lack of
                                        coordination between mining and finance services
                                       A very low profit take compared to the region
                                       Weak integration of the extractive industry with the local economy (links with private sector,
                                        development constraints)
                                       Reactive environmental policies
                                       Dominance and preferential treatment of SNIM and SMPHM: elite capture; vertical integration
        INSTITUTIONS                    crowding out private sector
                                       Weak control and monitoring capacity of the Geology and Mines Directorate
                                       Institutional negotiation capacity limitations, as demonstrated in the Chinguetti setback
  116
*Note: SMHPM – Société Mauritanienne des Hydrocarburés et de Patrimoine Minier
Improving Management of Extractives: Solutions
                                                                                                                                                     Implemen           Comple
                                                                                                                                       Authorizing
 Solution area                                                                                                                         Environment
                                                                                                                                                       -tation   Time   mentari
                                                                                                                                                      Capacity           ties
 Macro
 -fiscal




                      Lay the foundations for a fiscal rule to specifically address natural resource wealth considerations
 regime




                      Design a fiscal regime with effective tax rates more aligned with the region. Develop a unified frame for
   Tax




                      negotiations

                      Reintroduce independent and rules-based license management

                      Establish a fair and effective unitization agreement for the development of transnational oil reserves and
  Sectoral planning




                      conduct a capacity audit and gap analysis for oil and gas project negotiation and execution

                      Integrate regional development planning and sharing of infrastructure in “resource corridors” to improve water
                      and energy supply and management

                      Develop broader private sector participation for local supply and service provision

                      Harness decentralization process to roll out community development investments
  Environment




                      Oversight and enforcement of operators through improved inter-ministerial coordination


                      Integrate climate scenarios in existing management and planning of resources (in particular water)


                      Strengthen oversight and control functions of SOEs (SNIM, SMHPM) and FNRH; and improve audit quality
  Governance




                      Transparency: Revise procedures and systems to comply with EITI 2016 enhanced rules

117                   Reinforce capacity across the board (technical, oversight, execution, financial, fiscal, etc..)
Harnessing Potential in Livestock: Key Challenges
                              Limited allocation of public resources to the sector, despite its economic weight and high
                               impact on poverty and gender empowerment in rural areas
      RESOURCES
                     $   $    Growth in domestic and international demand and capacity to adapt to harsh and deteriorating
                               climatic conditions
                              Domestic transformation below potential in all animal products value chains for various
                               species (meat, milk, egg, hides, honey, etc.) and lack of export diversification outside
                               traditional regional market
                              Scarcity of animal feed and degraded environmental sustainability and water constraints
                               affecting natural pastures and leading to increased cattle movements and conflicts

                              Lack of a National Livestock Policy
        POLICIES
                              Challenges with respect to land management and climate-smart agriculture to support agro-
                               sylvo-pastoral sedentary producers
                              Lack of implementation/enforcement of animal health and sanitary policy, and recently adopted
                               Pastoral Code, as well as permanence of non-tariff barriers to trade (road blocks)
                              Weak business environment for livestock inputs (veterinary drugs and animal feed) and for
      INSTITUTIONS             agro-processing, including uncompetitive practices and limited access to credit
                              Weak and complex monitoring of the sector, missing livestock census and statistics
118                           Limited deconcentration of technical support services to livestock producers
Harnessing Potential in Livestock: Solutions
                                                                                                                         Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen-
 Solution area                                                                                                           Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                                   Time
                                                                                                                                                            tarities

                 Increase budgetary allocations to the livestock sector, commensurate with the sector’s weight in the
                 economy
  Resources




                 Address environmental sustainability of transhumance-based system through investments in animal
                 health, natural resource management (including pastoral hydraulics, pasture development and
                 protection of transhumance corridors), marketing infrastructure and crisis management systems

                 Modernize sedentary systems for productivity gains and value chains’ competitiveness

                 Reinforce mechanisms for credit provision to livestock producers

                 Adopt National Livestock Policy on the model of the “Plan national de Development Agricole” (taking
                 into account the role women play in animal rearing)
  Policies




                 Enforce the execution of the Pastoral Code, especially animal health and sanitary requirements, to
                 enhance export prospects

                 Launch the livestock census

                 Set up drought early warning and response system for livestock, and promote agriculture / livestock
                 complementarity (drought power, fertilization, feed production, such as intercropping fodder crops on
                 irrigated rice production systems and climate-smart agroculture)
  Institutions




                 Improve business environment in the sector and promote animal product value chains (processing
                 activities, including animal feed, eggs, honey, milk, meat and side products, such as hide and skins,
                 gelatin, etc.)

                 Strengthen research on technical and economic references, and guidelines for the sector
                 modernization (use of artificial insemination and genetic improvements techniques, feed rations using
119
                 local by-products, etc.) and extension programs for small herders
Harnessing Potential in Fisheries: Key Challenges
                              Poor technical conditions of the domestic fleet (most notably industrial) and sub-optimal
                               management of port infrastructure despite improvements
                                Concentrated catches in small pelagic (mostly sardinellas and horse mackerel) and octopus,
      RESOURCES                  which are respectively fully and over-exploited
                     $   $
                                Rapid emergence of the unsustainable fishmeal industry
                                Illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing affecting quantity and quality of marketable
                                 fish
                                Little value-added in the human consumption processing sector
                                Environmental sustainability risks (over-exploitation, declining marine biodiversity)

        POLICIES                Heavily concentrated fish export outlets (85 percent of exports to Japan, Italy and Spain);
                                 and EU agreement main financial dividend
                                Capacity issues to manage complex agreements, including EU protocol, and cumbersome
                                 export procedures
                                Insufficient use of available fisheries information to guide fisheries policy and management
                                Risk of conflict of authority between the Ministry of Fisheries and the Free Zone Authority;
      INSTITUTIONS               vested interests in fishmeal industry
                                Questionable role of SMCP (which sets export reference prices, taxes, currency repatriation)
                                Insufficient capacity to control and monitor quota intakes and illegal fishing practices
120
                                Weak institutional capacity of the Ministry of Fisheries and the Free Zone Authority
Harnessing Potential in Fisheries: Solutions
                                                                                                                  Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen-
 Solution area                                                                                                    Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                            Time
                                                                                                                                                     tarities

 1. Improve the sustainability of existing exports:
 1.1 Adopt and execute management plans for small pelagic and demersal catches and improve small
 pelagic and demersal processing for consumption

 1.2. Diversify export outlets and explore alternative export options (e.g. refrigerated trucking via Morocco),
 and ratify the TIR convention

 2. Diversify out of octopus and small pelagic: Investigate market opportunities for diversification in
 crustaceans, other demersal fish species, highly migratory species, and mollusks other than cephalopods

 3. Develop processing capacity for the value-added production for human consumption: reforms to
 improve investment climate; improve capacity of the Ministry of Fishery and the Free Zone authority

 4. Modernize domestic fleet and implement the Managed Infrastructure Development Plan:
 4.1 Improve execution of the government supervision and licensing / certification program;

 4.2. Explore PPPs for the development of port infrastructure

 5. Develop a one-stop exportation shop and improve logistic chains for exportations by air:
 5.1 Reduce processing times and delays and ensure predictability for the exportation of fresh fish by air;

 5.2. Improve the supply chain from the refrigeration warehouse to the airport.

 6. Clarify jurisdictional boundaries of institutional arrangements: review role of SCMP in export
 promotion and facilitation; strengthen institutional coordination and capacity to implement the Fisheries
 Transparency Initiative
121
 7. Implement the new quota-based management (output control) for regulating fisheries in EEZ
Addressing Outpaced and Rapid Urbanization: Key Challenges

                              Agglomeration economy impeded by sprawled out, ‘leap-frog’ development
      RESOURCES
                         $
                     $        Limited access to basic services and infrastructures (electricity, water) and long and costly
                               travel distances fragment labor market and impede private sector development

                              Disaster / climate change risks, in particular environmental risks for coastal urban centers,
                               including Nouakchott and Nouadhibou (coastal, water and sand)
                              Lengthy and unfinished urban planning
        POLICIES
                              Inadequate territorial planning, neglecting the importance of developing secondary buffer
                               cities or leveraging comparative advantages of cities

                              Dysfunctional land policy and market, leading to spatial inefficiencies in Nouakchott
                               (spread out development)

                              Weak business environment (infrastructure, energy, cost of trade, taxation, etc), especially
                               limited access to finance, impeding concentrated urban development

                              Weak compliance and enforcement of urban planning and environmental safeguards
      INSTITUTIONS
                              Limited coordination of territorial planning and spatial management

                              Weak capacity and limited resources of local governments
122
Addressing Outpaced and Rapid Urbanization: Solutions
                                                                                                            Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen-
 Solution area                                                                                              Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                      Time
                                                                                                                                               tarities

 1. Improve Strategic Planning and Urban Development

 Strengthen strategic spatial planning and conduct medium to long term economic growth and
 environmental feasibility studies (possibly using the Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
 methodology); explore secondary cities as a buffer for urban expansion and economic growth and
 diversification

 Encourage property development to slow down leapfrog spatial development through the introduction
 of a legal framework for property rights, a revision of land allocation policies and expansion of access
 to financing for concentrated housing developments and SMEs

 2. Enhance Access to Services

 Address bottlenecks in the business environment and development of entrepreneurship ecosystem
 (focus on youth and women)

 Expansion of service coverage, including public transport, with focus on high poverty areas and
 efficiency enhancements (exploring PPP as an option)

 3. Address Environmental Risks

 Consolidate and enforce environmental protection and risk mitigation initiatives in Nouakchott and
 Nouadhibou, including for coastal erosion and flooding

 4. Strengthen institutional and local governance arrangements


  Review and advance decentralization policy, aligning resources and capacity with mandate
123
Tackling High Food Prices for Rice and Wheat: Key Challenges

                              Disconnect between international and domestic prices for wheat and rice. Low and
      RESOURCES                asymmetric price transmission – positive international price shocks transmitted faster
                     $   $
                              Large distributor gross margins, accounting for up to 50% of retail prices for rice against
                               the background of low tariffs, taxes, handling and transport costs

                              Significant increase in domestic absorption of cereals (production plus imports- 35% per
                               year), which needs to be further investigated

                              Government imports substitution program for rice and wheat (input subsidy programs and
        POLICIES               price support programs) led to productivity & production improvements, but no reduction
                               of imports or decrease in prices in Nouakchott, as substitutability of imports limited by
                               quality issues

                              Government rice import substitution policy, apart from potential economic efficiency
                               problems, creates tensions with objective to reduce price of imported food, which would
                               favor urban poor

      INSTITUTIONS            Concentration (elite capture) in rice importation likely accounts for high distributor
                               margins, and appears linked to non-competitive practices, though further analysis is
                               required.

124
Tackling High Food Prices for Rice and Wheat: Solutions
                                                                                                               Implemen-          Complemen-
 Solution area                                                                                    Auth. Env.
                                                                                                                 tation
                                                                                                                           Time
                                                                                                                                    tarities

 1. Strengthen competition in rice import market to reduce distributor margins (knowledge gaps)

 Carry out competition analysis of food import sector

 Carry out consultations with private sector and citizens on food import prices issues

 2. Make local rice more competitive price-wise and quality-wise

 2.1 Improve quality along rice value chain

 South-South learning with Senegal, Thailand

 Strengthen farmer organizations and technical support to processing

 2.2 Expand small scale irrigation in Senegal Valley

 Establish new irrigation policy framework, including all donors

 Address land rights issues

 Strengthen efficiency of irrigation investment

 Address governance and capacity at SONADERE

125
Ensuring Equitable Distribution of Arable Land: Key Challenges

                              Limited data on the distribution of land

      RESOURCES               Allocation of irrigated land to small cooperatives in recent years, but concerns of land
                     $   $
                               grabbing; divestitures in 1980’s; discrimination against women; pastoralists

                              Limited formal land rights (3177 deeds registered) and absence of property rights (droits
                               reel), with most relying on customary rights

                              Outdated 1983 Land Law: shortcomings in both design (complexities; failure to take into
                               account customary system; cooperatives increasing uncertainty) and implementation
        POLICIES
                               (limited take up due to low returns and high costs; persistence of dual system and
                               arbitrary nature of local dispute resolution)

                              Lack of clarity on land acquisition policies for private investment in agriculture have
                               created social tensions

                              Weak institutional capacity (surveys, cadaster, etc.) and coordination
      INSTITUTIONS
                              Land capture by urban and tribal elites

                              Prevalence of customary land management and dispute resolution processes
126
Ensuring Equitable Distribution of Arable Land: Solutions
                                                                                                                   Authorizing   Implement-          Complemen-
 Solution area                                                                                                     Environment     ation
                                                                                                                                              Time
                                                                                                                                                       tarities

 1.   Close Knowledge Gaps:

 1.1. Conduct a Systematic Review of the Land Sector, incorporating the specificities of the SRV

 1.2. Undertake land household surveys in the Senegal River Valley


 2. Adopt land management plans in the Senegal River Valley that balance the promotion of
 responsible private sector investment with the needs of the local populations, including women


 3. Resolve outstanding resettlement issues related to returnees from Mali and Senegal

 4. Reach a nationwide consensus on Land Policy Reform and update the legal framework : Engage
 in a participative process of national and regional consultation; target reform efforts to the specificities of
 the SRV; ensure the recognition, delimitation and formalization of the multitude of ownership and land use
 rights, including customary rights and grazing rights

 5. Pilot innovative initiatives to formalize land and property rights and improve land conflict
 resolution mechanisms: including the testing of decentralized issuance of “land certificates”;
 mechanisms to improve women’s access to land; and integrated dispute resolution processes

 6. Strengthen land administration governance and institutional capacities:

 6.1 Modernize land registration procedures and tools

 6.2 Harmonize and regularize dispute resolution processes

127
 6.3 Train local land officers, customary authorities and rural communities
Building Human Capital: Key Challenges
                              Public spending in health and education has increased but remains low and is inefficiently allocated
                               and regressively distributed across quintiles and geographic regions
      RESOURCES
                     $   $    Human resources are also limited, unequally distributed, and poorly trained/motivated

                              Share of household spending on health has become increasingly significant

                              Rural access to energy at only 4 percent

                              Education: Fragmented educative system (public, private, traditional) driven by low quality of public
        POLICIES               schools; implementation challenges of bilingual policy; skewed focus on access (less on retention
                               or quality)

                              Health: Focus on tertiary services with limited emphasis on primary preventative care

                              Lack of support for the poor across social sectors; nascent pro-poor targeting mechanisms; limited
                               scale of national social safety net programs; lack of coherent rural energy access strategy

                              Institutional fragmentation and technical inefficiency; lack of coordination and institutional leadership
      INSTITUTIONS             in shock and crises responses

                              Limited governance at local levels, including accountability of service providers (teachers, health
                               providers, water and sanitation)

                              Lack of evidence-based decision-making (due to low statistical capacity)
128                           Certain cultural norms impede access of marginalized groups (e.g. early marriage)
Building Human Capital: Solutions
                                                                                                               Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen
 Solution area                                                                                                 Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                         Time
                                                                                                                                                  tarities

 1. Improve the governance of human resource management and civil servants’ training/skills, incentives,
 and accountability (at local and system levels)

 2. Target the quality of education in public schools in underprivileged areas:

 2.1 Reallocate resources and increase spending on critical educational inputs (such as textbooks, practice
 guides and basic student furniture, teacher training and curriculum development)

 2.2 Better integrate religious schooling into national education system

 3. Align tertiary and technical, vocational education with labor markets requirements: conduct tracer
 studies and strengthen the monitoring of training institutions, better identify skill gaps

 4. Re-allocate health spending (in favor of high impact interventions, such as preventative care, maternal,
 neonatal and child health)

 5. Analyze allocation of resources and the performance of public and private providers of water,
 hygiene and sanitation services

 6. Shift to lifecycle approach to human capital formation by investing in early childhood development,
 notably through social protection mechanisms; nutrition, water and sanitation, early stimulation/learning


 7. Introduce Results-Based Financing


 8. Introduce Universal Health Coverage

129
Building Human Capital: Solutions
                                                                                                             Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen
 Solution area                                                                                               Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                       Time
                                                                                                                                                tarities


 9. Strengthen Social Safety Nets: consolidate social protection system; roll out the national safety net
 program

 10. Improve efficiency of response to crises: develop financing, institutional and operational tools to
 respond to shocks and crises in a timely manner

 11. Support national deployment of the Social Register as the main pro-poor targeting instrument

 12. Expansion of mini-grid and off-grid technologies: develop a coherent rural energy access strategy and
 consolidate institutional arrangements




130
Strengthening the Transparency of Government Expenditures: Key Challenges


         POLICIES
      & INSTITUTIONS



 Public Finance Management: Opaque and discretionary budget expenditures; limited linkages between budget and policy;
  and weak internal and external controls of public expenditures (PER 2016)

 Public Investment Management Systems: few formal project appraisals; limited coordination; limited data and analysis; and
  weak oversight (PER 2016)

 Weaknesses in the current procurement systems that increase the risk of fraud and corruption: limited application of the
  existing legal and regulatory framework; by-passing of national procedures through public enterprises (PER 16)

 Limited government scrutiny of the para-statal sector that presents fiscal risks and risks of corruption (PER 2016 and
  SOES Report 2013)

 Despite robust anti-corruption framework, the systems for detecting, uncovering and prosecuting corrupt practices are
  nascent. Accountability institutions do not actively report on the findings of their audit and control work. Weak mechanisms for
  working with the public to uncover fraud and corruption. The Procurement Control Commission does not report on fraud and
  corruption in procurement, and neither do the external or internal auditors. No system is in place for debarment of firms found
  guilty of procurement fraud.
131
Strengthening the Transparency of Government Expenditures: Solutions


                                                                                                           Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen-
      Solution area                                                                                        Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                     Time
                                                                                                                                              tarities

      1.   Improve Public Investments Management
      Investment budget and project data; strategy based on economic and social impacts and financial
      viability in the longer term; investment project preparation and preliminary appraisal; roles and
      independent reviews (to be considered); monitoring and support for project implementation

      2. Modernize Public Financial Management systems
      2.1 Accurately record expenditures; keep BOOST up to date; strengthen financial oversight of SOE’s

      2.2 Effective implementation of performance-based program budgeting

      3. Improve the Public Procurement Reform Process
      Consolidate the process; enhance the transparency of the procurement systems including those used
      by public enterprises

      4. Strengthen the capacity of the institutions that are responsible for sanctioning corruption,
      including the justice system, the procurement control commission and internal inspections

      5. Initiate strategic communications with the media and citizens, as well as a framework to
      facilitate access to information



132
Reinforcing Social Contract: Key Challenges

                                      National Identity:
         POLICIES
                                       Limited effectiveness of Government social inclusion programs
      & INSTITUTIONS
                                       Regulatory complexities and practical impediments to civil registration
                                       Fragmented education system and limited integration of religious education stream
                                       Youth marginalization and radicalization (Government programs information and SCAPP)

Protection of the Vulnerable:
 Enforcement of the laws against slavery is reported to be incomplete and the legacy of slavery perpetuates the exclusion of
  certain groups
 Women face legal discrimination and some social practices hinder girls and women’s agency
 Formal judicial systems fail to protect the vulnerable and social norms perpetuate discriminatory practices
 Imperfect targeting and dispersion of social protection programs

Political Inclusion:
 Decentralization yet to ensure public resources flowing to local governments
 Nascent citizen engagement
 Weak de-concentration resulting in limited proximity of government and services to citizens
133
Reinforcing Social Contract: Solutions
                                                                                                                                   Authorizing   Implemen-          Complemen-
  Solution area                                                                                                                    Environment     tation
                                                                                                                                                             Time
                                                                                                                                                                      tarities

                        Consolidate the social cohesion process that has already started by enhancing the national dialogue
                        and focusing on the impact of social inclusion programs
    National Identity




                        Explore the options for better accommodating linguistic plurality, drawing upon international
                        experience and reinvigorate efforts to effectively implement education reforms, notably the bilingual
                        policy

                        Improve civil registry processes to ensure recognition of the most vulnerable and facilitate their
                        access to services

                        Adopt a holistic approach to education that better integrates religious education, that incorporates the
                        needs of those left behind by the education system and that harnesses the educative role of actors
                        outside the formal education system

                        Explore options for positive discrimination in employment, and geographic targeting of public
 Protecting the
  Vulnerable




                        investment, and access to credit

                        Improve the targeting and consolidation of the Social Protection System

                        Strengthen the skills and youth agenda: develop a steady job creation plan for young workers;
                        reinforce out of school programs; youth training programs

                        Improve access to justice amongst the most vulnerable including protection for women, slaves and
                        former slaves and the landless
 Inclusion
  Political




                        Enhance citizen engagement modalities


134                     Deconcentrate government services and resource allocation
Conclusions
Cross-cutting themes

 The analysis of the priority constraints to poverty reduction in Mauritania reveals three recurrent themes that
 underscore the country’s development problematic:

 • Mauritania’s economic space is dominated by a narrow base of private sector actors. Broadening economic
   participation and unlocking the potential for private sector-led diversification will require foundational changes to the
   country’s state-driven development model and fresh thinking on unlocking the constraints to governance and
   competitiveness.

 • Informal social networks and cultural norms pervade every sphere of the country’s economic, social and political
   space and undermine the legitimacy of state institutions. Across the sectors, the need to strengthen the authority and
   capacity of state institutions emerges as a priority and reinforces the over-arching importance of building a public
   administration that is performance-driven, capable and accountable, both at the central and local levels.

 • Mauritania’s wealth of natural resources and the richness of its cultural and social diversity are both a blessing
   and a curse. The unique combination of social and environmental fragility factors present the single most important
   challenge to poverty reduction and shared prosperity and will require determined leadership and sustained commitment to
   chart a new course for the creation of a unified and resilient nation.

 The challenges of sustaining and accelerating inclusive growth, improving equity for the bottom forty percent and ensuring the
 sustainability of the country’s development model will therefore require a paradigmatic shift towards a more open and
 resilient economic and social space, supported by capable and modern state institutions.
135
                                       Conclusion
 Reliant on its extractive resource wealth, Mauritania made important inroads into both poverty
 reduction and economic growth during the mining boom. Yet the end of the commodity super cycle
 marked a decisive turning point in the Government’s quest to end poverty and achieve shared
 prosperity by 2030. With the dramatic downturn in international commodity prices, the country is
 now presented with both the opportunity and the challenge of transforming its extractive-driven and
 state-dominated development model into one that leverages the country’s natural wealth
 endowments, promotes private sector led diversification and job creation and builds equity-
 enhancing structural foundations for sustained poverty reduction. The viability of such a development
 model ultimately hinges on the creation of a more inclusive and resilient economic, political and
 social space, supported by capable and accountable modern state institutions.
136
                                                                                            Photo credit: WFP / Justin Smith
      T H A N K Y O U F O R Y O U R AT T E N T I O N !




137
                      Annexes




138   © 2015 Ipsos.
Knowledge gaps

      Focus Area            Recommendations for further analysis

                            Further analysis into the factors underscoring the significant distributor margins associated with high
      Competitiveness in    domestic prices for imported rice and an investigation into the increase in domestic absorption is needed. To
      food import markets   effectively design and target measures aimed at correcting food prices a Comprehensive Competitiveness
                            Assessment of the Food Import Sector is therefore required.
                            The dearth of reliable statistical information on national livestock impedes effective policy design. A
                            Livestock Census to assess current livestock ownership dynamics (including ownership among most
                            vulnerable groups, such as women and youth) is therefore required.
      Livestock census
                            It is recommendable to include in such an assessment the analysis of key value chains and the identification
                            of the main bottlenecks to production and export diversification within Mauritania’s agri-food sector, with a
                            view to creating an enabling environment for private sector participation (e.g., food processing, cold value
                            chains, distribution).
                            Mauritania’s lagging performance on nutrition requires further analysis. In particular, a Spatial and
      Nutrition analysis    Population Group Analysis of Nutrition would assist in targeting neglected areas or population groups that
                            have thus far escaped government’s supervision.

      Public Expenditure    A detailed analysis of the allocation of resources in the WASH sector, together with an assessment of
      Review in the WASH    private sector engagement in the sector in both rural and urban areas would help to reinforce the diagnostic
      sector                behind the limited progress in sanitation and water.
139
Knowledge gaps

      Focus Area              Recommendations for further analysis

                              Further analysis and data collection into the demand for justice services and the intersection between
      Justice sector survey   informal and formal dispute resolution processes in Mauritania would facilitate the targeting of reforms
                              for the protection of the vulnerable.

      Distributional
                              A detailed analysis of land distribution practices in the Senegal River Valley together with household
      analysis of land in
                              land surveys would help to further validate the qualitative evidence of distributional distortions in land
      the Senegal River
                              access and would enable strategic orientations for land reform in the area to be developed.
      Valley

                              A comprehensive audit of the public investments executed by public enterprises would help to identify
      Public enterprises
                              options for improving the effectiveness and quality of public investments.


                              Further analysis on the economic growth potential of Mauritanian cities, the absorptive potential of
      Strategic spatial and
                              secondary cities and a prospective modeling of specific cities and territorial development (possibly using
      urban planning
                              a Decision-Making Under Uncertainty model) will be needed.




140
Bibliography (1/5)
         Acemoglou, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J., The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation, The American Economic Review 91(5):1369-1401, 2001.
         Amo-Adjei, J., Annim, S., Socioeconomic Determinants of Birth Registration in Ghana, BMC International Health and Human Rights 15 (2015)
         Banc, E., As Sahel Trafficking Networks Grow, Al Qaeda Rebels Get Stronger in Mali, February 2015.
         Batha, E., Mauritania commits to ending modern-day slavery, Reuters, March 2016.
         Bertelsmann Stiftung's Transformation Index, BTI (2016), Mauritania Country Report
         Boukhars, A., Mauritania’s Precarious Stability and Islamist Undercurrent”, Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, February 2016.
         Brunelin, S., Améliorer l’Accès à l’Alimentation Pour les plus Vulnérables, May 2015.
         Brunelin, S., Analysis of Imported Food Price Dynamics in Mauritania, 2016.
         Canadian Security Intelligence Services (2014), “Current Situation and Future of Jihadism in Mauritania”, in Political Stability and Security in West and North Africa.
         Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (2012), The Drivers of Insecurity in Mauritania.
         Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (2016), Mauritania’s Precarious Stability and Islamist Undercurrent.
         De Haas, Migration and Agricultural Transformations in the Oasis of Morocco and Tunisia, Utrecht: KNAG (2001).
         Economist Intelligence Unit (2015), Country Report on Mauritania.
         European Union (2014), Audit Institutionnel du Secteur de la Santé en Mauritanie, Rapport Final.
         Fraser Institute, Infrastructure Quality Index 2015.
         Freedom House (2015), Mauritania Country Report.
         Global Nutrition Report (2016). From Promise to Action: Ending Malnutrition by 2030.
         Global Slavery Index (2016), Mauritania Country Profile.
         International Finance Corporation (2014); Mauritania – Country Profile, Enterprise Surveys.
         International Monetary Fund (2012), Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich Developing Countries.
         International Monetary Fund (2015), Article IV Report on Mauritania.
141
Bibliography (2/5)
         International Monetary Fund (2015), Financial Assessment Stability Model.
         Inter Press Service (2011), Mauritania Could Lose Its Capital City to the Sea.
         International Food Policy Research Institute (2015), Mauritania – Nutrition Country Profile
         Kastner, P., Trudel, E., Canada’s Progress Shows Indigenous Reconciliation is a Long-Term Process, May 2015.
         Larcombe, G., Emerging Local Employment Opportunities for Young People: Innovative Employment and Learning Pathways, Larcombe, Glebe: Dusseldorp Skills Forum, 2002
         Mauritania (2000), National Urban Development Strategy, 2000-2001.
         Mauritania, Center of Policy Analysis, CMAP (2015), Système de subventionnement en Mauritanie.
         Mauritania, Ministry of National Education (2011), Programme National de Developpement du Secteur Educatif 2011-2020 (PNDSE II), Plan d’Action Triennal (2012-2014).
         Mauritania, Ministry of National Education (2015), Rapport d’État sur le Système Éducatif National (RESEN).
         Mauritania, Ministry of Commerce (2015), Stratégie pour le développement du secteur industriel en Mauritanie : 2015-2019.
         Mauritania, Ministry of Economic Affairs and Development (MAED) (2011), Stratégie nationale de Protection sociale en Mauritanie.
         Mauritania, MAED, (2013 and 2014), Elaboration d’une stratégie de développement du secteur privé, Rapport final de la phase 1 et rapport final de la phase 2.
         Mauritania, MAED (2015), Présentation des Résultats définitifs du Recensement général de la Population et de l’Habitat (RGPH 2013).
         Mauritania, Ministry of Economy and Finance (2016), Stratégie de croissance accélérée et de prospérité partagée (SCAPP), 2016-2030
         Mauritania, MAED and UNDP (2013), National Consultations on the Post-2015 Development Agenda Report.
         Mauritania, MAED and UNDP (2015), Rapport d’évaluation globale du CSLP 2001-2015.
         Mauritania, MAED and UNDP (2015), Rapport d’Evaluation Globale du Cadre Stratégique de Lutte Contre la Pauvreté (CSLP) 2001-2015.
         Mauritania, Ministry of Health (2015), Strategie National du Financement Base sur les Resultats dans le Secteur de la Sante.
         Mauritania, National Statistics Office (2008), Profil de la Pauvreté en Mauritanie.
         Mauritanie pour le Développement, Recherche et Suivi, MDRS (2012), Enquête de Perception de la Corruption en Mauritanie (EPCM).
         Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Country Insights – Mauritania, 2015.
142
Bibliography (3/5)
         Okeowo, Alexis, Freedom Fighter: A slaving society and an abolitionist’s crusade, The New Yorker, Sept. 8, 2014.
         Ouldzeidoune N, Keating J., Bertrand J., Rice, J., “A Description of Female Genital Mutilation and Force-Feeding Practices in Mauritania: Implications for the Protection of Child Rights
          and Health”. PLoS ONE 8(4).
         Rao, Sumedh (2014), “Conflict Analysis of Mauritania”, GSDRC Applied Knowledge Services.
         ReliefWeb (2015), Humanitarian Overview of Mauritania.
         Reporters without Borders (2015), World Press Freedom Index
         Transparency International (2012), Corruption Perception Index.
         United Kingdom Government’s Department for International Development, DFID (2014), Conflict analysis of Mauritania
         United States Department of State (2016), Trafficking in Persons Report.
         United States Department of State (2016), Bureau of Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism, Country Report on Terrorism 2015: Mauritania.
         United States Federal News Service, ECA Study Analyses Challenges of Microfinance for the Empowerment of Rural Women in Mauritania, September 2016.
         United Nations Populations Fund (UNFPA), 2016, Rapport de l’Atelier de Formation Sur la Mesure du Dividende Demographiique en Mauritanie, Version Provisoire
         United Nations WOMEN (2010), National Report on Mauritania.
         United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), SMART Surveys.
         UNICEF (2013), Every Child Birth Rights: Inequities and Trends in Birth Registration.
         UNICEF (2016), Data Work on FGM / C
         UNICEF (2016), L’Enseignement Originel en Mauritanie: Contribution de la Mahadra a la Realisation des Droits des Enfants
         UNICEF (2016) State of the World’s Children.
         United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (2014), Concluding Observations: Mauritania, CEDAW/C/MRT/CO/2-3, July 2014.
         United Nations (2010), Rapport sur les Progrès 2010 vers l’atteinte des objectifs du millénaire pour le développement (OMD) en Mauritanie.
         United Nations, UN ComTrade Database.
143
Bibliography (4/5)
         Walk Free Foundation, The Global Slavery Index 2016.
         World Food Program / UNHCR (2015) Joint Assessment Mission, Malian Refugees in Mauritania
         World Food Program (2015), Mauritanie – Enquête de suivi de la sécurité alimentaire (FSMS)
         World Food Program (2015), News release, WFP Chief Sees At First Hand Food And Nutrition Challenges In Mauritania
         World Health Organization (2014), Mauritania – Neonatal and Child Health Profile
         World Bank (2006), Mauritania - Managing Natural Resources: Challenges and Options, Country Economic Memorandum Update.
         World Bank (2008), Mauritania Anti-Corruption Study, Washington DC.
         World Bank (2010), Mauritania – Policy Options to Enhance Private Sector Development, Country Economic Memorandum.
         World Bank (2011), Mauritania – Nutrition at a Glance.
         World Bank (2013), Note d’Evaluation des Filets de Sécurité Alimentaire du Programme Emel.
         World Bank (2013), Mauritania: Local Government Development Project, Project Appraisal Document, Report No. 76053-MR.
         World Bank (2013), Gouvernance des Entreprises Publiques et des Agences Publiques en République Islamique de Mauritanie, Report N°: 78013-MR, 2013
         World Bank (2014), Porter, More Money, More Problems: Extractive Industries in the Sahara.
         World Bank (2014), Antil and Mokhefi, Managing the Sahara Periphery.
         World Bank (2014), Baghdassarian, Mele and Pradelli, Assessing Public Debt Sustainability in Mauritania with a Stochastic Framework.
         World Bank (2014), Cadre d’Analyse de la Gouvernance Foncière en Mauritanie (CAGF).
         World Bank (2014), Building on crisis response to promote long-term development: a review of social safety net programs in the Islamic Republic of Mauritania.
         World Bank (2014), Mauritania Economic Update.
         World Bank (2014), Mele, G., Counting on Natural Wealth for a Sustainable Future.
         World Bank Group (2014), Mauritania: Country Partnership Strategy.
         World Bank (2014), Transformations of Armed Violence in the Sahara.
144
Bibliography (5/5)
         World Bank (2015), La transition vers une croissance verte et inclusive en Mauritanie.
         World Bank (2015), Mauritania, The Evolution of the Labor Force and some of its Drivers between 2008 and 2014.
         World Bank (2015), Mauritania, National Climate and Disaster Risk Management Screening Tool Outcomes
         World Bank (2015), Diagnostic Trade Integration Study (DTIS) Update: From short-term rents to sustainable macroeconomic growth and trade-led development.
         World Bank and IMF (2015), Mauritania: Joint WB-IMF Debt Sustainability Assessment.
         World Bank (2015), Women’s Access to Land in Mauritania: A Case Study in Preparation for the COP.
         World Bank (2016), Mauritania, Program Document for a Proposed Development Policy Credit for a First Mauritania Fiscal Diversification Reform Development Policy Operation (DPO)
         World Bank (2016), Mauritania, Poverty Dynamics and Social Mobility 2008-2014 (Poverty Assessment).
         World Bank (2016), Mauritania, Public Expenditure Review (PER), Surfing the Wave: Public Spending During the Commodity Super-Cycle and Beyond.
         World Bank (2016), Mauritania, Transforming the Trajectory of Youth Labor Market Dynamics and Growth, Brief Draft.
         World Bank (2016), World Development Report: Digital Dividends
         World Bank (2016), Mauritania: Financing Social Protection and Analyzing the Impact of Subsidies (Mauritanie: Financer la Protection Sociale et Analyser l’Impact des Subventions).
         World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI).
         World Bank, Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI).
         World Economic Forum (2016), Global Competitiveness Report 2015-2016
         World Health Organization (2008), Eliminating female genital mutilation: an interagency statement UNAIDS, UNDP, UNECA, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNHCHR, UNHCR, UNICEF,
          UNIFEM.




145
Acronyms (1/3)
CPIA   Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
DTIS   Diagnostic Trade Integration Study
DTP    Diphtheria, pertussis, polio
EMEL   Emergency food program (Programme alimentaire)
EPCV   Survey of Household Living Conditions (Enquête Permanente sur les Conditions de Vie des ménages)
EU     European Union
EEZ    Exclusive Economic Zone
ENER   National Agency for Roads Maintenance (Etablissement National pour l’Entretien Routier)
FDI    Foreign Direct Investment
FGM    Female Genital Mutilation
FITI   Fisheries Transparency Initiative
FNRH   National Oil Fund (Fonds National des Revenues des Hydrocarbonés)

GAM    Global Acute Malnutrition

GDP    Gross Domestic Products

GoM    Government of Mauritania

HDI    Human Development Index

HOI    Human Opportunity Index

ICOR   Incremental Capital-Output Ratio

146
Acronyms (2/3)
IFPRI     International Food Policy Research Institute
IMF       International Monetary Fund

LE        Life expectancy

LMIC      Lower-Middle Income Country

MDG       Millennium Development Goals

MENA      Middle East and Northern Africa

MICS      Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey

MPI       Multidimensional Poverty Index

MRO       Mauritanian Ouguyia

NGO       Non-Governmental Organization

ONS       National Office of Statistics (Office National de la Statistique)

PEFA      Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Framework

PER       Public Expenditure Review

PIP       Public Investment Program

PNIDDLE   National Integrated Program to Support Decentralization, Local Development and Youth Employment (Programme National Intégré d'appui à la
          Décentralisation, au Développement Local et à l'Emploi des Jeunes)
PPP       Purchasing Power Parity

PPP (2)   Public-Private Partnership
147
Acronyms (3/3)
RER       Real Exchange Rate
SCAPP     Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity Strategy (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Prospérité Partagée)
SCD       Systematic Country Diagnostic
SMCP      Authority for commercialization of fisheries products (Société Mauritanien de Commercialisation des Poissons)
SNIM      National Industrial and Mining Company (Société Nationale Industrielle et Minière)
SME       Small and Medium Enterprise
SMPHM     National hydrocarbon and mining resource company (Société Mauritanienne des Hydrocarbures et de Patrimoine Minier)
SOE       State-owned Enterprises
SOMELEC   State Electricity Company
SONIMEX   Mauritanian Company of Import and Export (Société Nationale d’Importation et d'Exportation)
SSA       Sub-Saharan Africa
TDR       Total Dependency Ratio
TFL       Total Fertility Rate
UNICEF    United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund
WASH      Water, Sanitation, Hygiene
WEF       World Economic Forum
WFP       World Food Program
WGI       Worldwide Governance Indicators

WHO       World Health Organization
148
