           Overview




The Sunken Billions
         Revisited
                Overview




 The Sunken Billions
          Revisited
Progress and Challenges in
   Global Marine Fisheries
This booklet contains the overview, as well as a list of contents for The Sunken Billions
Revisited. The PDF of the final, full-length book, once published, will be available at https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/ and print copies can be ordered at http://Amazon.com. Please
use the final version of the book for citation, reproduction, and adaptation purposes.

© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The
World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denomi-
nations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance
of such boundaries.

Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges
and immunities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.

All queries on rights and licenses should be addressed to the Publishing and Knowledge Division,
The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail:
pubrights@worldbank.org.


Cover design and illustration: Bill Pragluski of Critical Stages
           Contents of the Full Report



Overview
   Introduction: Trends in Global Fisheries and Fisheries
1.	
   Governance
2.	 Basic Approach: The Bio-Economic Model and Inputs
3.	 The Sunken Billions Revisited: Main Results
   Dynamics of Global Fisheries Reform:
4.	
   Recovering the Sunken Billions




                              v  
                      Acknowledgments



This report was produced by a World Bank team led by Mimako Kobayashi and
comprising Charlotte de Fontaubert, Juan Jose Miranda, and Carter Brandon.
Prof. Ragnar Arnason (University of Iceland) prepared the initial draft of the
report and developed the model underpinning it.
   Many individuals and institutions assisted in the development of this report.
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the University of Iceland, and
the University of California, Santa Barbara, provided institutional support.
Birgir Thor Runolfsson (University of Iceland and FAO); Rebecca Metzner
and Anika Seggel (FAO); Rashid Sumaila (Fisheries Center at the University
of British Columbia); Gordon Munro (University of British Columbia); James
Anderson (University of Florida); Chris Costello and Tracey Mangin (University
of California, Santa Barbara); Matt Elliott and Emily Peterson (California
Environmental Associates); Trond Bjorndal (University of Bergen); James Wilen
(University of California, Davis); and Miguel Castellot (DG MARE European
Commission) made important contributions. Peer reviewers Trond Bjørndal
(University of Bergen), Mitsutaku Makino (Japan Fisheries Research Agency),
Flore Martinant de Preneuf (World Bank), Arni Mathiesen (FAO), Rebecca
Metzner (FAO), Gordon Munro (University of British Columbia), and Nobuyuki
Yagi (Tokyo University) provided much appreciated guidance. Paula Caballero
and Valerie Hickey (World Bank) provided encouragement and technical insights
throughout the project. Preparation and publication of the report was supported
by the Global Program on Fisheries (PROFISH) Multi-Donor Trust Fund.




                                       vii  
                           O V E R V I E W




     The Sunken Billions Revisited:
      Progress and Challenges in
        Global Marine Fisheries



Global marine fisheries are in crisis. The proportion of fisheries that are fully
fished, overfished, depleted, or recovering from overfishing increased from just
over 50 percent in the mid-1970s to about 75 percent in 2005 and to a staggering
90 percent in 2011 (figure O.1). This biological overfishing has led to economic
overfishing, which creates economic losses.

An earlier study estimated annual lost revenues from
mismanagement of global marine fisheries at $50 billion in 2004
To quantify the value of this economic loss, in 2009 the World Bank and the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) published a study on the economic
performance of global fisheries, The Sunken Billions: The Economic Justification
for Fisheries Reform. The study highlighted the very weak economic performance
of the global fisheries sector, estimating the lost economic benefits at about $50
billion a year. This finding stimulated policy discussions and made a compelling
case that comprehensive reforms were necessary in fisheries around the world
to recover these sunken billions. The report also changed the direction of devel-
opment assistance in support of international fisheries, including by the World
Bank, which established reform of fisheries governance as the fundamental entry
point to its fisheries investment programs.
    The 2009 report was written in the context of a long-term decline in fish stocks,
stagnant or even slightly declining catches since the early 1990s, and an increase

                                                                                    1  
 2 THE SUNKEN BILLIONS REVISITED



 F I G U R E O.1
 State of global marine fish stocks, 1974–2011

                                        100

                                        90

                                        80
Share of world marine fish stocks (%)




                                        70

                                        60

                                        50

                                        40

                                        30

                                        20

                                         10

                                         0
                                              1974   1979     1983      1987       1990      1995   2000    2006     2009

                                                     Overﬁshed stocks          Fully ﬁshed stocks     Underﬁshed stocks

 Source: FAO 2014.



 in the level of fishing by a factor of as much as four. The productivity of global
 fisheries decreased tremendously, as evidenced by the fact that catches did not
 increase nearly as rapidly as the global level of effort (apparent in a doubling of
 the size of the global fleet and a tripling of the number of fishers). Another source
 of uncertainty is the increasing impacts of climate change, including sea-level rise,
 rising ocean temperatures, acidification, and changes in patterns of the currents.
     This study follows the same approach as the earlier (2009) one. Both studies
 treat the world’s marine fisheries as one large fishery, and they both model the
 economic performance of the sector in terms of this single aggregate fishery. This
 study, however, departs from the original one by deepening the regional analysis.
     In addition, this study examines the range of complex issues that surround the
 reform of global fisheries management, including the financial and social costs of
 transitioning to a more sustainable resource management path, the considerable
 governance challenges associated with managing the largely open-access ocean
 resources, and the complicating factor of climate change. Although it does not
 attempt to address all of these issues fully, it lays out a comprehensive estimate
 of what the economic benefits of transitioning to higher value-added and more
 sustainable fisheries might look like.
                                                                        OVERVIEW    3 



This study estimates 2012 annual lost revenues at $83 billion

The primary objective of this study is to reinforce the messages of the 2009
publication and to catalyze calls for accelerating and scaling up the international
effort aimed at addressing the global fisheries crisis. The analysis reveals economic
losses of about $83 billion in 2012, compared with the optimal global maximum
economic yield equilibrium. This result is not statistically different from the
sunken billions estimated for 2004, which was adjusted to $88 billion, based on
improvements in the model, better data, and adjustment to 2012 dollars. Both
figures are strikingly large, and they highlight the fact that the fisheries sector is
being managed in a deeply unsustainable manner.
   These sunken billions represent the potential annual benefits that could
accrue to the sector following both major reform of fisheries governance and a
period of years during which fish stocks would be allowed to recover to a higher,
more sustainable, and more productive level. These stocks cannot be recovered
immediately, even if ideal sector governance were somehow imposed overnight.
Rather, the process of recovery implies large transition costs and long-term sector
restructuring.


Restoring fisheries would yield substantial returns

Severely overexploited fish stocks have to be rebuilt over time if the optimal
equilibrium is to be reached and the sunken billions recovered. To allow biolog-
ical processes to reverse the decline in fish stocks, fishing mortality needs to be
reduced, which can only happen through an absolute reduction in the global
fishing effort (as captured by the size and efficiency of the global fleet, usually
measured in terms of the number of vessels, vessel tonnage, engine power, vessel
length, gear, fishing methods, and technical efficiency). To reach the sustainable
optimal state, global fleet overcapacity would have to be reduced by 44 percent
from the level inferred for 2012. Doing so would likely lead to the following
economic benefits:

•	 The biomass of fish in the ocean would increase by a factor of 2.7.
•	 Annual harvests would increase by 13 percent.
•	 Unit fish prices would rise by up to 24 percent, thanks to the recovery of
  higher-value species, the depletion of which is particularly severe.

•	
  The annual net benefits accruing to the fisheries sector would increase by a
  factor of almost 30, from $3 billion to $86 billion.
4 THE SUNKEN BILLIONS REVISITED



FIGURE O.2
Benefits of global fisheries reform: projected dynamics of biomass (in comparison with
current path)
                  400

                  350

                  300

                  250
Tons (millions)




                  200

                  150

                  100

                   50

                   0
                    2012   2015   2018   2021     2024     2027      2030      2033      2036      2039

                                         Moderate path             Most rapid path

Note: The most rapid path involves reducing fishing effort to zero for first several years and then
holding it at the optimal level. The moderate path involves reducing global fishing effort by 5 percent
a year between 2012 and 2022. The current path involves fixing fishing effort at the 2012 level.


    Bold measures are required to achieve this 44 percent reduction in the global
fishing effort and to allow overexploited fish stocks to recover. At one hypothetical
extreme, if the fishing effort were reduced to zero for the first several years and
then held at an optimal level, global stocks could quickly recover to over 600
million tons in 5 years and then taper off toward an ideal level. Reducing the
global fishing effort by 5 percent a year for 10 years would allow global stocks to
reach this ideal level in about 30 years (figure O.2).


The need for reform is greatest in Asia and Africa
This study extends the original investigation to identify the economic perfor-
mance of fisheries in five world regions (Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe, and
Oceania). Because initial economic performance and the level of overexploitation
vary greatly by region, the effort required would differ across regions. Asia and
Africa are suffering the greatest economic losses, implying a greater need for
governance reform in those regions (figure O.3).
   The quality of data varies greatly across regions, rendering the assessments of
economic performance and the estimates of forgone economic benefits by region
less reliable than the global results. The regional results should be interpreted
in that light and a continued effort made to improve fisheries statistics at the
national, regional, and global levels.
                                                                           OVERVIEW    5 



FIGURE O. 3
Distribution of sunken billions by region

                                              Oceania
                                  Africa        1%
                                   12%




                   Europe
                    15%
                                                                   Asia
                                                                   65%



                 Americas
                   7%




FIGURE O.4
Sources of economic benefits from moving to the optimal sustainable state for global
fisheries
                            Higher harvest
                                 15%




                                                                       Lower
                                                                   fishing costs
                                                                        52%



          Higher unit price
           of landed fish
                33%




Transitioning to a sustainable level of fishing would be
difficult—but the benefits would far exceed the costs
Transitioning to a sustainable level of fishing would involve significant policy
and governance challenges at the global, national, and local levels. It would also
impose costs on some stakeholders. The single largest source of economic gain
from moving to a sustainable level of fishing would be the 44 percent reduction
in fishing costs (figure O.4). This reduction, however, would impose very high
adjustment costs on both the fishing industry and the upstream and downstream
6 THE SUNKEN BILLIONS REVISITED



industries and services, with displaced vessel owners and fishers bearing the
brunt of the costs.


Climate change will have additional negative impacts on global
marine fisheries, calling for quicker action
Sea-level rise, higher ocean temperatures, increasing acidification, and changes
in the ocean current patterns will all have tremendous impacts on global fish
stocks and the related ecosystems, in ways that are not yet fully understood
(Alison and others 2009). They add a sense of urgency to long overdue fisheries
reforms, because they threaten the ability of depleted stocks to recover from
overexploitation, as they had done in the past.


Reform will require financial and technical assistance at
many levels
This report makes a very clear case for the need for reform. It does not analyze
policies, financing, or the socioeconomic impacts of embarking on such reform.
    Many case studies have shown that different strategies are called for in different
circumstances (Worm and others 2009). Whichever strategies are chosen, fishing
capacity will have to be reduced, jeopardizing the livelihoods of millions of
fishers. Financing will be needed to fund the development of alternatives for
them, to provide technical assistance at all levels, and to conduct additional
research on ecosystem changes and related ecological processes.
    This report poses important questions. If the sunken billions wasted annu-
ally at sea are to be recovered, and fisheries put on a sustainable pathway, policy
makers will need to answer these questions, and soon.

References
Alison, E., A. Perry, M. Badjeck, W. Adger, K. Brown, D. Conway, A. Halls, G. Pilling,
   J. Reynolds, N. Andrew, and N. Dulvy. 2009. “Vulnerability of National Economies to the
   Impacts of Climate Change on Fisheries.” Fish and Fisheries 10 (2): 173–96.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2011. “Review of the State of World Marine Fishery
  Resources.” Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper 569, FAO, Rome.
———. 2014. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2014 (SOFIA). Rome: FAO.
World Bank and FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2009. The Sunken Billions:
  The Economic Justification for Fisheries Reform. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Worm, B., R. Hilborn, J. Baum, T. Branch, J. Collie, C. Costello, M. Fogarty, E. Fulton,
  J. Hutchings, S. Jennings, O. Jensen, H. Lotze, P. Mace, T. McClanahan, C. Minto,
  S. Palumbi, A. Parma, D. Ricard, A. Rosenberg, R. Watson, and D. Zeller. 2009. “Rebuilding
  Global Fisheries.” Science 235: 578–85.
