  DISCUSSION PAPER                   NO. 1507

                            100084
Integrating Disaster Response
     and Climate Resilience in
    Social Protection Programs
in the Pacific Island Countries
       Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko




                         September 2015
    Integrating Disaster Response and Climate
    Resilience in Social Protection Programs in
            the Pacific Island Countries
                     Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko 1


                                     September 2015

Abstract: The Pacific island countries (PICs) are some of the most exposed to frequent natural
disasters and climate shocks, and their vulnerability is increasing due to mounting effects of
climate change as well as demographic and economic forces. Natural disasters hit the poorest
hardest and have long-term consequences for human development. Social protection
programs and systems have an important role in helping poor and vulnerable populations
cope with the impacts of shocks as well as build long-term resilience. This paper discusses the
potential role of social protection for disaster and climate risk reduction and management in
PICs. It presents evidence and lessons from other regions, providing examples of tools and
entry points for the development of climate- and disaster- responsive social protection
interventions and context-specific recommendations for PICs.

JEL Classification: Q540, I380

KEYWORDS: Natural Disasters, Risk Management, Climate Change, Social Protection,
Poverty, Hardship, Assistance, Poverty Alleviation, Safety Net, Social Welfare Programs,
Transfers, Pacific Island Countries.




      This paper has been prepared by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko with inputs,
      comments and guidance received from Melissa Adelman, Jehan Arulpragasam, Cynthia
      Burton, Rachel Cipryk, Camilla Holmemo, Zuzana Stanton-Gedes, Jesse Doyle and Tatiana
      Sviridova.


1Please contact Oleksiy Ivaschenko (Sr. Economist, Social Protection & Labor Global
Practice, East Asia and Pacific Region) at oivaschenko@worldbank.org.
Table of contents
Executive Summary
   I. Motivation and Context
           a. Introduction
           b. Motivation: Why integrate disaster risk management and climate change
              adaptation with social protection?
                    i. Natural disasters have high economic and social costs
                   ii. The costs of disasters fall disproportionately on the poor and create
                       more poverty
                  iii. Natural disasters will become more variable and unpredictable
           c. How can social protection systems address climate and disaster challenges?
                    i. Prevention
                   ii. Protection
                  iii. Promotion
           d. Context: Pacific island countries, risk and vulnerability
                    i. Risk and vulnerability in Pacific island countries
                   ii. Poverty and hardship in Pacific island countries
  II. Analysis of Social Protection and Disaster/Climate Risk Management in the Pacific
           a. Disaster risk management and climate change adaptation in the Pacific
              Islands – current situation and constraints
           b. Social protection in the Pacific Islands
           c. How do social protection interventions currently address the risks from
              disasters and climate volatility in the Pacific?
           d. How should social protection integrate disaster response and climate
              resilience in the Pacific Islands?
                    i. Climate and disaster aware planning
                   ii. Interventions centered on livelihoods and assets
                  iii. Building adaptive and response capacity at system level
           e. A look at specific social protection instruments and potential use for disaster
              risk management in the Pacific Islands
                    i. In-kind vs. cash benefits
                   ii. Conditional or unconditional cash transfers
                  iii. Public works programs
                  iv. Index-based insurance
 III. Conclusions and Recommendations
 IV. References


                                             1
                                    Executive Summary

The Pacific island countries (PICs) are some of the most exposed to frequent natural
disasters and climate shocks, and their vulnerability is increasing due to mounting effects of
climate change as well as demographic and economic forces (World Bank, 2012a). These
shocks result in high economic and social costs for the region and represent a threat to
development and poverty reduction. In the past 60 years, PICs have experienced losses due
to natural disasters and climate shocks averaging US$ 284 million a year, and affecting, in
total, over 9 million people and causing 9,811 reported deaths. In Samoa, 2011 cyclone Evan
caused an estimated infrastructure and production loss of US$ 204 million, which represents
28 percent of the value of all goods and services produced in the country that year
(Government of Samoa, 2013).

Natural disasters and climate shocks often hit the poorest and vulnerable harder and sink
them deeper into poverty. Natural disasters cause economic damage, death and injuries, but
also other, less evident, losses, such as illness, missed school and work days, loss of
subsistence crops, etc. (World Bank, 2012a). These impacts can become permanent and have
long-term consequences for human development, with families pulling children out of school,
reducing health clinic visits, etc. (World Bank, 2010).

The poor and those who experience chronic hardship are often more exposed to natural
hazards because their livelihoods and, often, their locations are highly sensitive to shocks,
and they often have little access to information, lack savings and depend on informal safety
nets that are unable to function after major covariate shocks. Thus, when disaster hits, those
that already vulnerable are usually the most affected. In addition, people who are at risk of
falling into poverty and hardship – people just above poverty line and vulnerable populations
– can be pushed into transient poverty when a disaster hits as their livelihoods become
destroyed.

It is expected that natural disasters will become more frequent and unpredictable in the
region as the effects of climate change intensify. Their impacts may worsen as they combine



                                                2
with other forces such as rapid, unplanned urbanization, poor natural resource management
and the erosion of traditional social networks that drive up exposure of great numbers of
population. Without appropriate policies and initiatives in place, the impacts of climate
change are likely to be significant and pervasive and fall disproportionately on the poor
(World Bank, 2012a).

Social protection programs and systems have an important role in helping poor and
vulnerable populations cope with the impacts of shocks and build long-term resilience.
From providing timely, opportune safety net interventions in time of crises to offering long-
term tools for increasing assets, skills and livelihoods, social protection has a role in the
management of risk for poor people. In the context of high climate and disaster risk, which
the Pacific region is subject to, it becomes even more critical to think of ways social protection
interventions can address these risks.

This paper discusses the potential role of social protection for disaster and climate risk
reduction and management in the PICs and intends to serve as a primer for World Bank
engagement in social protection in the region. The study presents evidence and lessons from
other countries and regions with the goal of providing examples of tools and entry points for
the development of climate- and disaster- responsive social protection interventions.
However, given the Pacific region specific context and the characteristics of each country’s
social protection (SP), climate change adaptation (CCA) and disaster risk management (DRM)
sector, it is important to keep in mind that some of these lessons will need to be extrapolated
to other settings with due caution.

The reference to PICs in this paper embraces the ten World Bank member countries in the
Pacific: Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Palau, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. Although not considered part of Pacific Islands, Papua
New Guinea and Timor-Leste are also included here as important players in the region. In
total, these countries have a population of over 10 million people (with PNG accounting for 7
million) spread across hundreds of islands in the area equivalent to 15 percent of the globe’s
surface.


                                                3
Pacific island countries (PICs) experience a dangerous combination of high exposure to
natural hazards and high vulnerability that makes them particularly prone to disaster risk.
According to the 2012 World Risk Report (Bündnis, Entwicklung, Hilft, 2012) which measures
disaster risk based on hazard exposure, susceptibility, lack of coping capacities and lack of
adaptive capacities, six out of the 15 countries most at risk to disasters in the world are Pacific
island countries2, with Vanuatu and Tonga in first and second place, respectively. In terms of
exposure, some of the most common hazards are tropical cyclones, earthquakes and
tsunamis. Moreover, there is strong evidence in the region of an increase in the observed
frequency and intensity of weather and climate-related events, and the climate also appears
to be changing (World Bank, 2006).

PICs also have a set of economic and social characteristics that make them vulnerable to
disasters, including: (i) small economies, with very limited natural resources and reliance on
coastal areas, which are extremely fragile and vulnerable to change; (ii) high dependence on
the rural economy and agriculture, which are very sensitive to climate shocks; (iii)
dependence on global markets (open economies importing foodstuff and essential items, and
exporting agricultural products and tourism), which makes them highly exposed to global
economic shocks; (iv) rapid unplanned urbanization (often driven by outer-to-main island
migration), which gives rise to poor housing or slums lacking the services provided by local
and central government and being at high exposure to shocks.

The economic and social losses caused by natural disasters and climate shocks, their
relationship with poverty and the increasing nature of these threats all point out to the
need of protecting the poor, but also helping them reduce their exposure and increase their
capacity to deal with and recover from those impacts. Social protection interventions have
been recognized as an important instrument in this task. In several countries, experience has
shown that when a disaster hits, the provision or temporary expansion of social protection
mechanisms such as cash and asset transfers, subsidies, emergency public works, etc., can



2
    This list includes Timor-Leste.



                                                4
help the affected and vulnerable populations cope with the effect of disasters. Social
protection programs can also help increase opportunities, by promoting human capital
development, access to sustainable livelihoods, and employment. In this way, they can
contribute to long-term resilience and climate change adaptation.

For the positive links between social protection systems, disaster risk management and
climate change to materialize, social protection programs ideally need to be in place before
disasters hit, and need to be endowed with sound design and effective implementation and
coordination mechanisms. By being prepared in advance, social protection systems might be
able to respond to natural disasters and climate-related shocks more effectively and help
decrease the impacts of the shock on the most vulnerable. As traditional practices lose
effectiveness, the need for formal and contextualized risk management and adaptation
measures becomes more pressing.

Although formal social protection systems are in their infancy in the Pacific, there is a
growing recognition that traditional and informal safety net mechanisms in PICs are not
sufficient to respond to the challenges of covariate shocks (World Bank, 2014). For this
reason, it becomes important to not only incorporate disaster risk reduction and climate
change adaptation objectives into existing social protection programs, but also develop new
programs aimed at addressing these risks. This paper examines the core set of SP/DRM/CCA
issues across PICs, and offers recommendations and entry points to move this agenda
forward.

The institutional frameworks of SP, DRM and CCA systems have some common
characteristics across all PICs, and are faced with several challenges. Traditionally, most of
the focus in the region seems to have been placed on more reactive disaster response,
providing short-term relief based on in-kind commodities such as food, relief kits, shelter, etc.
Some of these activities have sometimes been followed by recovery efforts, such as housing
reconstruction, small shelter solutions, etc. In general, PICs have limited financial and
institutional capacity for large-scale disaster response, and thus rely on international donors
for relief after major disasters.


                                               5
There are also some other key constraints which impede increasing the effectiveness in
these sectors, including: (i) DRM and CCA frameworks are not fully incorporated into national
budgets, sectors and programs; (ii) often, the DRM and CCA teams/departments/ministries
are separate entities with their own agendas; (iii) limited human resources and institutional
capacity at the national level for disaster response, which relies on very few people with
limited resources; (iv) limited data availability and weak hazard and climate monitoring and
information management systems; (v) a top-down approach and limited community
involvement in formal risk reduction activities.

Although a few countries in the region already have some formal social protection
programs in place, these programs tend to be small in comparison with those in many other
countries. The predominant form of social protection seems to be social insurance programs
for formal workers and the elderly, which, given the existing levels of informality, means that
most social insurance programs reach only a small proportion of the population. The most
common types of non-contributory social protection are universal pensions and relatively
small cash transfers schemes. Many PICs provide free basic education and health services to
the general population. A few governments, with the support from donors, have established
one-off public works programs, although often their goal has been to build infrastructure,
with the employment objective as a secondary consideration (AusAID, 2010).

There are very few experiences using formal social protection mechanisms for disaster
response or risk reduction in PICs, and they seem to have been reactive and small-scale. As
the PICs expand and reform their social protection systems, it is crucial that disaster and
climate risks are taken into account given the region’s exposure and vulnerability to these
shocks. A climate and disaster responsive social protection system would need to take into
account the following principles:

Climate- and Disaster-aware Planning, which implies building the necessary contingency and
information mechanisms (e.g. early warning systems, risk mapping) and climate- and disaster-
sensitive targeting into the intervention. Traditionally, targeting of formal social protection




                                               6
interventions in the Pacific Island countries has been limited given low capacity and scarce
data, with a few exceptions (e.g., the targeted Poverty Benefit Scheme in Fiji).

Interventions Centered on Livelihoods and Assets, with the goal of strengthening social,
physical and natural community assets in a way that increases resilience to shocks and
supports viable livelihoods for households. There is also a need to develop a knowledge base
about what can work in urban areas to support and enhance social protection as a platform
for CCA and DRM agendas.

Building Adaptive and Response Capacity at System Level to deal with large systemic shocks,
which will require developing: (i) appropriate institutional capacity and coordination with
DRM and climate change agencies to tap into combined expertise and institutional capacity;
and, (ii) scalable and flexible mechanisms that can quickly react to protect populations during
or after a disaster (e.g. targeting, registry, and payment systems). Moving forward on this
agenda in PICs might first require the development of country-specific diagnostics and
assessments to identify entry points.

In spite of these general principles, the choice of an appropriate social protection
instrument is always highly contextual, and must be based on a careful assessment of the
objectives that are to be achieved by the intervention, as well as the capacity and resources
for implementation. Some of the key SP instruments and related factors for consideration
include:

In-kind vs. cash benefits: Although many agencies that have traditionally used in-kind
assistance are now more widely promoting the use of cash-based interventions, food aid
continues to be the key in many contexts, for instance, when markets are disrupted, are not
developed or when there is no cash-based local economy, such as is the case in many remote
island locations in the Pacific. Cash transfers, on the other hand, are versatile instruments
that can be used to meet a range of needs. In PICs, it appears that immediate disaster
response tends to be mostly in-kind as formal cash transfer mechanisms are very limited, and
have seldom been used for responding to natural disasters, largely due to the cultural




                                              7
aversion to cash transfers in many PICs (e.g., Vanuatu, Samoa). However, as these countries’
economies quickly monetize, options for accessing cash become important in the wake of
disasters.

Conditional or Unconditional Cash Transfers: In general, the use of cash transfers after
emergencies has been limited to unconditional transfers, since conditions might be too
onerous for affected families immediately after a disaster, due to disruptions in services, etc.
Although the experience with either conditional or unconditional cash transfers in the Pacific
Island countries is limited, demand for these types of interventions might increase together
with a higher degree of monetization.

Public Works Programs: In addition to reaching individual households in need, public works
programs (PWPs) also bring additional tangible and immediate benefits to the community by
helping build or rehabilitate infrastructure, assets, or natural resources that are much needed
in the aftermath of disasters. Before a disaster occurs, ex-ante public works can focus on
activities with risk reduction and adaptation benefits (e.g. environmental conservation and
rehabilitation works, soil and water management, etc.). In PICs, there is tremendous potential
to use PWPs as a mechanism to provide cash transfers and employment to poor and
vulnerable populations, while at the same time helping build or rehabilitate infrastructure,
assets and resources that help communities increase their resilience. Public works could also
be used as an instrument to support urban development agenda. Focusing public works on
young adults in the Pacific would be particularly valuable given the large numbers of
unemployed youth. Disaster resilience elements could be potentially integrated into existing
PWPs, such as Rapid Employment Project (REP) in Solomon Islands and the Urban Youth
Employment Project (UYEP) in PNG.

Index-based insurance: In general, index-based micro insurance focuses on insuring livestock
or crop losses by small farmers. SP programs can provide an effective and, likely, cost-efficient
means of making disaster insurance accessible to the chronically poor. The security provided
by the insurance, combined with regular cash transfers and/or other forms of asset
protection against climate-related impacts, may further create an enabling environment for


                                               8
prudent risk-taking by poor households to increase and diversify their asset/income base. At
the sovereign level, several PICs already share climate/disaster risk through the Pacific
Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Program under the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment
and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI), with Tonga being the first country to receive a payout in
January 2014 following Cyclone Ian.

In conclusion, although each PIC’s social, economic and cultural context is unique and varies
substantially from country to country, they all face some similar challenges as they become
more integrated in the global economy, but also more exposed to forces that modify their
traditional societies. PICs’ high exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards and climate
change compounds these problems. These vulnerabilities not only point to the need for more
comprehensive formal social protection systems, but also make it essential that, as SP
systems start to emerge and evolve, they include disaster and climate risk considerations, in
order to provide prevention, protection and promotion functions around these risks.




                                             9
   I. Motivation and Context
           a. Introduction
As natural disasters and climate shocks become increasingly important threats to economic
growth and development, it is essential to find ways to systematically protect and build
resilience of vulnerable and poor populations. Social protection can play a key role, as it aims
to help those in need cope with the impacts of shocks and build their long-term resilience. In
general, social protection programs have been used as a vehicle to respond to economic and
financial crises, and, recently, have expanded quickly across the developing world. For
instance, in 2008, safety nets interventions were increased exponentially to address the
effects of the triple food, fuel, and financial crises (Marzo and Mori, 2012). Although the use
of social protection interventions for disaster and climate risk management has not been
systematic, they are increasingly seen as a potential mechanism to help individuals cope with
shocks arising from natural hazards, helping them reduce risk ex-ante and offering protection
when disasters hit. In the context of high climate and disaster risk, as well as high poverty and
vulnerability, such as that experienced in Pacific island countries (PICs), social protection
interventions can become an important mechanism to address these risks.
This paper explores the potential of SP interventions as a mechanism for disaster response
and long-term resilience in the Pacific island countries.
It offers a preliminary review of the potential role social protection interventions can play in
disaster and climate risk management in the Pacific Islands and intends to serve as a primer
for World Bank engagement in the region. This study recognizes that social protection is a
nascent sector in the region and that programs, systems, and institutions are, in many cases,
being just established or developed. The paper presents evidence and lessons from other
regions with the goal of providing options and entry points for the development of climate
and disaster responsive social protection interventions and systems in PICs. However, given
the region’s peculiarities , it is important to keep in mind that some of these lessons need to
be extrapolated carefully and interventions that aim to address the social impacts of climate
change and disasters must be developed with particular regard to each country’s context and
through an iterative and collaborative process with relevant national and local stakeholders.


                                               10
In spite of these important caveats, experiences from other regions can offer lessons, tools
and options that kick-start the dialogue around climate and disaster responsive social
protection in the PICs. As people’s food security, livelihoods, and well-being continue to be
threatened by natural hazards, it is necessary to think of comprehensive interventions that
focus not only on the physical impacts of disasters but also on their social implications. Social
protection interventions offer a way to tackle the risk and effects these shocks have on the
poor and destitute.
           b. Motivation: Why integrate DRM and CCA with SP?
Natural disasters and climate-related shocks have important consequences for economic
growth, prosperity and development.
                    i. Natural disasters have high economic and social costs
Natural disasters and climate shocks have high economic and social costs and represent a
threat to development and poverty reduction. Globally, over the past 30 years, disasters have
caused an estimated US$ 3.5 trillion in losses, with 2011 - the costliest year on record -
estimated at US$ 380 billion (World Bank, 2012b). In the past 60 years, PICs have experienced
losses due to natural disasters and climate shocks averaging US$ 284 million a year. Since
1950, natural disasters have affected approximately 9.2 million people in the Pacific region,
causing 9,811 reported deaths (World Bank, 2009b).
For smaller countries, disasters are often more costly - they can represent a significant
portion of GDP - while often affecting the poor and vulnerable disproportionately. In Samoa,
2011 cyclone Evan caused an estimated infrastructure and production loss of US$204 million,
which represents 28 percent of the value of all goods and services produced in the country
that year (Government of Samoa, 2013). The 2004 floods in Navua, Fiji resulted in an average
loss to farming households of FJ$ 4,815 per household compared to an average household
income of FJ$ 3,500 a year. In this region, 60 percent of the population is dependent on
primary industries (agriculture, forestry, and fishing) that are highly vulnerable to disasters
(SOPAC, 2009).
Natural disasters cause deaths and injuries, but also other, less evident, losses, such as illness,
missed school and work days, loss of subsistence crops, and opportunity costs (World Bank,


                                                11
2012a). These impacts, which are seldom documented, can sometimes become permanent
and have long-term consequences for human development, with families pulling children out
of school, decreased health clinic visits, stunting and even decreased cognitive abilities
(World Bank, 2010). In a cross-country study, Cuaresma (2009) measures secondary school
enrolment as a proxy for human capital accumulation and finds that those more exposed to
earthquakes between 1980 and 2000 have lower secondary school enrollment rates that
those with lower exposure.
PICs are some of the most exposed to frequent natural hazards, and their vulnerability is
increasing due to the mounting effects of climate change as well as demographic and
economic forces (World Bank, 2012a). Of the 20 countries with the highest average annual
disaster losses relative to GDP, eight are PICs (World Bank, 2012a). Each of these countries
face threats that might cause them severe human, economic, physical and environmental
losses, and some are facing risks of economic loss that would represent over half of their GDP.
For instance, cyclone modeling in the region shows that in the capital cities of Fiji, Solomon
Islands, Vanuatu, Samoa and Tonga, a cyclone with a 100-year recurrence interval — which
has a 50 percent chance of occurring within the current generation — could inflict damage
equivalent to 60 percent of GDP (World Bank, 2006b).
                   ii. The costs of disasters fall disproportionately on the poor and create
                      more poverty
Disasters and climate change threaten economic growth and poverty reduction, causing loss
of life, as well as destroying livelihoods and infrastructure. These impacts often
disproportionately affect the poor and most vulnerable. However, natural disasters and
climate shocks not only hit the poorest and vulnerable harder, but they also induce and
exacerbate poverty.
The 2014 World Development Report on Risk and Opportunity (World Bank, 2013b) suggests
that a strong risk management strategy would include four components, interacting and
reinforcing each other: accessing knowledge, building protection, obtaining insurance (in the
broader sense) and, once the event has occurred, using all three tools for actually coping with
the shock. The poor and vulnerable are at a disadvantage on all these fronts. The poor are


                                              12
often more exposed to, or less protected from, natural hazards because their livelihoods and
assets are highly sensitive to shocks. They are also more vulnerable to these hazards due to
a lack of timely information, lack of access to financial instruments such as savings, credit and
insurance, and dependence on informal safety nets that often break down after major
covariate shocks. Thus, when disaster hits, they are usually the most affected as they have
little capacity to anticipate, cope and recover from the impacts. In Fiji, a national level analysis
of the relationship between poverty and disasters found that the level of poverty negatively
affects the impacts of the disaster (SOPAC, 2009). The UN’s Rapid Environmental Assessment
of the impact of the December 2004 tsunami in the Indian Ocean noted that,
disproportionately, many of the victims of this disaster were poor people who depended on
eco-system services and natural resources for their livelihoods (IRIN, 2005).
Additionally, people who are at risk of falling into poverty and hardship – people just above
poverty line and vulnerable populations (children, women, elderly) – can be pushed into
transient poverty when a disaster hits as their livelihoods become destroyed. Although results
might be context-specific, a study on the links between poverty and disasters (Shepherd et
al., 2013) found that in areas of Ethiopia and Andhra Pradesh in India where drought is a
major risk, this type of shock is also the single most important factor in impoverishment –
outstripping, for example, ill health or dowry payments. The study also shows that disaster-
related impoverishment appears to have a distinct within-country geography, being largely
rural rather than urban.
Finally, poverty also increases disaster risks by intensifying the over-utilization of resources -
for instance, cutting trees for firewood, thus increasing erosion and risk of flooding.

As both the chronic and transient poor are faced with more frequent disasters and climate
shocks (for instance, low-intensity, high-probability shocks such as frequent storms, floods,
or droughts), they have even less chances to rebuild their livelihoods and invest in human
capital, thus becoming trapped in a cycle that sinks them further down into poverty.

                   iii. Natural disasters will become more variable and unpredictable




                                                13
Globally, natural disasters are becoming more frequent and unpredictable as the effects of
climate change intensify and combine with other forces such as rapid, unplanned
urbanization, poor natural resource management and the erosion of traditional social
networks that increases the exposure of the population at large. In the Pacific, the climate is
already changing and the rate of change is likely to intensify in the future (World Bank,
2012a). Without appropriate policies and initiatives in place, the impacts of climate change
are likely to be significant and pervasive and fall disproportionately on the poor (World Bank,
2012a).
PICs are highly exposed to natural hazards and climate change and the effects will be most
dire for the poor and vulnerable. Although social protection systems are in their infancy in
PICs, there is growing recognition that traditional and informal mechanisms are not sufficient
to respond to the challenges of big covariate shocks. Social protection policies and programs
must then carefully consider addressing disaster risk reduction and climate change
adaptation as part of their objectives.

           c. How can social protection systems address climate and disaster challenges?
The economic and social losses caused by natural disasters and climate shocks, their
relationship with poverty and the increasing nature of these threats all point out to the need
for protecting the poor, help reduce their exposure and increase their capacity to deal with
these shocks as key to development. Social protection interventions are an important
instrument and experience from around the world have shown that when a disaster hits,
having in place or establishing social protection interventions can help speed up recovery and
prevent people from falling into poverty. As noted by an IEG assessment (2006), “getting cash
support to victims quickly has positively affected people’s sense of safety and security [and]
has been a prominent first sign of government support” (See Box 1).
  Box 1: Pakistan Citizen Damage Compensation Program
  In July and August 2010, during the monsoon season, Pakistan experienced the worst
  floods in its history (IRIN, 2010). To respond to the floods, the Government put in place a
  temporary nationwide social safety net (SSN) program that successfully reached an
  estimated eight million flood-affected people. The program also led to the development




                                              14
  of a SSN disaster preparedness action plan by the Government of Pakistan (GOP) for future
  disasters and crises.
  The Citizen’s Damage Compensation Program (CDCP) is a rapid response cash grant
  program. Phase I of this program ran from September 2010 to June 2011 with the goal to
  provide quick assistance to families who lost their homes or faced a serious threat to their
  wellbeing as a result of the flood. Eligible households located in the affected areas were
  given a one-off cash grant of PRK 20,000 (or approximately US$ 213). The funds helped
  households cover urgent needs at a crucial time (PDAM, 2011), as shown by an evaluation
  of Phase I, which found that families had used the grants mostly for food, health needs,
  housing repair, and debt re-payment (Hunt et al., 2011). However, the amount was
  insufficient for the flood-affected households to recapitalize their damaged or lost assets.
  Phase II of the CDCP started in 2011 with the goal to support the recovery of affected
  households. Flood-affected households, including many of those from Phase I, were
  provided with cash payments which could be used to meet any of their recovery needs,
  such as reconstructing their houses, restoring their livelihoods or paying back accumulated
  debt. With additional donor support available, the GOP was able to double the size of the
  grant to eligible households to PRK 40,000 (around US$ 426), a more suitable amount to
  support recovery.
  Source: World Bank, 2013a.


In addition, evidence from around the world shows that social protection can not only help
protect the chronic poor from falling deeper into poverty after disasters, but also speed up
the recovery process for the transient poor by offering longer-term risk management
strategies. For instance, in Ethiopia, impact evaluations of the Productive Safety Nets
Program (PSNP) show that predictable, seasonal assistance from the program has enabled
households to manage risk more effectively and avoid adopting negative coping strategies
when hit by a shock (e.g. droughts), such as selling livelihood assets; and protect against food
insecurity (World Bank, 2013a) .
The World Bank Social Protection and Labor Strategy (World Bank, 2012c) recognizes three
risk management functions for Social Protection — prevention, protection and promotion —
and they all can play a role in disaster and climate risk management (see Figure 1).




                                              15
Figure 1: Functions for Climate and Disaster Responsive Social Protection




Source: World Bank.
                      i. Prevention
Social protection interventions can help prevent or reduce, ex-ante, the impacts of disasters
and climate-related shocks. By putting in place risk mitigation mechanisms and increasing the
availability of coping strategies for vulnerable populations before a disaster hits, social
protection interventions can help reduce their vulnerability.
Examples of these interventions are social or index-based insurance and public works to
conserve soil and water, or develop hazard-resistant infrastructure (see Box 2).
  Box 2: Reducing impacts of disaster through weather index insurance
  In Ethiopia, the Rural Resilience (R4/HARITA) Program gives poor farmers the option to pay
  for index-based insurance by working on small community projects that build climate
  resilience and agricultural productivity, such as improved irrigation or soil management.
  In the event of a seasonal drought, automatic insurance payouts to the farmers are
  triggered if rainfall drops below a predetermined threshold. This enables farmers to afford



                                             16
   the seeds and inputs necessary to plant in the following season and protects them from
   having to sell off productive assets to survive.
   Source: World Bank, 2013a.


                    ii.   Protection
Social protection contributes to equity by offering protection against destitution in the face
of disasters and climate-related shocks. Thus, these interventions can be used to help
affected and vulnerable populations cope with the effect of disasters and prevent them from
falling deeper into poverty through the provision or temporary expansion of cash and asset
transfers and/or subsidies, emergency public works, etc. (see Box 3)
   Box 3: Coping with disasters through scaling-up public works
   Besides promoting long-term risk reduction through its regular programming, the
   Bangladesh Chars Livelihoods Project (CLP) has helped protect those affected by floods in
   the aftermath of these shocks. In 2007, when severe flooding struck several regions of
   Bangladesh, causing losses of cash and food crops, and temporarily diminishing
   employment opportunities, it raised concerns regarding potential income and asset
   erosion of CLP’s beneficiaries. To avert the use of negative coping strategies (e.g. distress
   sales of livestock, taking out private loans at exorbitant rates, etc.), and in response to a
   request from the Government of Bangladesh, the CLP expanded its public works activities
   by one million person days and into three further districts.
   Source: World Bank, 2013a.

                    iii. Promotion
Social protection programs can be used to increase opportunities, by promoting human
capital development, access to sustainable livelihoods, and employment. In this way, they
can contribute to long-term resilience and climate change adaptation by helping households
diversify and/or enhance income and assets and by building institutional capacity to reduce
vulnerability to natural hazard and climate change impacts. Examples of this are: introducing
hazard-resilient crops into drought/flood prone communities; strengthening coordination
between social protection, disaster risk management (DRM) and climate change adaptation
agencies (CCA); raising awareness of DRM/CCA skills amongst social protection practitioners;
etc. (see Box 4).




                                              17
  Box 4: Providing opportunities for poor households through integrated risk management
  Recent evaluations of Ethiopia’s HARITA Program show that insurance mechanisms for
  subsistence farmers might allow them to transfer risk and free them to make higher-risk
  investments with higher returns. In 2010, in some of the villages where the program had
  rolled out, farmers who bought insurance planted more seeds and seemed to be switching
  to high-yielding-variety seeds at higher rates than did farmers who did not buy insurance.
  In addition, farmers who bought insurance tended to invest less family labor in agriculture
  and to diversify their sources of income relative to farmers who did not purchase
  insurance. They also experienced smaller losses of livestock than did farmers who did not
  buy insurance. More farmers who bought insurance for the second time reported that they
  expect to plant different crops, use more fertilizer, and obtain loans (Oxfam America,
  2011).
  Source: World Bank, 2013a.


A summary of social protection functions, the corresponding risk management strategies
they support and social protection instruments that can be used to cover some of these
functions are presented in Table 1. Examples presented in the table below are expanded upon
throughout this paper and are included as examples in the boxes.

Table 1: Social protection functions for disaster risk management and climate change adaptation
 SP Function    Risk Management   SP instruments                                 Examples
                Strategy
 Prevention     Risk Mitigation    •   Cash transfers                            •   Ethiopia PNSP
                                   •   Public works (food for assets, cash for   •   Bangladesh CPL
                                       work, insurance for work)                 •   Malawi MASAF
                                   •   Asset/ livelihood transfers               •   Ethiopia R4/HARITA
                                   •   Community-driven        infrastructure    •   Bangladesh CLP
                                       (social funds)
                                   •   Weather-based insurance
                                   •   Training/skills
 Protection     Risk Coping        •   Cash and in-kind transfers                •   Pakistan CDCP
                                   •   Public works (food for assets, cash for   •   Ethiopia PSNP
                                       work)                                     •   Mexico PET
                                   •   Access to credit                          •   Malawi MASAF
                                   •   Informal support mechanisms               •   Philippines CCT
                                                                                 •   Tonga CFW
 Promotion      Risk Reduction     •   Conditional Cash Transfers                •   Ethiopia PSNP
                                   •   Livelihoods interventions                 •   Bangladesh CLP
                                   •   Training/Skills
                                   •   Microcredit
                                   •   Public Works (Infrastructure)




                                                18
Despite the fact that the positive links between social protection systems, DRM and CCA are
well established and understood, effective and systematic experiences of building those links
are few. In most cases, the use of these mechanisms to respond to natural disasters has been
ad hoc and ex-post, and although most times they have been relatively successful, they have
faced challenges at the design, implementation and coordination levels.
In terms of design, social protection programs are rarely prepared to address the risks and
impacts of natural hazards ahead of time. For instance, social protection targeting
mechanisms often fail to take into account climate and disaster vulnerability in advance,
meaning that many victims of relatively predictable shocks are missed when they occur.
Moreover, in some cases, the instruments and tools utilized in disaster response are limited
to short-term relief measures such as food, blankets and essential items. These short-term
responses miss the medium term recovery needs, and the importance of building long-term
risk management strategies. Finally, coordination between social protection agencies and
relevant agencies such as disaster risk management, meteorology and climate change
adaptation is often limited, meaning that responses are uncoordinated, sometimes
overlapping or leaving ostensible gaps.
By being prepared in advance, social protection systems might be able to respond to natural
disasters and climate-related shocks more effectively. Moreover, by focusing on reducing risk
and building resilience before shocks occur, they can help decrease the impacts of the shock
on those most vulnerable. A recent World Bank toolkit (http://preventionweb.net/go/42486)
on this particular topic suggests a series of aspects and principles to focus on when preparing
SP interventions to address disaster and climate risk upfront (World Bank, 2013a):
   a. Climate- and disaster-aware planning:
           •   acknowledging and hedging against uncertainty and planning for the greater
               frequency and severity of disasters;
           •   feedback loops with early warning systems and coordination with agencies
               responsible for meteorology and climate change; and




                                              19
              •     risk mapping to determine the impact of events on geographic areas and
                    physical, natural, and institutional assets.
   b. Interventions centered on livelihoods and assets: planning that reflects understanding
        of livelihood sources and economic decision making at the community and household
        level
   c. Building adaptive and response capacity at the system level: budgeting of adequate
        financing, human resources, and administrative systems.
A description of some of the country social protection programs that integrate the principles
of disaster- and climate- responsive SP is provided in Table 2. These principles will be explored
more in-depth in the context of PICs in Section 4.
Table 2: Examples of social protection programs integrating climate resilience
  Program          Country     SP instruments                            Description
    Name
 Chars            Bangladesh   •   Cash         •   Aims to secure and promote livelihoods opportunities while
 Livelihood                        transfers        at the same time strengthening the resilience of its target
 Project                       •   Public           population to natural shocks and climate variability.
 (CLP)                             works        •   Works with extremely poor households located on fluvial
                               •   Asset and        islands in Bangladesh, which are particularly vulnerable to
                                   livelihood       annual seasonal flooding as well as random extreme
                                   transfers        flooding events.
                               •   Training     •   The CLP uses a combination of public works, asset transfers
                                   and skills       (cash/in-kind), livelihoods-related training, market
                                                    development, and social development activities to achieve
                                                    its aims.
                                                •   Public works focus on reduction of flood risks;
                                                •   Provides post-disaster relief and recovery support to
                                                    protect and restore the assets/income being built up
                                                    through the program;
                                                •   Builds direct measurement of climate resilience outcomes
                                                    into its monitoring and evaluation systems.
 Productiv        Ethiopia     •   Cash and     •   Large national social safety net (SSN) program that responds
 e Safety                          in-kind          not only to chronic food insecurity among Ethiopia's poor,
 Nets                              transfers        but also to shorter-term shocks, mainly droughts.
 Program                       •   Public       •   Targets a highly climate-vulnerable population
 (PSNP)                            works        •   Public works activities geared towards improving climate
                                                    resilience;
                                                •   A risk financing facility to help poor households and
                                                    communities better cope with transitory shocks, including
                                                    households outside of the core program
                                                •   Works through, and focuses on strengthening, existing
                                                    government institutional systems at all levels - rather than
                                                    creating separate systems.



                                                     20
                                          •   Combination of a secure and predictable transfer to poor
                                              households, protection of poor households against natural
                                              hazard shock impacts and significant improvements in the
                                              management of the natural environment that contributes
                                              to these risks has enabled the program's core beneficiaries
                                              to meet consumption needs, mitigate risks and avoid selling
                                              productive assets during times of crisis (e.g. droughts).
                                              There is evidence that livelihoods are stabilizing and food
                                              insecurity is being reduced among these households.
R4 Rural     Ethiopia   •   Weather-      •   Disaster micro-insurance for the poor integrated into a
Resilience                  based             social safety net (SSN) program, enhancing both its climate-
Initiative                  insurance         related and social protection benefits.
(R4/HARIT               •   Training      •   Program offers weather-based insurance to a chronically
A)                          and Skills        poor, highly climate-vulnerable population in the Tigray
                        •   Access to         region of Ethiopia; most are already participants in the
                            credit            country's national Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP).
                        •   Public        •   Beneficiaries pay for the insurance through the provision of
                            Works             additional labor on community-based disaster risk
                                              reduction activities that complement the PSNP's public
                                              works activities.
Malawi       Malawi     •   Public        •   MASAF was used for government’s response to disaster
Social                      works             when drought caught the country unprepared in 2005.
Action                  •   Community         Organization had credibility in terms of having the capacity
Fund                        -driven           to deliver results as well as the systems that ensured
(MASAF)                     infrastruct       transparency and accountability.
                            ure (social   •   Outreach within the communities had led to an
                            funds)            accumulation of local knowledge.
                                          •   Autonomy and flexibility of the setup of MASAF allowed for
                                              speedy design of interventions geared toward risk
                                              reduction.
                                          •   Disaster response consisted of a conditional cash transfer
                                              per day for 10 days’ work on public works so that
                                              beneficiaries could buy two bags of fertilizer, a bag of maize,
                                              and five kilos of maize seed.
                                          •    Fertilizer was to be bought at one-third of the market price
                                              against coupons issued to the ultra-poor identified with the
                                              help of local leaders.
                                          •   Targeted information, education, and communication
                                              campaigns played a key role in helping to bring different
                                              stakeholders to a common platform.
Mexico       Mexico     •   Public        •   Social safety net (SSN) program in a middle-income country
PET                         works             that has integrated disaster risk management and climate
                                              change adaptation into its operations.
                                          •    Cash-for-work program provides temporary transfers in
                                              exchange for labor in community projects to eligible
                                              households in marginalized municipalities or whose
                                              livelihoods have been affected by natural disasters or other
                                              crises.
                                          •   Highly collaborative and formalized institutional
                                              relationship that has been developed between social
                                              protection, disaster management and sectoral agencies.



                                               21
                                            •     Quick and efficient disaster response mechanism and
                                                  contingency fund.
                                            •     Incorporates disaster and climate sensitive targeting criteria
                                                  into sectoral public works programs.
 Pakistan    Pakistan      •   Cash         •     Rapid response cash grant aimed to provide quick
 CDCP                          Transfers          assistance to families who lost their homes or faced a
                                                  serious threat to their wellbeing as a result of the 2010
                                                  Floods.
                                            •     Phase I funded by the GOP, which provided almost US$ 400
                                                  million in cash grants to more than 1.62 million families
                                                  across Pakistan.
                                            •     Eligible households located in the affected areas were given
                                                  a one-off cash grant of approximately US$ 213.
                                            •     Second phase supported the recovery of affected
                                                  households with cash payments that can be used to meet
                                                  any of their recovery needs, such as reconstructing their
                                                  houses, restoring their livelihoods or paying back
                                                  accumulated debt.
                                            •     Second phase doubled the size of the grant to eligible
                                                  households, which provided a more suitable amount to
                                                  support recovery.


Source: World Bank, 2013a and World Bank, 2009.



            d. Context: Pacific island countries, risk and vulnerability
The Pacific Island region is extensive and diverse. This paper focuses on the ten World Bank
member countries, including Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands,
Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. Although not considered part of
Pacific Islands, Papua New Guinea and Timor-Leste are also considered here as important
players in the region. These countries have a population of over 10 million people, spread
across hundreds of islands, and scattered over an area equivalent to 15 percent of the globe’s
surface.
The region is extremely diverse, both in geographical and cultural terms. On one hand,
topography makes these countries very different, with some being part of what is called
‘continental islands’ which tend to be larger and prone to geological hazards, others being
‘oceanic islands’ (mainly volcanic islands), others being atolls with very small, low-lying land
areas and others ‘raised limestone islands’. Culturally, islands are generally divided between




                                                   22
Melanesia (PNG, Fiji, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu), Polynesia (Samoa, Tonga and Tuvalu)
and Micronesia (FSM, Kiribati, Marshall Islands and Palau). Although some of these tend to
be more homogenous (Polynesia), some islands are quite culturally diverse. For instance, in
Vanuatu, with only 250 thousand people, over 100 languages are spoken (Campbell, 2006).
In spite of this diversity, these countries are all greatly exposed to natural hazards given their
geographic and physical characteristics. Moreover, some of them are extremely vulnerable
to the effects of these hazards given their particular socioeconomic and environmental
context. The risks and particular vulnerabilities these countries face are discussed below.

                        i. Risks and vulnerability in the Pacific island countries
Pacific island countries experience a dangerous combination of natural hazards, high
exposure and high vulnerability that makes them particularly prone to disaster risk. According
to the 2012 World Risk Report (Bündnis, Entwicklung and Hilft, 2012) five out of the 15
countries most at risk of disasters in the world are Pacific Island Countries3, with Vanuatu and
Tonga in first and second place, respectively (see Table 3) 4 . The World Risk Index (WRI)
measures risk based on the principle that frequency and strength of natural hazards do not
per se determine how likely a country is to experience disasters. Although natural hazards
themselves (earthquakes, cyclones, extreme rainfall, etc.) are largely outside human control,
disasters are not (World Bank, 2010), as they are the result of the country’s exposure and
vulnerability to those hazards. 5 The World Risk Index is based on the core understanding that
a society’s disaster risk is influenced by its structure, processes and framework conditions,


3
  Six countries out of 15 if Timor-Leste is taken into account.
4
  Vanuatu is the country with the largest disaster risk worldwide, followed by Tonga, the Philippines, Guatemala
and Bangladesh. Since the index is the product of exposure and vulnerability, it shows that these countries bear
the disastrous combination of extreme exposure and high vulnerability.
5 There are several indices that look at disaster and climate risks (Germanwatch Climate Risk Index, Global
Assessment Report by UNISDR, etc.). The WRI is discussed here because, in addition to exposure analysis, this
report focuses strongly on the vulnerability of the population, i.e. its susceptibility, its capacity to cope with and
to adapt to future natural events as well as the consequences of climate change. Disaster risk is seen as a
function of exposure and vulnerability. The World Risk Index is calculated by combining four individually
calculated components of exposure, susceptibility, lack of coping capacities and lack of adaptive capacities, with
these last three yielding the vulnerability index, which indicates whether a disaster may actually ensue should
an extreme natural event occur. The vulnerability index multiplied by the exposure index yields the World Risk
Index (Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft, 2012).



                                                         23
which in turn may be affected by natural events and the effects of climate change. Besides
having high levels of exposure to hazards, PICs are highly vulnerable (see Table 3), due to a
combination of factors that drive up disaster and climate risk. An analysis of these factors
follows below.

Table 3: Fifteen countries most at risk of disasters (exposure and vulnerability)
                        World Risk Index
     Rank        Country                           Risk (%)
      1.         Vanuatu                            36.31
      2.         Tonga                              28.62
      3.         Philippines                        27.98
      4.         Guatemala                          20.75
      5.         Bangladesh                         20.22
      6.         Solomon Islands                    18.15
        7.       Costa Rica                         17.38
        8.       Cambodia                           17.17
        9.       Timor-Leste                        17.13
        10.      El Salvador                        16.89
        11.      Brunei Darussalam                  15.92
        12.      Papua New Guinea                   15.81
        13.      Mauritius                          15.39
        14.      Nicaragua                          15.36
        15.      Fiji                               13.69

Source: Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft, 2012


    •     Hazards and Geographic Exposure
The Pacific is one of the regions most exposed to natural hazards; although the hazards vary
by sub-regions. For instance, although tropical cyclones are the most common hazard, many
countries lie along active fault lines, and as part of the “Pacific Ring of Fire”, several of these
countries are exposed to a serious threat from earthquakes and tsunamis 6 . In addition,
although droughts are less common, they tend to affect the highest number of people per
event, as evidenced by data between 1950 and 2004 (World Bank, 2006b).


6
 Pacific island countries located in the southwestern region – primarily PNG, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji and
Tonga - are particularly at risk (World Bank, 2006b).



                                                      24
Different countries face specific risks. For instance, in the Solomon Islands, an earthquake
loss exceeding US$ 270 million (40 percent of GDP) is to be expected on average, once every
100 years, with earthquake risk being more prominent than cyclones. In Samoa, however, a
tropical cyclone loss exceeding US$ 134 million, which is equivalent to about 24 percent of
Samoa’s GDP, is to be expected on average once every 100 years. In Samoa, tropical cyclone
losses are expected to be substantially more frequent and severe than losses due to
earthquake ground shaking and tsunamis (World Bank et al., 2011).

   •   Climate Change
According to IPCC (IPCC, 2012), a change in climate will lead to variations in the frequency,
intensity, extent, duration, and timing of extreme weather and climate events. According to
a study by the World Bank (2006), there is a strong evidence in the Pacific of an increase in
the observed frequency and intensity of weather and climate-related events. According to
this study, ten of the 15 most extreme events reported in the region in half a century have
occurred in the past 15 years.
Moreover, the climate also appears to be changing. A study that looked at climate trends,
between 1950 and 2004 shows that, while the southern Pacific seems to be experiencing a
significantly drier and warmer climate (by 15 percent and 0.8˚C, respectively), the Central
Equatorial Pacific, by contrast, is experiencing more intense rain (representing a change of
about 30 percent) and a similarly hotter climate (0.6˚C). Sea surface temperatures in both
areas have increased by about 0.4˚C (World Bank, 2006b).
The rate of climate change is likely to intensify in the future, in terms of both average and
extreme conditions. As average temperatures increase, sea level is expected to rise by
between 9 and 90 centimeters by the end of the century, with the eastern Pacific
experiencing the largest rise. Cyclones are expected to increase in intensity by about 5–20
percent. Storm frequency is likely to increase in the equatorial and northern Pacific. And in
general, the future climate is expected to see more droughts in the southern Pacific and more
rain and floods in the equatorial Pacific (World Bank, 2006b).




                                             25
Climate change will exacerbate current risks from natural hazards. The climatic changes will
affect every aspect of life: freshwater supplies for natural systems, communities and
businesses; food security, threatened both through impacts on agriculture and fisheries;
infrastructure, as the risk from coastal flooding and erosion increases as sea levels rise.
Overall, in the coming decades, impacts are expected to become more widespread and more
severe (PIRCA).

   •     Other Factors that Contribute to PIC’s vulnerability to natural disasters
Besides being exposed to a high number of hydro-meteorological and geological hazards, PICs
as a whole have a set of other common economic and social characteristics that make them
vulnerable to disasters, such as:
   •     Small island states and limited natural resources
Small island developing states (SIDS) together with land-locked countries comprise about two
thirds of the countries with very high economic vulnerability to disasters (World Bank, 2010).
There are multiple reasons this is the case. First, as small landmasses in the middle of a vast
ocean, they are more exposed to weather inclemency and potentially high levels of losses. In
the case of small islands, economic development may be set back by decades due to disaster
impacts (SOPAC). Many of the 25 countries with natural disaster damages in a range of more
than 1 percent of GDP (in a sample of 175 countries) are small island economies (World Bank,
2010).
In addition, PICs have very limited natural resources and rely, for livelihoods, mostly on
coastal areas, where most of the populations and resources are located. Although the coastal
areas are the most highly diverse of the ecosystems, they are also extremely fragile and
vulnerable to change (SPREP). As these areas become more developed and over-utilized, an
increasing degradation of habitats, soils, forests, coastal and inland waters, reefs occurs, as
well as overexploitation of resources and growing conflicts in resource use and access.
   •     Narrowly based economies, import dependency and large distances to major
         markets, weak financial management and preparedness to deal with shocks




                                               26
Most of the population in PICs (except Marshall Islands, Palau and Tuvalu) live in rural areas
and depends on the rural economy for their livelihoods. For instance, Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu are agrarian societies in which agriculture provides the overwhelming main source
of employment and livelihoods. The Fijian economy is more diversified, with a higher
percentage of the population living in urban areas. Yet agriculture employs 70 percent of the
labor force (World Bank, 2011a). Agriculture and subsistence activities (fishing) are very
sensitive to natural disasters and climate extremes.
Moreover, economic growth has been slow and the islands’ links to global markets (open
economies importing food and essential items, and exporting agricultural products and
tourism) makes them highly exposed to global economic shocks (AusAID, 2012b). This
becomes a negative spiral, as the PICs have limited options for trade and economic
diversification, making them even more dependent on outside actors – both for aid and
remittances – when shocks hit.
Financial management and preparedness to deal with shocks in PICs is generally very small
due to their limited fiscal reserves and contingency budgets. There recently have been new
initiatives to pool risk at a sovereign level for a numbers of PICs, such as the PCRAFI risk
insurance pilot. However, the current payouts are very low (usually around 1-2 US$ million)
even in case of a major natural disaster. These insurance mechanisms need to be further
developed and their funding enhanced for them to play a bigger role in the disaster response.


       •   Urbanization and the breakup of traditional safety nets 7
In spite of the narrowly developed economies, approximately 36 percent of the Pacific
population (excluding PNG) lives in urban areas. Although by international standards the
absolute numbers of population may be small, the reduced land areas have given rise to
population densities comparable to highly populated countries in Asia (Wilkinson, 2011;
Haberkorn, 2008). Expansion is occurring in PICs small urban centers and is expected to



7
    This section is largely based on Wilkinson, 2011.



                                                        27
continue over the next few decades, as they become centers of opportunity. This will also
make them hubs of social and environmental risk at the same time.
Significant proportions of urban areas in the Pacific are made up of poor housing or slums,
sometimes known as squatter or informal communities. These areas are usually beyond the
reach and services provided by local and central government. In addition, a large proportion
of young people in urban areas means that urban population growth will continue for several
years, creating further pressures. Poor land use planning also exacerbates risk.
Particularly relevant for disaster and climate change risks is the fact that, while the density of
urban life can be seen on the one hand to have relieved pressure on natural habitats and
biodiversity in rural areas, the impact on sensitive coastal ecosystems is intensifying in areas
of urban growth, placing urban populations at increasing risk of disease, coastal erosion, and
flooding. Much urban growth in the capital cities of the Melanesian countries (Fiji, Papua New
Guinea, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu) is taking place in low lying and flood prone areas
not only placing these populations at risk of flooding, including tidal surges and tsunamis, but
also resulting in high levels of
environmental pollution through
lack of waste controls.
The World Bank (2004) noted that “growing urbanization and squatter settlements,
degradation of coastal ecosystems, and rapidly developing infrastructure on coastal areas are
intensifying the [Pacific] islands’ exposure to extreme weather events.”
Although in the past Pacific people have built traditional practices for resilience to natural
disasters, these adaptation mechanisms are being lost as people migrate to the cities and to
fragile coastal areas. Moreover, the breakup of families due to urban migration is resulting in
the weakening of traditional safety nets and community coping mechanisms. At the same
time, urban safety nets are non-existent and people lack coping mechanisms in the face of
shocks. The lack of institutional capacity is another factor in vulnerability, including capacity
to forecast and disseminate early warning messages to scattered population.

                   ii. Poverty and hardship in Pacific island countries



                                               28
In PICs, traditionally the idea that the community, clan or family would support those in need
meant that nobody was supposed to fall into poverty. Until recently, most countries in the
region considered poverty as a foreign concept, and indeed many still do. However, this
concept around the non-existence of absolute poverty is gradually changing as economic
forces, systemic shocks and urbanization erode traditional safety nets and more governments
recognize that a significant proportion of the population may face difficulties meeting basic
needs.
Nevertheless, extreme poverty, defined as the proportion of the population living below US$
1.25 a day, is largely considered an irrelevant concept in the Pacific context due to the high
dependence on subsistence living and traditional social safety nets (Pacific Islands Forum
Secretariat, 2011). In general, hunger and destitution are still rare in the region and many
prefer to use the term ‘hardship’ or poverty of opportunity, which has been defined as a lack
of basic services, a lack of opportunities to participate in the economy and a lack of adequate
resources to meet the basic needs of the household or customary social obligations (Abbott
and Pollard, 2004).
Thus, while food poverty in these
countries is relatively low – 2 to 5 percent in Fiji, Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu,
and 9 to 13 percent in FSM and Solomon Islands, the population living below the (national)
Basic Needs Poverty Lines is significantly higher, with most countries ranging from 25 to 30
percent (see Table 4).




                                               29
Table 4: Food and Basic Needs Poverty in PICs

                                Food Poverty (%)                  Basic Needs Poverty (%)
Fiji                            5 (2008)                          31 (2008)
PNG                             ...                               28 (2009e)
Solomon Is                      9 (2006)                          23 (2006)
Vanuatu                         2 (2010)                          13 (2010)
FSM                             13 (2005)                         31 (2005)
Kiribati                        5 (2006)                          22 (2006)
Palau                           0 (2006)                          25 (2006)
Samoa                           5 (2008)                          27 (2008)
Tonga                           2 (2009)                          23 (2009)
Tuvalu                          4 (2004)                          20 (2010)

Source: Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2011.


In addition, income and expenditure distribution curves in Pacific island countries are
generally quite flat around the poverty line, which points to a high level of vulnerability to
poverty in the region (ADB, 2010b). Since much of the population lives just above the poverty
line, even small events can push many into poverty. This fact, combined with other socio-
economic factors, increases people’s vulnerability to climate and natural hazard risks.
Some of the factors that increase hardship and vulnerability are 8:
       •   An increased demand for cash and monetization of the economy, as the population
           becomes more urbanized and less reliant on subsistence agriculture. This, combined
           with reliance on expensive imported food (due to long distances), and social
           obligations (church, community) means households might be cash–strapped and
           resort to harmful coping mechanism (e.g. reducing consumption of nutritious food);
       •   Inadequate health and education services, low literacy rates, limited opportunities for
           secondary schooling (due to fees/quality) and the rise of life-style diseases (diabetes,
           hypertension) which put pressure on already inadequate health services;


8
    All of this adapted from (AUSAID, 2012a) and (AUSAID, 2010) and communications with World Bank staff.



                                                      30
   •   High unemployment, especially among young people, which often forces people to
       migrate for jobs;
   •   Exposure to political and economic shocks, as was demonstrated by the impact of the
       triple fuel, food and financial crisis in 2008;
   •   Limited financial services and very low levels of savings and access to credit that allow
       households to cope in the face of shocks;
   •   Large dependency ratios, translating into households with children and elderly being
       the poorest; very low levels of social security and pensions; and
   •   Weakening forms of traditional support and unequal distribution of it.

Groups most at risk are children, the elderly, women and the disabled. In particular, the ADB
study (ADB, 2010a) identified the following population groups as being vulnerable through a
lack of access to economic resources, education and health services, employment and credit,
and infrastructure and markets: (i) rural communities, particularly rural children; (ii) rural
women involved in both subsidence and wage activities; (iii) out-of-school and unemployed
youth; (iv) landless people—outer island and inland migrants to coastal towns and cities; (v)
low-paid wage workers—the formal and informal sector working poor; (vi) disabled people
for whom facilities for education, training, and rehabilitation, including opportunities for
employment, are limited; (vii) the destitute, comprising deserted wives, widows, single
parents, the chronically ill, the severely disabled, and the aged; and (viii) children of the poor.
Some evidence suggests that in the absence of formal risk coping mechanisms or informal
support, during times of hardship, vulnerable groups will increasingly be forced into poverty-
entrenching support mechanisms (ADB, 2010a). For example, in Samoa, children have been
taken out of school either because their parents have been unable to afford to pay school
fees or so that children could earn income for their families in the absence of other sources
of livelihood (Chibber, 2009).




                                                31
   II. Analysis of Social Protection and Disaster and Climate Risk Management in the
       Pacific
           a. Disaster risk management and climate change adaptation in the Pacific
                 Islands – current situation and constraints
Informal, community-based measures to reduce the risks and impacts of natural disasters in
the Pacific Islands have a strong tradition. Communities have long carried out disaster risk
management activities by themselves, usually focusing on intra and inter community
cooperation, food security, traditional knowledge and settlements (Campbell, 2006). For
instance, food surplus has usually been stored and preserved for times of hardship, and
houses built on mounds to reduce the risk of flooding. However, some of the more recent
economic and social changes have undermined many of these practices. For instance, as
populations become more urbanized, they move into highly vulnerable areas, while
abandoning traditional food security mechanisms.
As traditional practices loose effectiveness – not only due to socio-economic and cultural
changes, but also due to increasing frequency and unpredictability of climate shocks – the
need for formal, holistic, contextualized disaster risk management and climate change
adaptation measures becomes increasingly evident.
Although funding for disaster risk management and climate change adaptation has increased
in the last decade (World Bank, 2006b), most of the focus seems to traditionally have been
placed on more reactive disaster response. Disaster response has usually been focused on
providing short-term relief in the form of in-kind commodities such as food, relief kits, shelter,
etc. Some of these activities have sometimes been followed by limited-scale recovery efforts,
such as housing reconstruction, small shelter solutions, etc. In general, PICs have limited
financial and institutional capacity for large-scale disaster response, and thus rely on
international donors (Australia, New Zealand, Red Cross, the UN system and large
international NGOs) for relief after major disasters.
In addition, the actions taken so far for disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation
seem to not have been sufficient for sustained and systematic progress on-the ground (World
Bank, 2009a). There is a need for stronger commitments and action by governments at


                                               32
several levels, including political, regulatory and sectoral actions (World Bank, 2009a). Several
constraints impede increasing the effectiveness of activity in this sector, including9:
    •    Disaster response and risk reduction are mostly financed by external donors and
         remain outside of the national budget
A great proportion of the activities destined to reduce risks of or help cope with the impacts
of natural disasters and shocks are financed by international donors, and funds are not
provided through national budgets. This leads to uncoordinated action and fragmentation, as
well as a short-term project focus that impedes sustained action and ownership. Moreover,
some have pointed out that this situation incentivizes activities in disaster response at the
expense of risk reduction; while disaster response has high visibility and can be funded off-
budget, preparedness and risk reduction require day-to-day commitment. Thus, while donors
continue to contribute to response generously, governments have little incentive to invest in
risk reduction (World Bank, 2006b).
As a result, PIC governments tend to consider the need for climate change adaptation and
much of disaster risk reduction as being externally driven and thus expect that activities will
be externally funded (World Bank, 2009a). A study of external assistance for DRM and CCA
(Gero et al., 2011) found that while there was ongoing support from both donors and PIC
national budgets for these interventions with a view to build adaptive capacity, the bulk of
the support was donor funded.
As the strong reliance on external assistance threatens to undermine the building of a
national system for disaster and climate risk reduction, this has led regional organizations,
donors and international partners to consider ways to assist PICs to build internal capacity to
respond to their own needs. Moreover, some countries in the region have taken the lead in
building a coordinated national response and risk reduction system. For instance, Vanuatu
has recognized this problem and requires that any external technical assistance be aimed at




9
 Only those constraints and characteristics that are relevant to the topic of this note are presented here. Many
others can be described that are particular to the DRM sector in the Pacific. Literature on this is included in the
references.



                                                        33
building the in-country capacity required for disaster response as well as for sustained risk
reduction (World Bank, 2009a; Griffiths, 2013). (See Box 5)
  Box 5: Vanuatu Humanitarian Team
  In Vanuatu, the National Disaster Management Office (NDMO) and other key Government
  ministries are being supported by the Vanuatu Humanitarian Team (VHT). The VHT was
  established in late 2011 and is a collaborative project set up by humanitarian stakeholders
  in Vanuatu and the UN’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in the Pacific
  (OCHA). It was established based on the recognition that humanitarian stakeholders with
  a presence in the country could strengthen the preparedness and response capacity in
  certain sectors or clusters, as well as the NDMO’s capacity, through providing consistent
  on-ground support and access to personnel and other resources. Here, Government
  ministries lead clusters in agriculture and food security, emergency education, health,
  logistics and WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene). Members of the VHT support the
  Government ministries as cluster co-leads.
  Since its establishment, the VHT has assisted with the response to Tropical Cyclone (TC)
  Jasmine and TC Pam in March 2015. The VHT is included as an integral component in the
  NDMO’s tsunami-and-cyclone response preparedness plans, as well as Standard Operating
  Procedures (SOPs). The VHT is also extending disaster preparedness support at the
  provincial level within Vanuatu as well as assisting the NDMO to develop SOPs to
  strengthen coordination between Port Vila and the provinces.
  Source: Griffiths, 2013.
   •   DRM and CCA are not fully mainstreamed into national budgets, sectors and
       programs
A regional study (World Bank, 2009a) found that across the region, there are universally weak
institutional frameworks at national level for defining roles, accountabilities, and linkages
across sectors and between levels of government, in ways that would effectively
operationalize existing or emerging national hazard risk management policies. This includes
links between disaster risk management and climate change adaptation themselves, but also
with other sectors that are relevant for development, such as social protection.
Recently, some governments have increased their commitment to institutionalizing DRM and
CCA, including preparing national DRM/CCA strategies and actions plans. For example, Samoa
has a National Action plan for DRM 2011-2016. In Timor-Leste, the National Disaster
Management Office (NDMO) is part of the Ministry of Social Affairs, which would make it easy




                                             34
to coordinate DRM and SP agendas. 10
Nevertheless, governments and development partners should increase efforts to ensure
sustainable financing and institutionalization of DRM and CCA. As suggested by the World
Bank (2012a), improved coordination between DRM and CCA institutions and greater
involvement by relevant ministries would increase PICs governments’ ability to carry out
integrated and intersectoral approaches that are needed for climate resilient development,
while also reducing inefficiencies in the use of scarce resources.
       •   Limited human resources and institutional capacity at the national level
A recurrent theme across PICs is the lack of adequate human resources and institutional
capacity, and the disaster risk management and climate change adaptation sectors are not
an exception. Disaster response relies on very few people with limited resources (Gero et al.,
2011), which increases the vulnerability of these countries to disaster risk. On the other hand,
there are a multitude of donors active in the disaster risk reduction and climate change
adaptation sectors, but often they provide more technical assistance than these countries are
able to absorb (World Bank, 2009a).
According to a regional study (World Bank, 2009a), significant barriers to effective risk
reduction are the relatively low-level availability and utilization of relevant knowledge, skills,
wider understanding, and decision-support tools; and shortfalls in data management and
information-sharing mechanisms. It is important that human resource capacity is improved
in terms of the numbers, skills, competencies, deployment and co-ordination required to
respond to natural disasters. Moreover, it is important to find synergies and collaboration
between disaster risk management and climate change adaptation sector, but also with other
sectors, to ensure resources, knowledge and skills are used as efficiently as possible.
       •   Limited data availability
A cross-country study of seven countries in the region (World Bank, 2009a) found that in the
previous 10-15 years there had been a widespread degradation of hazard and climate
monitoring and information management systems, which impeded the identification of


10
     Communication with an expert.



                                                35
areas, assets, operations, and communities at risk as well as their vulnerabilities. Due to
scarce resources, lack of knowledge or technical capacity, etc., governments and donors often
prefer not to fund long-term data collection activities even if essential for supporting
informed decision-making.
Moreover, even in those countries where data is reasonably adequate, there is little cross-
sector coordination that allows other agencies to access and utilize that data effectively. The
capacity to share and access data across sectors is crucial.
Finally, there is also an extreme urgency to update both the need for and current capabilities
of appropriate early warning systems (World Bank, 2009a), as most of these countries rely on
other countries’ EWS systems.
Some efforts have taken place in past years to improve this situation. The Pacific Catastrophe
Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) aims to provide 15 countries in the region
with disaster risk assessment tools to help them better understand, model, and assess their
exposure to natural disasters, as part of the broader agenda on disaster risk management
and climate change adaptation in the Pacific region (World Bank, n.d.). 11


     •   Limited community involvement in formal risk reduction activities
Implementation of risk-reducing measures has largely been through a top-down approach,
and for many countries there is a sizable gap between the village or community level and the
provincial or national level at which scientific knowledge, mainstreaming, and capacity
building are usually directed (World Bank, 2009a). Often this reflects the manner in which
information or assistance is provided, frequently inappropriate in the native cultural or
organizational context.




11
  The Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) is a joint initiative of SOPAC/SPC,
World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank with the financial support of the Government of Japan, the Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and the ACP-EU Natural Disaster Risk Reduction
Programme, and technical support from AIR Worldwide, New Zealand GNS Science, Geoscience Australia, Pacific
Disaster Center (PDC), OpenGeo and GFDRR Labs.



                                                      36
Recently, however, some organizations have recognized that tangible benefits need to be
delivered at the local level, where needs are the greatest, and are starting to increase the
emphasis on community-based adaptation, management or natural resources and
community-based disaster risk management (World Bank, 2009a).

For instance, the World Bank has recently approved the Community Resilience to Climate and
Disaster Risk Project for Solomon Islands (CRISP), which aims to increase the capacity of
selected rural communities to manage natural hazards and climate change risks. The project
will support both structural and non-structural disaster risk and adaptation investments at
the community and provincial level, including, among other activities, risk analysis, design,
development and implementation of community-led rural investments (World Bank, 2014).

             b. Social protection in the Pacific island countries
Social Protection is a relatively new, but growing area of government intervention in PICs. As
traditional informal safety nets weaken and community and faith-based groups are only able
to offer a limited range of services (e.g., to orphans and disabled people) to make up for the
failing of those traditional mechanisms, governments are recognizing the need to establish
more formal mechanisms.
Although some countries in the region already have some formal social protection programs
in place, they tend to be small. The low scores of most PICs in the Asian Development Bank’s
Social Protection Index 12 seem to confirm that these systems are weak (ADB, 2010a). Some
of the most developed interventions are in Fiji and Kiribati, which have complex cash
transfers. 13 Other countries like Vanuatu are just beginning to consider the State’s role in the
provision of social risk management interventions. In most countries, there are concerns
about welfare dependency and the role of the State in re-distribution. However, with growing

12
   ADB has developed a social protection index that includes four quantitative indicators to measure and
compare the adequacy of social protection in its member countries. The indicators include (1) expenditure on
social protection (as a percentage of gross domestic product), (2) coverage of social protection programs in
terms of the extent to which they reach their target populations, (3) poverty targeting in terms of the proportion
of poor who receive social protection transfers, and (4) impact of social protection expenditures measured as
the average expenditure on social protection per person living below the poverty line (ADB, 2010a).
13
   Communication with World Bank staff.



                                                       37
poverty and hardship, there is also a recognition that government intervention might be
needed to close the gap. 14 In any case, overall social protection coverage ratios are low -
ranging from 30 percent of target population receiving some form of formal social protection
in Nauru to only 1 percent of target groups in PNG (ADB, 2010a).
The predominant form of social protection seems to be social insurance programs for formal
workers and the elderly. Most PICs have established provident funds or superannuation
schemes that provide pensions for formal sector workers, particularly retired civil servants
(ADB, 2010a; AusAID, 2010). However, most social insurance programs reach only a small part
of the workforce and elderly people.
Universal old age pensions are the most common type of non-contributory social protection
(AusAID, 2010). Some countries, such as Fiji, Kiribati and Samoa, have introduced universal
income support for the elderly. In Samoa, the cost of the scheme represents 1 percent of GDP
(AusAID, 2010).
Some cash transfer schemes exist, although they are also limited. The Poverty Benefit Scheme
(PBS) in Fiji, which replaced Family Assistance Program (FAP) in2013, is the largest cash
transfer in the region, aimed to reach the poorest 10 percent of the country’s population. The
design elements of PBS are intended to move from categorical targeting of elderly, disabled
and chronically ill (under FAP), to poverty targeting through standardized household welfare
assessments. It is expected that the reform will significantly contribute to focusing the benefit
on reducing poverty incidence in the country.
Many PICs provide free basic education and health services to the general population.
Recently, in response to the hardship faced by vulnerable groups in Samoa, Solomon Islands,
and Vanuatu, “fee-free” primary education schemes were introduced with substantial
support from donors. However, the quality of service remains poor in many countries, and
access is generally limited outside of urban areas, particularly in larger, more populous
countries such as Solomon Islands (ADB, 2010a).




14
     Ibid.



                                               38
A few countries, with the support from donors, have established one-off public works
programs, although often their goal has been to build infrastructure, with the employment
objective as secondary (AusAID, 2010). For instance, in the Solomon Islands, the Cash for
Work pilot program provided wages and tools to target communities for the clean-up and
repair of public areas and infrastructure (common gardens, halls and churches, schools, wells,
drains and paths) that were damaged by flash floods in 2014. A study by AusAID (2010) found
that, in some previous projects, wage rates had been established well above market wage,
with the potential of distorting labor markets.
In the region, Government capacity to design, implement, and monitor social protection
programs remains limited. The data on vulnerable groups is poor and is not often collected
on a regular basis, which makes identifying and monitoring vulnerable groups difficult. This
may be a reason why some PICs governments have opted for a universal benefit (ADB, 2010a).
Finally, involving community and nongovernment organizations (NGOs) in the delivery of
basic social services, particularly to vulnerable groups, is common across the Pacific. Such
groups are normally decentralized and well integrated into existing social structures. In many
Pacific countries, governments and community organizations such as churches have
established partnerships, particularly in the health and education sectors. Community
delivery of basic social services not only builds on the strong tradition of community support
networks in the region, but also assists in overcoming capacity and financial resource
constraints that limit the government’s ability to provide broad basic service coverage to the
entire population, particularly in rural areas (ABD, 2010a).

             c. How do social protection interventions currently address the risks from
                 disasters and climate volatility in the Pacific?
There is little evidence that formal social protection mechanisms to date have been used
either for disaster response 15 or for reducing risks arising from climatic and natural hazards,
with the exception of ex-post cash-for-work (CFW) programs, such as the one developed in

15
  A study by Naidu, V. and Moharty, M. (2009) “Situational Analysis of Social Protection Policies, Services and
Delivery Mechanisms in the Pacific” mentions that at least Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands, Samoa and Vanuatu
have a mechanism called “Disaster victim assistance” but no details have been found.



                                                      39
Tonga by UNDP. Given the level of institutional development and coordination of both the
social protection and the disaster risk management sectors, their limited budgets and human
resources, this situation is not unexpected.
A recent Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) found evidence that, after cyclone Evan in
December 2012, the government of Fiji was using Provident Funds as an ad hoc one-off
mechanism for disaster response (Government of Fiji, 2013). Similarly, 5,000 workers under
the Vanuatu National Provident Fund have applied to withdraw 20% of their retirement funds
post-TC Pam that hit Vanuatu in March 2015. The government opened access to the
provident funds for a set amount of money as a means of providing people access to funds
for recovery. Thus, people who chose to take this option would be accessing funds from their
retirement savings to cover the needs arising after the disaster.
This type of intervention may be problematic at several levels. First, and more importantly,
this measure is not sustainable in the long term, as it implies extracting funds from old-age
savings, which run the risk of becoming depleted before reaching their intended use period.
Second, since there is a very small formal sector that contributes to these funds, and there is
very low coverage of poor or vulnerable households in these schemes, the intervention might
not have reached those most in need for response after the disaster. Finally, this seems to
have been an ad hoc mechanism that is not part of a systematic plan for disaster response,
and it is unsustainable in the long run.
Another mechanism that may help have an effect for small-scale farmers’ resilience to shocks
might be the Copra Subsidy Scheme—Kiribati’s largest social protection program—which
helps farmers cope with fluctuations in copra prices by guaranteeing a minimum purchase
price from government. This maintains copra production in the outer islands and protects
famers’ assets when prices are low. However, the program might not be sustainable because
it maintains an artificially high price for copra, while providing inequitable support to
households, as those with less labor capacity receive smaller subsidies even though they are
vulnerable. Moreover the scheme is quite expensive and runs at a significant fiscal loss to the
Government. Core social protection instruments—such as cash transfers or cash for work—
may tackle underlying risks more cost effectively and equitably (AusAID, 2012b).


                                               40
In terms of informal social protection mechanisms, it is well known that one of the risk
management strategies utilized by Pacific islanders involves migration, both domestic and
international. Migration not only allows migrants to send remittances home, but it is also part
of a risk management strategy to escape environmental pressures and risks in some areas.
Mohanty (2011) notes that people are migrating from low-lying, smaller and outer islands to
larger islands in search of secured land with hopes of minimizing the impact of environmental
and climatic change. However, migration opportunities might be limited for some of the
poorest and most vulnerable households, often located in the most remote communities
(AusAID, 2012a).
Through migration, however, remittances become important forms of risk management for
those who are left behind. For instance, a study on disaster remittances following a cyclone
in Samoa found that amounts remitted rose steeply in response to the cyclone, achieving
about 25 per cent of the total value of the losses incurred by recipient families (Macpherson
1994 in AusAID, 2012a). More recently, in December 2009, a remarkable upsurge in
remittances to Samoa occurred after the tsunami (Gibson 2010 in AusAID, 2012a).
Other types of informal coping mechanism might revolve around informal lending and
borrowing from family and friends. While the latter might not be very effective in the case of
systemic shocks, the former has the potential of being harmful if interest rates are high and
conditions are onerous meaning those households might sink further down in poverty.
Finally, Mohanty (2011) points out that the credit union systems also work for those who are
not covered by formal social insurance schemes. Credit unions provide a sense of support to
those without regular employment. In Fiji, for instance, there are several community-,
profession- or company-based credit unions that act as “safety nets”.

           d. How should social protection integrate disaster response and climate
               resilience in the Pacific Island Countries?
As highlighted earlier in this note, the Pacific Island Countries are highly exposed to natural
disaster risk. Climate change will contribute to further compounding those risks, exerting
renewed pressure on these countries’ disaster risk management systems and impacting the



                                              41
poorest and most vulnerable. As the countries in this region consider expanding and
reforming their social protection systems, it is crucial that they consider disaster and climate
considerations as key risk factors for their target populations.
If designed well, social protection programs play a key role in helping households cope with
the short-term impacts of shocks, as has been demonstrated by several studies. For instance,
evaluations of the cash and voucher programs used in humanitarian emergencies, such as in
response to the Indian Ocean tsunami in December 2004 (e.g., in Thailand, Indonesia, India
and Sri Lanka) and the South Asia earthquake in 2005 (e.g., in Pakistan) found evidence that
beneficiaries largely spent the cash on necessities such as food, clothing and school fees,
which helped them cope with the shock (Parks et al., 2009). Moreover, if provided
systematically and predictably, social protection transfers can reduce long term risk by
helping poor households build savings, an asset-base or human capital.
In general, based on the international evidence, a social protection system in the Pacific that
takes climate and disaster risks into account will need to have the following characteristics 16:
                       i. Climate and Disaster aware Planning
Whether designing a new social protection intervention or adapting an existing one,
policymakers and practitioners in countries at risk for natural disasters need to be mindful of
the particular nature of the risks and how they might affect vulnerable populations. This
requires:

          •   Acknowledging uncertainty and building the necessary contingency and
              information mechanisms, such as information from early warning systems, into
              social protection interventions to deal with disaster risk;
          •   Risk mapping to determine how different hazards might affect a geographic area
              and which human, physical, natural, or institutional assets need to be supported
              or strengthened;




16
     Adapted from World Bank, 2013a.



                                                 42
       •   Incorporating climate- and disaster considerations into the targeting system by
           using area- and household-level data on hazard exposure to inform targeting,
           distinguishing the chronic poor from those at risk of falling into transitory poverty,
           etc. Climate and disaster targeting can be done as part of regular SP programs in
           areas at high risk or for particularly vulnerable populations. Alternatively, targeting
           methods can be adapted post-disaster to reach those affected (see Box 6).
  Box 6: Climate and disaster responsive targeting
  In Bangladesh, the Char Livelihoods Project (CLP) targets only poor communities living on
  fluvial islands (chars), which are highly vulnerable to flooding and climate change impacts.
  In Ethiopia, the PSNP covers geographic regions and districts that are famine-prone (i.e.,
  highly climate-vulnerable, usually due to droughts). The PSNP further includes a household
  level criterion focused on severe asset loss over time, which is sensitive to the cumulative
  effect of both disaster and economic shocks.
  In addition, the PSNP has a scalability feature, which allows it to increase coverage in
  response to extreme weather events – supporting transitorily food-insecure populations
  that have been affected by shocks. The program relies on a contingency budget and a risk
  financing mechanisms to scale up effectively and reach chronic and transitory food-
  insecure populations.
  Source: World Bank, 2013a and Kuriakose et al., 2012.

Traditionally, targeting of formal social protection interventions in the Pacific Island countries
has been limited given low capacity and scarce data. The World Bank and other development
partners (e.g., DFAT) are currently collaborating to increase the availability of data and to
improve targeting mechanisms in selected PICs. For instance, as part of this effort, the World
Bank has worked with the government of Fiji to incorporate a module on households’ shocks
and coping mechanisms as part of the 2013/14 Household Income and Expenditure Survey
(HIES). This will allow collecting data to understand the shocks households are exposed to
and their risk management strategies.
Given the data constraints that exist for the disaster risk management sector as signaled
above, as well as limitations that exist in the setup of early warning systems, a potential entry
point for agencies working on social protection would be to collaborate with disaster
management and meteorology agencies on building effective databases on vulnerability. This




                                               43
would allow coordination among agencies, a more effective use of resources and
supplementing some of the data needs of the disaster management system.

In addition, some PICs are currently in the process of reviewing and reforming targeting
mechanisms for their SP programs, which will increase their efficiency in reaching the poorest
and most vulnerable. Throughout the review of these mechanisms, it is critical to consider
climate and natural hazard risks as important factors of vulnerability and hardship, especially
as they play a role in creating and perpetuating poverty. Finally, as these mechanisms are
reformed or created, it would be important to assess ways in which they can be rolled out to
address the needs of disaster victims when shocks hit.

                   ii. Interventions centered on livelihoods and assets

When designing SP interventions to address disaster risk and response, it is important to take
into account how livelihoods and assets might be impacted by different risks and what
economic decisions households and communities make to sustain livelihoods in face of these
pressures. This might help identify the right level and mix of instruments to encourage
healthy risk-taking behavior and livelihoods diversification. For instance, in some cases, cash
transfers can help build savings and an asset base, but in others, community assets for
disaster risk reduction (e.g. planting mangroves in coastal zones) might be more relevant.
Likewise, in some cases, where there are no other viable alternatives, resettlement might be
the only option, but this should be carefully considered given the inherent challenges it faces.
It is important to keep in mind that the goals should be:

       •   Strengthening social, physical and natural community assets in a way that
           increases resilience to shocks; and

       •   Supporting viable livelihoods to ensure long-term sustainability (see Box 7).


  Box 7: Working with communities to strengthen livelihoods and community assets
  HARITA/R4 Initiative, an 'insurance-for-work' scheme implemented in Ethiopia, gives poor
  farmers the option to pay for insurance by working on small-scale community-identified
  projects that build climate resilience and agricultural productivity, such as improved



                                              44
  irrigation or soil management. In the event of a seasonal drought, automatic insurance
  payouts to the client farmers are triggered if rainfall drops below a predetermined
  threshold.
  In order for the insurance mechanism to work in poor communities, HARITA/R4 has
  focused on educating poor and largely illiterate farmers about the benefits of insurance,
  as well as on ensuring that the insurance product meets their needs, while building trust
  between the insurance providers and farmers. Communities have actively participated in
  the development of the products, resulting in what many consider to be an attractive
  micro-insurance package (Suarez and Linnerooth-Bayer, 2011). Farmer design teams are
  formed in each village; they work with program implementers to develop product options
  that are identified as meeting their needs. These teams also play a key role in the design,
  monitoring, and evaluation of HARITA/R4's climate resilience-building public works.
  Source: World Bank, 2013a.

In PICs, it seems that formal social protection mechanisms have not traditionally focused on
strengthening community assets or supporting livelihoods for individuals. New data
collection initiatives, such as the one described in the previous sub-section, will most likely
allow PICs governments understand better what shocks households’ livelihoods and
community assets are exposed to and how they manage those shocks. A better
understanding of people’s exposure to shocks and coping mechanisms might provide an
opportunity to increase the role of SP interventions along the promotion function, especially
those that aim to enhance human capital (conditional cash transfer, but also skills and training
programs) as well as community and individual assets (asset transfers, public works).

In addition, traditional social protection mechanisms need to be better understood and
strengthened where possible (Parks et al., 2009). In this direction, another entry point for
social protection agencies might be to promote the use of community-based and civil society
mechanisms for identifying both households and community vulnerability to climate shocks
and natural disasters, and assessing the appropriate interventions based on communities’
inputs.
                  iii. Building Adaptive and Response Capacity at System Level

Traditional, informal safety nets become inadequate when faced with the disproportionate
increases of covariate risk brought about by natural disasters and climate change. As shocks




                                              45
from natural disasters become systemic, they affect those in the community who cannot rely
on their family and neighbors for support. This type of risk requires social protection
programs that are responsive and adaptive in the face of large systemic shocks. Building
adaptive and responsive SP systems will require:

•    Developing appropriate institutional capacity and coordination with DRM and climate
     change agencies to tap into combined expertise and institutional capacity. This is
     challenging because DRM/CCA and SP agencies often work in isolation from each other
     and have different approaches and focus. Social protection agencies often lack skills,
     knowledge and experience on how to integrate DRM/CCA into programs and systems,
     etc. For these reasons, it is important to promote inter-agency collaboration and working
     across disciplines; coordination and collaboration with the international humanitarian
     response system in post-disaster context; and undertaking capacity development
     activities (See Box 8).
    Box 8: Institutional coordination in Mexico’s Temporary Employment Program (PET)
    The PET is an inter-agency program overseen by the Ministry of Social Welfare (SEDESOL)
    and implemented by several sector ministries and agencies, including the Transport and
    Communications Ministry, the Agriculture and Natural Resources Ministry and the
    Ministry of Labor. A PET Technical Commission has the role of strengthening institutional
    coordination in the planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the program,
    as well as coordinating resources to obtain maximum socioeconomic impact.
    Moreover, SEDESOL is co-signatory to a Parliamentary Act with the Ministry of Interior’s
    department in charge of the Government of Mexico's emergency and recovery response
    to natural disasters. The Ministry of the Interior is tasked with the oversight of a
    coordinated institutional response to natural disasters, and the management of a major
    national disaster response contingency fund, the Natural Disasters Fund (FONDEN).
    Emergency response, including some contingency financing, is coordinated by SEGOB with
    line ministries implementing previously defined functions.
    Source: World Bank, 2013a.

     The collaboration between social protection, disaster management and climate change
     actors in PICs currently remains weak, for various reasons. First, social protection
     requires strong policy coordination and coherence across several sectors to avoid
     piecemeal and reactive responses, including strengthening ministries that are
     responsible for a range of benefit programs and services (Parks et al., 2009). Moreover,


                                              46
     as new social protection programs are designed and adapted with disaster response and
     resilience goals in the PICs, it becomes essential that the relevant agencies establish
     partnerships with disaster risk management, meteorology and climate change
     adaptation actors at the national level, especially for coordinating around hazard and risk
     mapping and early warning systems ahead of disasters, as well as for rapid response
     when a disaster hits.

•    Developing scalable and flexible mechanisms that can quickly react to protect
     populations during or after a disaster. These mechanisms include targeting, registry, and
     payment systems that can identify, enroll, and make transfers to additional eligible
     participants, as well as funding arrangements that can mobilize adequate resources on
     short notice (See Box 9).
    Box 9: Scaling-up cash-transfers after disasters
    Following the January 2011 floods in Brazil, the Bolsa Familia was able to extend in kind
    and cash benefits to 162,000 affected families in 279 municipalities within 10 days. The
    rapid response was made possible by using the Bolsa Familia registry (Cadastro Unico) and
    ID cards to identify and verify the affected families and disbursing payments through
    program banking arrangements with the Caixa Economica Federal branches.
    In Pakistan, the Citizen Damage Compensation Program in response to 2011 floods
    benefitted greatly from the National Database Registration Authority (NADRA) which
    maintains a database of civil registration data of over 96 million citizens in Pakistan and
    abroad, and also from a database of the beneficiaries of an ongoing national SSN program.
    The CDCP made use of both of these databases to identify its beneficiary household pool.
    NADRA also helped CDCP refine its eligibility criteria by triangulating household data with
    other disaster specific eligibility criteria to verify beneficiary eligibility and produced lists
    of over 2million beneficiaries. The Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program in the
    Philippines was utilized to top-up payments to beneficiaries in the areas affected by
    typhoon Yolanda in November 2013.
    Source: World Bank, 2013a.

Building responsive social protection systems is challenging in countries such as PICs where
social protection agencies have relatively low capacity and have not yet developed
technology and systems that allow them to scale up. As these features require capacity to
quickly adjust benefits and payment systems based on the post-disaster context and needs,
it is important to plan and enhance capacity and coordination before disaster hits. For this,



                                                 47
contingency budgets and plans, emergency response teams, and partnerships with the
private sector and civil society are vital.

Assessing options for building scalable and responsive programs in some of these countries
might first require the development of country-specific diagnostics and assessments to
identify entry points. In particular these diagnostics could look at existing systems, assess
linkages and capacity and provide suggestions to increase collaboration and reduce
fragmentation of programs and actors.             17   Specific assessments to identify potential
mechanisms for the scale up of social protection systems in the face of disasters and shocks
might also be needed (See Box 10).
Box 10: Mexico Temporary Employment Program
The Temporary Employment Program (PET) in Mexico is a cash-for-work program providing
temporary transfers in exchange for labor in community projects to eligible households in
marginalized municipalities or whose livelihoods have been affected by natural disasters or
other crises. PET aims to reach the poor with labor-intensive public work programs that build
infrastructure as well as environmental or sustainable agricultural improvements.
Incremental funds are usually made available for additional beneficiaries in places that have
been affected by systemic shocks such as natural disasters. This way, the PET provides
resources both for ex-post (disaster recovery/reconstruction) and ex-ante (disaster risk
reduction) community-based public works. In the last decade, the program has invested
approximately US$ 420 million in public works projects. Different ministries share
responsibility for implementation, in accordance with their specializations and comparative
advantages.
Some of the types of interventions supported by the public works have a goal to build climate
resilience, such as building flood channels and reinforced terrace borders to protect against
rain storms/hurricanes; planting of coastal areas to protect from storm surge/high winds;
water collection and preservation in arid/drought-prone areas, etc. Disaster preparedness
and risk reduction information and outreach activities are also carried out.
In 2003, a subcomponent of the PET was established as the Emergency PET (PETi), and
assigned the task of emergency response. In 2006, an annual contingency fund became
mandatory for each agency involved in the implementation of the program (of up to 20
percent) to be used in case of emergency. PETi is activated when a state of emergency is
declared with the goal of supporting households that have been affected by a disaster
through relief and recovery activities, with the goal of providing them with a source of income
while helping them avoid negative coping strategies.


17
  In 2014/15, the Bank’s SP&L team (East Asia and Pacific region) has conducted such stocktaking SP/DRM/CCA
country diagnostics in Vietnam, Philippines, Fiji and Tonga.



                                                    48
Once response is approved, the emergency actions are launched, including a damage
assessment, planning visits to identify potential beneficiaries based on damage, and
beneficiary selection and enrollment. Social Assistance Teams are mobilized to work together
with the municipal authorities in identifying and communicating with the affected
population. The beneficiaries provide labor to community works focused primarily on post-
disaster clean-up activities (e.g., waste collection and disposal, etc.) and supporting
temporary shelters and displacement centers.
The regular PET's beneficiary targeting system uses social marginalization indexes to more
accurately identify the most vulnerable communities. Municipalities with medium, high or
very high marginalization levels or high unemployment are selected for operation of regular
PET. The marginalization index is a composite measure published by CONAPO (National
Population Commission) that allows classifying municipalities based on their lack of access to
services, housing conditions, income, and remoteness or size of the locality. Individuals self-
select themselves into the program. However, preference is given to those individuals who
have registered in the program through the National Employment Service (SNE).
In the case of PETi, when an emergency is declared, geographical targeting is the first level of
beneficiary selection. Participation is mainly limited to households residing in municipalities
inside the area where the emergency has been declared. Since 2009, housing damage
surveys have been the mechanism used to identify eligible households within disaster-
affected communities. The PETi emergency response teams perform a visual assessment of
household and property damage, and interview the heads of the households that have
sustained the damage. In addition to targeting based on housing damage, PET also targets
beneficiaries who cannot return to work due to loss of infrastructure at their workspace, as
well as loss of their lands/crops. It has been observed that in emergency response, a certain
amount of exclusion error is more likely, as some households may have sustained damage
and income losses in municipalities not officially declared under a state of emergency.
Regular PET uses a standardized and centralized database that allows for the efficient sharing
of information among the implementing partners. For registration in regular PET, the SNE
provides information on the availability of employment opportunities in PET projects. Eligible
individuals can request to participate through the local SNE office.
In the case of PETi, during the housing damage survey, the PET team provides eligible
household heads with a receipt or number code which they can use to register at temporary
registration desks and to claim benefits. Field staff enters the beneficiary data into PETi's
own registry after each natural disaster. The registry is used for public works follow-up by
other participating government agencies.
Regular PET payments are meant to function as a supplementary and temporary income
support. Generally, the payments cover 10 working days. The wage is set at 99 percent of the
current minimum wage rate (62 pesos or US$ 4.60 in 2012). This represents 52 percent of the
poverty line in urban areas, 146 percent in rural areas (national poverty line is individual).
Beneficiaries can work up to 132 working days per intervention, with the average intervention
being 76 working days.
When responding to a disaster, PETi adapts some of these mechanisms to ensure that support
reaches beneficiaries in a timely and adequate manner. Thus, the limit to the number of days


                                              49
a beneficiary can work is lifted and this limit removal can last as long as the state of
emergency is in place. Payments are disbursed to beneficiaries within five working days, on
average, after a disaster has been declared in an area.
Source: World Bank, 2013a.


           e. A look at specific social protection instruments and their potential use for
               DRM/CCA in the Pacific Island Countries
Experience shows that when disasters hit, usually, existing mechanisms or programs may be
adapted or expanded to increase speed of response. This approach might be appropriate
when adequate social protection programs exist, as some of the existing mechanisms can be
modified or improved in the short term (Parks et al., 2009). For instance, programs’ targeting
mechanisms could be modified through the adoption of simple targeting methods focusing,
for example, on: (i) geographic characteristics; (ii) housing or livelihoods damage; (iii)
household/individual vulnerability characteristics such as disability and old age.
In the case of PICs, most systems and programs for social protection are weak or not yet
developed. For this reason, in most cases, as new social interventions or schemes are
developed, they should aim to address the risks and priorities imposed by the extreme
vulnerability of the region to disasters and climate change.
The choice of social protection instrument is highly relative and contextual and must be based
on a careful assessment of the objectives that are to be achieved by the intervention, as well
as the capacity and resources for implementation. However, based on successful experiences,
some general lessons can be drawn from the use of different SP instruments for disaster
response and risk reduction.
                   i. In-kind vs. cash benefits
In the past, food aid and other in-kind relief (blankets, emergency kits) have been the main
form of humanitarian assistance after a natural disaster around the world. Although many
agencies that have traditionally used this type of assistance are now more widely promoting
the use of cash-based interventions, food aid continues to be key in many contexts, for
instance, when markets are disrupted, are not developed or when there is no cash-based
local economy, such as is the case in many remote island locations in the Pacific. In some


                                              50
cases, when there is high inflation or prices rise quickly after a disaster, locals may prefer food
or in-kind transfers, as was the case in Ethiopia after the 2011 drought. In-kind transfers are
also sometimes preferred if there are security constraints or specific gender or malnutrition
issues that need to be addressed by providing specific interventions such as school-feeding,
take home rations, etc. In-kind modality is also preferred in the aftermath of natural disasters,
when markets, especially for food/supplies, do not exist.
Cash transfers, on the other hand, are versatile instruments that can be used to meet a range
of needs. For instance, cash transfers have been successfully used to reach populations
affected by natural disasters in several occasions, such as during the floods in Pakistan in 2011
or typhoon in Philippines in 2013. In general, cash transfers serve the purpose of getting help
to the victims of those disasters with the goal of preventing them from falling or sinking
deeper into poverty (See Box 11).
  Box 11: Cash transfers in Pakistan
  In Pakistan, Phase I of the CDCP aimed to provide quick assistance to families who lost their
  homes or faced a serious threat to their wellbeing as a result of the flood. Eligible
  households located in the affected areas were given a one-off cash grant in the amount of
  PRK 20,000 (or approximately US$ 213). This amount was determined based on the funds
  available to the Government of Pakistan to try to cover the urgent needs of a very large
  flood-affected target population.
  The funds helped households to cover needs at a crucial time, with an evaluation of Phase
  I finding that families had used the grants mostly for food, health needs, housing repair,
  and debt re-payment (Hunt et al., 2011). However, the amount was insufficient for the
  flood-affected households to recapitalize their damaged or lost assets, and a decision was
  taken to implement a second phase of the CDCP in order to support the recovery of
  affected households.
  Source: World Bank, 2013a.

Cash transfers are useful to stabilize the situation after a disaster, to protect and replace lost
income and assets, ensure adequate household nutrition and health care, and keep children
in school. Cash programs were also found to be 20-50 percent cheaper to administer than
food or in-kind programs, hinting at their cost-effectiveness (Parks et al., 2009).
Finally, a few programs have also experimented with transferring productive assets to
populations that are at risk of natural and climate shocks, especially in those cases where




                                                51
crops and livestock might be affected (droughts, floods, cyclones). Just as with cash transfers,
this type of productive asset transfer might also help families increase their risk management
strategies ahead of a disaster, by helping them build an asset base (See Box 12).
      Box 12: Asset transfers in Bangladesh CLP Program
      The CLP’s Asset Transfer Project (ATP) is designed to strengthen the income and assets
      base of its core households, with the longer-term aim of lifting their regular income above
      the poverty line. The program is comprised of three key elements: the provision of a
      substantial productive asset; payment of a monthly stipend; and livelihoods-related
      training.
      The program provides access to a cash grant for the purchase of productive assets of their
      choice. The participants are trained in the selection, care and profitable sale of their assets
      and in reinvestment strategies to accumulate further assets (Marks, 2010). The level of the
      asset grant is determined based on the market cost of purchasing and maintaining the
      chosen item at the time of program implementation (Howe 2006) and has averaged
      between Tk 13,000-17,000 during CLP-1 (Conroy et al, 2010).
      Source: World Bank, 2013a.

There is some evidence that in PICs the disaster response more often tends to be in-kind, and
it appears that formal cash transfer mechanisms are very limited and have seldom been used
for responding to natural disasters. 18 There is also little evidence that the existing
mechanisms help households create resilience to natural disasters and climate shocks.
Evidence shows that remittances and other forms of accessing cash are very important in the
wake of disasters. This clearly points out to the need of providing some type of cash
interventions, especially in urban areas. As the demand for more formal, cash-based social
protection increases, PICs governments will need to keep in mind their important role in
building resilience to natural and climate shocks and for response after a disaster. In each
case, however, the risks and benefits of an in-cash versus and in-kind benefit will need to be
assessed and weighed against the particular context.

                       ii. Conditional or Unconditional Cash Transfers
In general, the use of cash transfers after emergencies has been limited to unconditional
transfers, since conditions (schooling, health) might be too onerous for affected families


18
     Communication with an expert.



                                                  52
immediately after a disaster, due to disruptions in services, etc. Even in the case of CCTs, the
emerging practice (e.g., response to typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines) is to exempt
households from conditions for a certain period after the disaster. Conditions (e.g., the
requirement to send children to school, attend health checks or other activities as a condition
to receive the cash transfer) might be more useful in the recovery phase or later, when there
is a long-term objective, such as encouraging human capital development after a disaster. In
these cases, if relevant for the country context and program objectives, conditions might be
useful to encourage families to put children back into schools and access health care. In any
case, conditional cash transfers require significant capacity to implement and monitor
conditionalities as well as having in place adequate service provision for beneficiaries to be
able to meet those conditionalities. 19 Their benefits and disadvantages will have to be
weighed against the program objectives.
It is important to note that besides their role in disaster response, cash transfers can also play
a role in helping vulnerable populations build resilience to natural disasters and climate
shocks. Conditional and unconditional cash transfers can help the poor and vulnerable build
an asset base, invest in human capital and in the long term, diversify livelihoods, access credit,
etc., which make them more resilient to shocks (See Box 13).
      Box 13: Bangladesh Chars Livelihoods Project (CLP)
      Starting from 2007, the CLP, a livelihoods scheme that mostly focused on temporary
      employment and asset transfers to poor beneficiaries affected by seasonal floods,
      introduced a cash grant varying from Tk 800 to Tk 2,000 (US $10-25) to those households
      unable to participate in the employment program (e.g., those headed by disabled people
      or women without the physical strength to provide labor). A CLP study found that, during
      the prolonged 2007 lean season, the recipient households took 40 percent less cash loans
      and significantly less food loans and credit than control households (Conroy et al, 2010).
      The participation of disabled-, older- and female-headed households grew progressively
      over CLP intakes (Hodson, 2009), possibly indicating the success of this and other CLP social
      equality measures.
      Source: World Bank, 2013a.




19
     For instance, sending children to school requires that there is actually a school nearby, etc.



                                                          53
Although the experience with either conditional or unconditional cash transfers is limited in
PICs, demand for these types of interventions might increase together with increased
monetization. There is evidence that cash interventions are needed after natural disasters,
although this is often currently provided through informal, private remittances.
                        iii. Public Works Programs
Public works programs20 (cash or in-kind transfers in exchange for labor on community and
public assets) have been used with the goal of providing relief, recovery and reconstruction
after disasters. In addition to reaching individual households in need, public works programs
(PWPs) also bring additional tangible and immediate benefit to the community and society
by helping build or rehabilitate infrastructure, assets, or natural resources that are much
needed. In the aftermath of disasters, public works programs have been used to build or
restore communal assets, as well as for rubble clearance, marketplace rehabilitation, roads,
and slope stabilisation.
Moreover, PWPs have a role to play in preparing and building resilience towards disasters. By
implementing disaster- and climate- sensitive PWPs before disaster hits, it is possible to
increase the availability of coping strategies and reduce the risk both at the household and
the community level; while the cash or in-kind transfer helps individuals increase or maintain
consumption, the assets created by the intervention may benefit the entire community,
especially by putting in place assets and measures that help reduce risk from disasters.
Although the main objective of PWPs is usually to transfer cash or assets to the affected and
vulnerable population, it is important that the resources allocated to the infrastructure
portion of the works are used in the most productive way. For that reason, a recent trend in
public works programs has been to focus the public work activities on small environmental
conservation and rehabilitation works, soil and water management, etc. (for instance,
building small irrigation works, planting mangroves for coastal protection). These activities
are usually small, which allows keeping the transfer to poor households sizable, while the




20
     Also called, workfare, temporary employment programs, food for assets, cash for assets, cash for work.



                                                        54
public works activities help build resilience of the community to environmental and climate
hazards through the assets created (See Box 14).
  Box 14: Ethiopia Productive Safety Nets Program
  The Productive Safety Nets Program in Ethiopia (PSNP) helps address the needs of
  chronically food insecure households in identified famine-prone areas of rural Ethiopia
  through:
  • The predictable provision of adequate food and cash transfers to targeted beneficiary
  households, thus allowing effective consumption smoothing and avoiding asset depletion.
  • The creation of productive and sustainable community assets that contribute to the
  rehabilitation of severely degraded areas, build resilience to climate-related impacts, and
  increase household productivity. The program also contributes to improved access to
  social services, such as education and health.
  • The use of risk financing mechanisms, which allow for the program to be scaled up in
  times of transitory crisis.
  The program finances labor-intensive public works, such as building terraced fields on hill
  slopes to reduce soil erosion and increase water retention, and social services
  infrastructure. Cash is paid for up to five days of work a month per household member,
  for six months a year, until the recipient households graduate from the program by
  accumulating an asset and income level that enables them to meet 12 months of food
  needs and to withstand modest shocks. In addition, about 20percent of the participating
  households with members unable to work receive unconditional cash or food transfers
  (World Bank/United Nations, 2010).
  Some 60 per cent of the PSNP's public works sub-projects are in soil and water
  conservation, strengthening both livelihoods and resistance to the impacts of variable
  rainfall. A 2008 independent Public Works Impact Assessment (M.A Consulting Group,
  2009) found that:
  • Soil and water conservation projects led to significant and visible increases in wood
  and herbaceous vegetation cover and a broader diversity of plant species, in turn
  contributing to an increased supply of livestock feed, bee forage, and medicinal plants.
  • Small-scale irrigation from water sources developed by the PSNP helped 4–12 percent
  of households to expand livestock holdings and to increase incomes by 4–25 percent, with
  even very small irrigated plots (190 m2) estimated to be capable of generating gross
  margins of between ETB 4,200 to 6,000 per year (US$413-91) if double cropped.
  • The construction of water conservation structures has reduced surface runoff,
  increased infiltration, and raised groundwater levels, thereby enhancing spring yields and
  increasing stream base-flows with the result that, in several communities, springs now last
  longer into the dry season. The domestic water supplies have doubled in the sampled
  communities.
  The PSNP has dedicated specific resources to ensuring the quality and sustainability of the
  public works. Woreda, zonal, or regional experts carry out technical supervision, with an
  overall project supervisor making at least weekly visits to all work sites. A program of skills



                                              55
     upgrading and training across different technical agencies and levels is provided through
     the capacity building component of the program. Regional Public Works Focal Units
     (RPWFU) have been also established in all regions to coordinate the implementation of
     activities at the regional level and to provide technical support to the woredas (World
     Bank, 2010).
     Source: World Bank, 2013a.
Looking at the formal social protection mechanisms, it is clear that PWPs have not been used
in this fashion in PICs. However, given these countries contexts, there is tremendous potential
to use PWP as a mechanism to provide cash transfers and employment to poor and
vulnerable populations, while at the same time helping build or rehabilitate infrastructure,
assets and resources that help communities increase their resilience. 21 Parks et al. (2009)
have noted that focusing such programs on young people in the Pacific would be particularly
valuable given the large numbers of unemployed youth in many Pacific Islands. Gender
requirements must be included.
Although PWPs usually require a relatively good level of capacity for implementation, there
are several experiences (especially in sub-Saharan Africa) where they have been
implemented through a community-based model. High levels of community engagement
help transfer some of the needs for capacity to the local communities. Given the strong
tradition of community participation in PICs, PWPs could be implemented through a
community-driven delivery mechanism (See Box 15).
     Box 15: Implementing Public Works Programs through community-based approaches
     Community participation has many advantages for project implementation as well as for
     communities themselves:
     • Since communities have better access to information at the local level, they are better
     able to select, design, implement, and monitor projects by being close to where the
     projects are happening.
     • Community participation might also reduce administrative and coordination costs.
     • It allows communities to take ownership of the program.
     • It may promote the execution of activities that genuinely respond to the needs of the
     poor.


21
  The disaster preparedness and response can be potentially incorporated into some of the existing PWPs in
the Pacific, including Urban Youth Employment Project (UYEP) in PNG, and Rapid Employment Project (REP) in
Solomon Islands.



                                                   56
  • It may contribute to better-quality works and may lead to better maintenance of the
  assets created.
  • It may increase the program’s public accountability and transparency.
  There are several ways in which communities can be involved in program implementation.
  They can determine eligibility criteria for beneficiary selection and/or identify
  beneficiaries, select projects, monitor activities, or even help fund projects. The success of
  their involvement depends on how their participation is built into program design. The
  degree of involvement and scope of activities in which communities are involved vary
  greatly across countries.
  In Yemen’s Public Works Program, the active participation of poor communities became
  the cornerstone of the success in delivered services. Their involvement encompassed
  identifying, prioritizing, and selecting projects according to their needs; providing
  contributions (in cash or in kind) as a prerequisite to implementation; and implementation,
  operation, and maintenance of projects. This process increased community awareness of
  the program’s development aspects and community understanding of implementation
  issues. Moreover, it promoted a strong sense of ownership—which was evidenced by
  community contributions, which reached 11 percent of total project cost— and improved
  community members’ abilities to assume responsibility of completed projects, thus
  guaranteeing sustainability.
  In Malawi, project selection within the Social Action Fund Program (MASAF) is, in principle,
  made at the district level in consultation with traditional leaders using participatory rural
  appraisal methodologies. Practical application has varied, however, and the evidence
  shows that those communities that participated in project selection had fewer
  implementation problems compared with the other communities, which is directly
  attributable to the procedure used for project selection.
  In Ethiopia, PSNP project selection is handled at the community level using a planning
  process based on the concept of community-based participatory watershed development
  (CBPWD). This approach was developed by the government of Ethiopia in collaboration
  with the World Food Program and other agencies. It is recognized both nationally and
  internationally as an appropriate method and serves as the basis for developing a pipeline
  of projects, many of which have a soil and water conservation focus. A guideline authored
  by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development provides local government staff and
  rural communities with a workable and adaptable planning tool.
  Source: Adapted from Subbarao et al., 2012.

                  iv. Index-based insurance
Weather-index insurance is designed to trigger compensation against a weather-related
shock (flood, drought, etc.) based on a parameter previously defined, i.e. payment is not
triggered by actual loss, but on the basis of an index, such as rainfall measured at a local
weather station (WFP, 2010). Although so far most of these initiatives have been small scale,



                                              57
some initial results suggest that this type of interventions might help vulnerable farmers build
resilience by protecting against shocks, increasing productivity and diversifying livelihoods.
For instance, Index insurance could help manage catastrophic and highly covariate risks such
as hurricanes, floods and severe (possibly back-to-back) droughts (protection role). In
addition, micro-level insurance for poor farmers exposed to climate risk has the potential to
allow households to increase productivity by encouraging the use of higher-yielding crops, as
well as asset or livelihood diversification, and to access credit by using the insurance as
collateral (promotion role).
The R4 Rural Resilience/HARITA project in Ethiopia provides poor farmers the option to pay
for insurance by working on public works projects (See Boxes 2 and 4 and Table 2). The
positive response by cash-poor PSNP beneficiaries to the opportunity to purchase insurance
with their labor indicates that the demand exists for micro-level disaster insurance by the
chronically poor, provided it is designed to meet their self-assessed needs and circumstances.
SP programs can provide an effective, and likely cost-efficient, vehicle to make disaster
insurance accessible to the chronically poor. The security provided by the insurance,
combined with regular cash transfers and/or other forms of asset protection against climate-
related impacts, may further create an enabling environment for prudent risk-taking by poor
households to increase and diversify their asset/income base (World Bank, 2013a).
Nevertheless, feasibility of index insurance needs to be carefully considered. Similarly,
different levels of insurance might work better in different contexts (macro/meso level vs.
micro level). According to a comprehensive study of weather-index insurance around the
world (IFAD/WFP, 2010) WII is expensive to launch as it requires significant resources and
technical expertise to conduct the initial research and development, and, in some cases,
access data, and build the local market capacity.
In PICs, insurance could play an important protection and promotion role as part of a
comprehensive package of integrated social protection tools. It is important, however, that
the proposition for these countries take into account what might be significant data
constraints as well as potentially shallow markets. In this cases, a higher level (national or
meso level) insurance mechanism can serve as a contingency financing mechanism for social


                                              58
protection programs. In all cases, it is important to use, when possible, existing, efficient
delivery channels, such as successful safety nets projects, and to engage the private sector
from the beginning.




                                             59
   III. Conclusions and Recommendations

As the risks from natural disasters and climate change continue to grow, it is essential to find
solutions that can help the poor and vulnerable cope with the impacts and build long term
resilience. Social protection, with its goals to prevent the poor from falling deeper into
poverty, protect them against shocks and promote them out of extreme poverty, represents
a potentially useful mechanism for disaster risk management and climate change adaptation.
As demonstrated by the examples of Bangladesh, Brazil, Ethiopia, Malawi, Mexico, and
Pakistan that have been presented throughout this paper, social protection mechanisms
might help deal with disaster risk in very diverse contexts and circumstances. Pacific island
countries (PICs) might be able to extrapolate some of the lessons from these examples.

Although PICs’ social, economic and cultural context is unique and varies substantially from
country to country, they all face similar challenges as they become more integrated in the
global economy, as well as more exposed to forces that modify their traditional societies.
PICs’ high exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards and climate change compound these
problems. These vulnerabilities not only point out to the need for more comprehensive
formal social protection systems, but also make it essential that, as SP systems start to
emerge and evolve, they include disaster and climate risk considerations, in order to provide
prevention, protection and promotion functions around these risks.

This paper has intended to provide a framework for exploring the potential for social
protection for disaster risk management and climate change adaptation in the region. Given
the highly contextual nature of the region, the particularities arising from its location,
topography and cultural forces, as well as the differences from country to country, the new
and reformed social protection systems might look somewhat different from other regions in
the world. In any case, some lessons, principles and pointers presented throughout this paper
should be useful, while keeping in mind that they need to be extrapolated to the region with
due caution.




                                              60
A climate and disaster responsive social protection system in PICs would need to take into
account the following characteristics:

   •   Climate- and Disaster-aware Planning, which implies building the necessary
       contingency, information and targeting mechanisms that allow anticipating, coping
       with and reducing risk from natural disasters at a system level.
   •   Interventions Centered on Livelihoods and Assets, with the goal of strengthening
       social, physical and natural household and community assets in a way that increases
       resilience to shocks; and supporting viable livelihoods for households.
   •   Building Adaptive and Response Capacity at System Level to deal with large systemic
       shocks, including appropriate institutional capacity and coordination with DRM and
       climate change agencies and, scalable and flexible mechanisms that can quickly react
       to protect populations during or after a disaster.

As new social interventions or schemes are developed or expanded in PICs, they should aim
to address the risks and priorities imposed by the extreme vulnerability of the region to
disasters and climate change. Nevertheless, the choice of social protection instrument is
always highly contextual and should be based on a careful assessment of the objectives that
are to be achieved by the intervention, as well as the capacity and resources for
implementation. Based on successful experiences, some key considerations that can be
drawn regarding the use of different SP instruments for disaster response and risk reduction
include:
   •   Providing in-kind or cash benefits, as appropriate to the context, keeping in mind that
       although cash provides versatility, in-kind transfers are needed when markets are not
       developed or destroyed.
   •   Choosing between conditional or unconditional cash transfer based on the program’s
       objective but keeping in mind that conditions might be onerous after a systemic
       shock.
   •   Considering public works programs in cases where there is also an objective of
       building or reconstructing assets, while ensuring that public works activities



                                             61
       contribute to risk reduction and resilience goals. The public works could serve as a
       good instrument to enhance the housing and urban development agenda.
   •   Where markets exist, consider index-based insurance combined with regular social
       protection mechanisms to create an enabling environment for prudent risk-taking by
       poor households to increase and diversify their asset/income base.

Based on these principles, an overall assessment of the common challenges for disaster risk
management and social protection in the region points out to several commonalities or
synergies that could be explored:

   •   National level policy and planning coordination: In terms of the disaster risk
       management sector, there is a need to mainstream disaster risk reduction and climate
       change into national budgets and into sector policies, plans and programs.
   •   Data, information and identification of vulnerabilities: There is a need across the
       region to promote better data collection and its use for guiding disaster and climate
       risk reduction interventions, but also social protection programs targeting.
   •   Community involvement: Both in the social protection sector and the disaster risk
       management, there is a need to involve communities in disaster risk reduction and to
       understand traditional forms of coping (traditional social protection) to design
       adequate complementary interventions.

The potential entry points for social protection policy makers and practitioners in the region
to start incorporating features and principles for disaster response and climate resilience are
presented below.

Recommendations for improving Climate- and Disaster-aware Planning:

   •   Establishing partnerships for data and information gathering with relevant agencies.
       Social protection agencies should establish stronger partnerships with disaster risk
       management, meteorology and climate change adaptation actors at the national
       level, especially for coordinating around hazard and risk mapping and early warning
       systems ahead of disasters, as well as for rapid response when a disaster hits.



                                              62
   •   Promoting better data collection and use for not only guiding disaster and climate risk
       reduction interventions, but also targeting social protection programs.
   •   Assessing targeting mechanisms to identify potential features that can allow
       identifying and reaching those with highest climate and natural hazard risk or those
       affected by a disaster.
   •   Promoting better integration of the SP/DRM/CCA with the urban development
       agenda, with a focus on exploring what can work in urban areas to support and
       enhance social protection links to the CCA and DRM agendas;
   •   Developing country-specific diagnostics and assessments to identify entry points
       where capacity and systems can be enhanced, and identifying potential mechanisms
       for the scale-up of social protection systems in the face of disasters and shocks.

Recommendations for enhancing Interventions Centered on Livelihoods and Assets:
   •   Identifying relevant actors at the local level, while considering traditional coping
       practices and promoting the use of culturally-appropriate community-based and civil
       society mechanisms to identify households’ and community vulnerability to climate
       shocks and natural disasters and assess the appropriate interventions based on
       communities’ inputs.
   •   Assessing the relevance of cash-based interventions for social protection and disaster
       response based on each country’s context and policy objectives.
   •   Exploring and developing linkages between conditional cash transfers (CCTs) and
       disaster response; for example, CCTs focusing on nutrition issues could be used as an
       entry point to build interventions that require household registries with coverage of
       the population that could represent an adequate base for comprehensive disaster
       response.
   •   Assessing the potential for public works programs at the country level, both as a
       mechanism to provide income and employment to vulnerable populations, and a
       mechanism to build physical assets for climate and disaster risk reduction at the
       community level.



                                              63
Recommendations for building Adaptive and Response Capacity at System Level:
   •   Ensuring coordination between social protection, disaster risk management and
       environment agencies, including participation in bodies for disaster response
       coordination as well as mainstreaming of disaster and climate risk relevant principles
       and features in social protection policies, plans and programs.
   •   Finding synergies and collaboration between the disaster risk management, climate
       change adaptation and social protection sectors to ensure that resources, knowledge
       and skills are used as efficiently as possible.


The specific actions in each country context should be based on country-specific diagnostics
(i.e., detailed country case studies similar to those undertaken recently in Fiji and Tonga) and
emerge, ideally, from a national and local level dialogue on the role of these mechanisms.
Context-specific social protection instruments/interventions might have an important role
for disaster response and long-term resilience, and should continue to be explored, both in
terms of design and implementation arrangements, in more depth.




                                               64
   IV. References
Abbott, D & Pollard, S, 2004. Hardship and Poverty in the Pacific, Strengthening Poverty
Analysis and Strategies in the Pacific. Asian Development Bank: Pacific Department.
Asian Development Bank (ADB), 2010a. Enhancing Social Protection in Asia and the Pacific:
The Proceedings of the Regional Workshop. Philippines: Asian Development Bank
Asian Development Bank (ADB), 2010b. Weaving Social Safety Nets. Philippines: Asian
Development Bank.
AusAID, 2010. Social Protection in the Pacific - A Review of its Adequacy and Role in Addressing
Poverty. Canberra: AusAID
AusAID, 2012a. Informal Social Protection in Pacific Island Countries-Strengths and Weakness.
Canberra: AusAID
AusAID, 2012b. Poverty, Vulnerability and Social Protection in the Pacific: The Role of Social
Transfers. Canberra: AusAID
Bündnis, Entwicklung, Hilft, 2012. World Risk Report 2012. Berlin.
Campbell, J. R., 2006. Traditional Disaster Reduction in Pacific Island Communities. New
Zealand: GNS Science Report.
Cuaresma, J.C., 2009. Natural Disasters and Human Capital Accumulation. Washington, DC:
World Bank
Chibber, A (2009): The Global Economic Crisis and Pacific Island Countries: The Human and
Social Dimensions, Lowy Institute of International Policy.
Gero, A., Fletcher, S., Rumsey, M., Thiessen, J., Kuruppu, N., Buchan, J., Daly J., Willetts, J.,
2013. Disaster Response and Climate Change in the Pacific, National Climate Change
Adaptation Research Facility. Gold Coast: NCCARF
Gero, A., Meheux, K., & Dominey-Howes, D., 2011. Integrating Community Based Disaster
Risk Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation: Examples from the Pacific. Natural Hazards
and Earth System Sciences.
Government of Samoa, 2013. Samoa Post Disaster Needs Assessment Cyclone Evan 2012.
Samoa: Government of Samoa.
Government of Fiji, 2013. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment, Tropical Cyclone Evan, 17th
December 2012. March, 2013.
Griffiths, Kristel - OCHA Pacific, 2013. Pacific Humanitarian Team Performance Review 2008-
2012. Fiji: OCHA



                                               65
Haberkorn, Gerald, 2008. “Pacific Islands’ Population and Development: Facts, Fictions and
Follies” in New Zealand Population Review, 33/34: 95-127. Auckland: Population Association
of New Zealand
Heyzer, Noeleen, n.d. A Social Protection Agenda for Asia Pacific. United Nations ESCAP
Retrieved from http://www.unescap.org/speeches/social-protection-agenda-asia-pacific.
International Fund for Agricultural Development and World Food Programme, 2010. Potential
for scale and sustainability in weather index insurance for agriculture and rural livelihoods, by
P. Hazell, J. Anderson, N. Balzer, A. Hastrup Clemmensen, U. Hess and F. Rispoli. Rome
ILO, 2014. Rural Community Rehabilitation through Emergency Public Works in Response to
the Deadly Flash-Flood Damage in the Solomon Islands. Report of the pilot programme April
2014. Retrieved from: http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/---
ilo-suva/documents/publication/wcms_242095.pdf
IPCC, 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change
Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D.
Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (Eds)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambrisge, UK, and New York, Ny, USA.
IRIN, 2005. Disaster Reduction and the human cost of disaster. IRIN Web Special. Retrieved
from http://www.irinnews.org/pdf/in-depth/disaster-reduction-irin-in-depth.pdf
Keener, V. W., Marra, J.J., Finucane, M.L., Spooner, D., & Smith, M.H.(Eds.), 2012. Climate
change and Pacific Islands: Indicators and Impacts. Report for the 2012 Pacific Islands
Regional Climate Assessment. Washington, DC: Island Press.
Marzo, F. & Mori, H., 2012. Crisis Response in Social Protection. Washington, DC: World Bank
McCord, Anna, 2013. Shockwatch & Social Protection: Shock Response Readiness Appraisal
Toolkit. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Mohanty, Manoranjan, 2011. Informal Social Protection and Social Development in Pacific
Island Countries: Role of NGOs and Civil Society. Asia Pacific Development Journal.
Parks, W. with Abbott, D. and Wilkinson, A., 2009. Protecting Pacific Island children and
women during economic and food crises: A working document for advocacy, debate and
guidance. Suva: UNICEF Pacific,UNDP Pacific Centre, UNESCAP Pacific Operations Centre.
Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2011. 2011 Pacific Regional MDGs Tracking Report.
Prepared by Pacific Island Forum Secretariat.




                                               66
Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative (PCRAFI), n.d. Homepage.
Retrieved from: http://pcrafi.sopac.org.
Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Program, n.d., “The natural resources of the
Pacific region” Accessed at: http://archive.iwlearn.net/www.sprep.org/topic/NatRes.htm
Shepherd, A., Mitchell, T., Lewis, K., Lenhardt, A., Jones, L., Scott, L., Muir-Wood, R., 2013.
The geography of poverty, disasters and climate extremes in 2030. London: ODI.
SOPAC, 2009. Relationship between Natural Disasters and Poverty: A Fiji Case Study. SOPAC
Miscellaneous Report 678.
Subbarao, K., del Ninno, C., Adrews, C. and Rodriguez-Alas, C. 2012. Public Works as Safety
Nets: Design, Evidence and Implementation. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Wilkinson, Alastair, 2011. Urban Challenges in the Pacific. United Nations ESCAP.
World Bank, 2006a. Human Development in the Pacific Islands: Opportunities to Improve
Social Protection Sector Performance Summary Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2006b. Not If but When: Adapting to Natural Hazards in the Pacific Islands
Region- A Policy Note. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2007. A Technical Working Paper- Philippines: Agriculture Public Expenditure
Review. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2009a. Preparedness, Planning, and Prevention Assessment of National and
Regional Efforts to Reduce Natural Disaster and Climate Change Risks in the Pacific.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2009b. Reducing the Risk of Disasters and Climate Variability in the Pacific
Islands. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank and United Nations, 2010. Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters, The Economics
of Effective Prevention. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2011a. Fiji: Assessment of the Social Protection System in Fiji and
Recommendations for Policy Changes. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2011b. Republic of Fiji Poverty Trends, Profile and Small Area Estimation (Poverty
Maps) in Republic of Fiji (2003-2009). Washington, DC: World Bank
World Bank, 2011c. Social Resilience & Climate Change Operational Toolkit. Washington, DC:
World Bank.




                                              67
World Bank, 2012a. Acting Today for Tomorrow: A Policy and Practice Note for Climate-And
Disaster-Resilient Development in the Pacific Islands Region, with Supporting Research,
Analysis, and Case Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2012b. The Sendai Report: Managing Disaster Risks for a Resilient Future.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2012c. Resilience, Equity, and Opportunity: World Bank Social Protection and
Labor Strategy 2012-2022. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2013a. Building Resilience to Disaster and Climate Change through Social
Protection. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2013b. World Development Report 2014: Risk and Opportunity—Managing Risk
for Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, 2014. Hardship and Vulnerability in the Pacific Island Countries. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
World Bank, 2014a. Project Appraisal Document: Community Resilience to Climate and
Disaster Risk in Solomon Islands Projects. February 3, 2014. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank, ADB, SOPAC/SPC, 2011. Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing
Initiative-Country Risk Profile: Solomon Islands. SOPAC PCRAFI.
World Bank, n.d. World Bank Pacific Islands                   Website.     Retrieved    from
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/pacificislands.
World Food Program, 2010. Revolution: From Food Aid to Food Assistance. Rome: World Food
Program.




                                             68
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2013-2015

No.    Title

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014
1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012

1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412   Mali Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411   Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
       by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410   Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
       by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409   Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
       by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408   Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
       Protection Expenditures
       by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407   Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
       by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011

1406   Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
       by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013
1405        Botswana Social Protection
            by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
            and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013

1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014

1308        Youth Employment: A Human Development Agenda for the Next Decade
            by David Robalino, David Margolis, Friederike Rother, David Newhouse and Mattias Lundberg, June
            2013

1307        Eligibility Thresholds for Minimum Living Guarantee Programs: International Practices and
            Implications for China
            by Nithin Umapathi, Dewen Wang and Philip O’Keefe, November 2013

1306        Tailoring Social Protection to Small Island Developing States: Lessons Learned from the Caribbean
            by Asha Williams, Timothy Cheston, Aline Coudouela and Ludovic Subran, August 2013

1305        Improving Payment Mechanisms in Cash-Based Safety Net Programs
            by Carlo del Ninno, Kalanidhi Subbarao, Annika Kjellgren and Rodrigo Quintana, August 2013

1304        The Nuts and Bolts of Designing and Implementing Training Programs in Developing Countries
            by Maddalena Honorati and Thomas P. McArdle, June 2013

1303        Designing and Implementing Unemployment Benefit Systems in Middle and Low Income Countries:
            Key Choices between Insurance and Savings Accounts
            by David A. Robalino and Michael Weber, May 2013

1302        Entrepreneurship Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta Regression Analysis
            by Yoonyoung Cho and Maddalena Honorati, April 2013

1301        Skilled Labor Flows: Lessons from the European Union
            by Martin Kahanec, February 2013


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

The Pacific island countries (PICs) are some of the most exposed to frequent natural disasters
and climate shocks, and their vulnerability is increasing due to mounting effects of climate
change as well as demographic and economic forces. Natural disasters hit the poorest hardest
and have long-term consequences for human development. Social protection programs and
systems have an important role in helping poor and vulnerable populations cope with the
impacts of shocks as well as build long-term resilience. This paper discusses the potential role
of social protection for disaster and climate risk reduction and management in PICs. It presents
evidence and lessons from other regions, providing examples of tools and entry points for the
development of climate- and disaster-responsive social protection interventions and context-
specific recommendations for PICs.




About this series...

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.



                                   © 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
