                                                              100030
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Inclusive Global Value Chains
                               Policy options in trade and complementary
                               areas for GVC Integration by small
                               and medium enterprises and low-income
                               developing countries
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               OECD and World Bank Group

                               Report prepared for submission to
                               G20 Trade Ministers Meeting
                               Istanbul, Turkey, 6 October 2015
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
This joint report of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the World
Bank Group has been prepared at the request of Turkey’s Presidency of the Group of 20.

The opinions expressed and the arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official
views of OECD countries. Nor do they represent the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

This report and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over
any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any
territory, city or area.

© 2015
                                                             HIGHLIGHTS
   This report responds to a request form Turkey as the G20 Presidency during 2015. It is part of larger
   multi-year work programs at both the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
   (OECD) and the World Bank Group (WBG), and builds on earlier reports by the two organizations and
   other international institutions to successive G20 Presidencies.
   The focus of the report is on making GVCs more “inclusive” by overcoming participation constraints
   for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and facilitating access for Low Income Developing
   Countries (LIDCs).
   Two key facts emerge from this report: participation in GVCs is heterogeneous and uneven, across
   and within countries; and, available data and survey-based evidence suggest that SME participation
   in GVCs is mostly taking place through indirect contribution to exports, rather than through
   exporting directly.
        •     Heterogeneity in GVC participation. LIDCs are under-represented in GVCs, even though their
              integration has greatly expanded in the course of the past two decades: from 6% to about
              11% of the world total. SMEs in LIDCs predominantly operate in the informal economy and
              their participation in GVCs is concentrated in the agricultural sector and labor-intensive, very
              low value added manufacturing and services activities, where entry costs are lower and not
              capital intensive. SMEs in middle and higher income countries are operating in both the low-
              value added end of the spectrum and in high skilled and specialized niche activities. The
              increasing importance of knowledge based capital within value chains, coupled with
              increased international fragmentation of these chains, has opened up new channels to
              integration through specialization in specific tasks.
        •     Participation through indirect contribution to exports. Most SMEs in developed economies
              are very well plugged into GVCs as domestic suppliers of exporters. SMEs are vastly under-
              represented in GVCs when looking at direct exports only.
   The report makes the case that policy action, at the national and multilateral level and through G20
   leadership, can make a difference in achieving more inclusive GVCs through: a holistic approach to
   reform spanning trade, investment and domestic policies both in G20 nations and in trade partner
   countries; and, investment in expanding the statistical basis and analysis of GVCs and in sharing
   knowledge on best practices on enabling policies and programs. Three broad areas of
   recommendation are elaborated for G20 consideration:
        •    Establish a trade and investment action plan for inclusiveness defining clear and achievable
             objectives on trade and investment policy and identifying the necessary complementary
             domestic policy actions.
        •    Complement trade, investment and complementary domestic policy actions by providing the
             needed political leadership and support to enhanced collaboration across the public and
             private sector and establishment of global platforms for sharing best practices.
        •    Provide political support for the establishment of a realistic multi-year plan to expand and
             upgrade the statistical foundation necessary to increase the capacity of all countries to
             identify and implement policies that can contribute to stronger, more inclusive and
             sustainable growth and development, globally.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS – 5




                                                                Table of contents



Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................... 7

1. Setting the scene .................................................................................................................................. 14
   The opportunities of GVCs for LIDCs .................................................................................................... 17
   Importance of SMEs for economic progress and their participation in GVCs ...................................... 20

2. Stylized facts of SMEs in GVCs .............................................................................................................. 24
   Informality of the economy: A binding constraint................................................................................ 25
   Participation in GVCs: Direct insertion ................................................................................................. 25
   Suppliers of large local and multinational firms: Indirect insertion ..................................................... 33

3. Determinants of and challenges to participation by SMEs and LIDCs in GVCs .................................... 40
   Preview of key take-aways ................................................................................................................... 40
   Internal determinants of SME participation and upgrading in GVCs ................................................... 47
   External determinants of SME participation in GVCs ........................................................................... 53

4. Policies to Promote SME and LIDC Participation in GVCs .................................................................... 86
   Preview of key take-aways ................................................................................................................... 86
   Furthering international trade openness ............................................................................................. 88
   Ensuring that openness benefits reach beyond large firms and the G-20 to SMEs and LIDCs............. 94
   Investment in expanding the statistical basis and technical analysis of participation in GVCs ............ 98

References .............................................................................................................................................. 100




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY – 7




                                                  Executive Summary

        At the Brisbane Summit in November 2014, the Group of Twenty (G-20) Leaders concluded that
  trade and competition are powerful drivers of growth, increased living standards and job creation.
  They also acknowledged that one important way for countries to connect to the global economy and
  develop is through global value chains (GVCs); a recognition that GVCs provide opportunities to
  empower the local economy with sophisticated imported technology, know how, and a richer skill-set.
  G20 leaders at the Brisbane Summit stated that ”we need policies that take full advantage of global
  value chains and encourage greater participation and value addition by developing countries.”
         This report is part of larger multi-year work programs by both the Organization for Economic
  Cooperation and Development (OECD) and of the World Bank Group (WBG) to support countries’
  policies on GVC integration with analysis and capacity building for leveraging GVCs for growth and
  development. It also builds on previous events and assessments promoted by the G20, including the
  G20 OECD-Turkish Presidency Stocktaking Seminar on GVCs (Paris, June 2 2015), and reports by the
  two organizations and other international institutions to successive G20 Presidencies on the
  implications of new measures of trade in value-added terms and the emergence of GVCs for trade,
  investment and related policies.
          The focus of the report is on making GVCs more “inclusive”. Inclusiveness is defined in our
  report as overcoming participation constraints for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and
  facilitating access for Low Income Developing Countries (LIDCs). Emphasis is placed on the constraints
  to SMEs. The underlying assumption is that most firms in LIDCs are SMEs. And even larger firms in
  LIDCs are likely to face similar challenges to SMEs, including a less supportive domestic operating
  environment and weaker institutions that lead to higher fixed costs and challenges to compete on the
  international markets. In discussing the challenges for SMEs, however, this report recognizes that
  important differences exist across world regions.
        Two key facts emerge from this report. First, participation in GVCs is heterogeneous and
  uneven, across and within countries. Second, data available for OECD countries and survey-based
  evidence for LIDCs suggest that SMEs participation in GVCs is mostly taking place through indirect
  contribution to exports (backward linkages).
         Heterogeneity in GVC participation. The report finds that LIDCs are under-represented in GVCs,
          even though their integration has greatly expanded in the course of the past two decades: from
          USD 259 billion in 1995 (or 6% of the world total of USD 4.6 trillion), to about USD 1.5 trillion in
          2011 (or 11% of the world total of USD 14 trillion), according to OECD-WTO Trade in Value
          Added (TiVA) database. While LIDCs’ SMEs predominantly operate in the informal economy,
          their participation in GVCs is challenging, and is concentrated in the agricultural sector and
          labor- intensive, very low value added manufacturing and services activities, where entry costs
          are lower and not intensive in tangible capital. On the other hand, SMEs from middle and
          higher income countries are operating in both the low-value added end of the spectrum, and
          also in high skilled and specialized niche activities. The increasing importance of knowledge
          based capital within product value chains, coupled with increased international fragmentation
          of these chains has opened up new channels to integration through specialization in specific
          tasks.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
8 – EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

       Participation through indirect contribution to exports. The report finds that most SMEs are
        plugged into GVCs as domestic suppliers of exporters. SMEs are vastly under-represented in
        GVCs when looking at direct exports only. However, in GVCs, the indirect contribution to
        exports also matters. Survey analysis and case study evidence from the World Bank, and new
        work at the OECD that links available national data on SMEs with the TiVA database show that
        the indirect contribution of SMEs is sizable in all OECD countries and significantly greater than
        what the value of direct exports would suggest.
       The report makes the case that policy action, at the national and multilateral level and through
 G20 leadership can make a difference in achieving more inclusive GVCs. Two coherent sets of action
 are proposed: a holistic approach to reform spanning trade, investment and domestic policies both in
 G20 nations and in trade partner countries; and investment in expanding statistical basis and technical
 analysis of participation in GVCs, and in sharing knowledge on best practices on rules, policies and
 programs.
Improving the policy environment for more inclusive GVCs
        G20 countries are the key trading partners for LIDCs, with around 70% of imports of LIDCs
 originating from G20 countries and close to 80% of LIDCs exports directed to the G20. Thus, policy
 reforms that would lower trade costs in G20 economies and LIDCs can have important implications for
 GVC participation. GVC trade is particularly affected by trade barriers: when goods and services cross
 borders multiple times, as both imports and exports, trade costs are compounded. This is especially
 problematic for firms in LICDs and for SMEs, which are less able to absorb these costs. Moreover,
 foreign direct investment (FDI) is the most common vehicle for countries to participate in global value
 chains. The US government, for example, estimates that intra-firm transactions constitute close to
 50% of US imports and around 30% of US exports. According to UNCTAD, an estimated 80% of global
 trade now occurs within international production networks of multinational companies. And it is
 these companies that are responsible for more than 1 trillion dollars of global FDI flows annually. FDI
 are vital for SMEs, as their natural predisposition is to join GVCs indirectly as upstream supplier to
 exporters.
        The G20 could lead progress in areas of trade and investment policy reforms that require
 collective action or that would benefit from individual policy actions by G20 members in the context,
 for example, of their domestic growth strategies, leveraging on the fact that most GVC’s lead firms,
 turnkey suppliers or global buyers are headquartered in G20 countries. The table below provides a
 detailed list of trade and investment policy actions, distinguishing between national and collective,
 G20 initiatives.


 Priority areas for trade and investment policy
 What: Establish a trade and investment action plan for inclusiveness defining clear and achievable
 objectives on trade and investment policy and identify the necessary complementary actions on the
 domestic agenda
 Why the G20 can help: The G20 platform could address coordination failures between and within countries
 through a comprehensive action plan focusing on: treating trade and foreign direct investment, both
 inward and outward in an integrated framework; giving as much consideration to imports and timeliness as
 to exports and market access; and by streamlining import tariffs and simplifying export procedure. Systems
 in place in the G20 finance track can be of guidance.



                                             INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                           EXECUTIVE SUMMARY – 9



  Items for consideration to be included in the trade and investment action plan           National Collective
  for inclusiveness                                                                        initiative Action
  Further the trade facilitation agenda through completing the ratification process of
  the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) and by complementary improvements                
  in hard and soft infrastructure, and in logistics services quality
  Better harness the challenges for SMEs to be competitive in GVCs, by relaxing
  policies such as rules of origin, and by agreeing to bring other policies, such as
  competition principles or standards, to the international level of policy; and through                
  dedicated funding to aid for trade or through other capacity building efforts
  supporting SMEs preparedness to comply with regulations
  Reform, nationally and in coordination with other G20, business services sectors in
  key network industries such as logistics, supply chain management services, ICT-
                                                                                                        
  related services, e-commerce, and professional services, by removing barriers to
  entry and improving pro-competitive regulation
  Engage GVC lead firms, turnkey suppliers, global buyers, and SMEs in identifying
  binding constraints and solutions to investment attraction and promotion, for
  improving investment climate and SMEs absorptive capacity, particularly in sectors
                                                                                                        
  known to generate strong upstream and downstream SME linkages, such as services,
  knowledge based industries, and manufacturing sectors where specialization and
  branding are important.
  Establish a G20 platform for identifying and implementing measures for the
  reduction of contractual frictions that act as a disincentive to the outsourcing and
                                                                                                    
  offshoring of valuable innovative assets. Prioritize minimizing transaction costs for
  SMEs (both G20 micro-multinationals and investors and LIDCs users of imported IP)
  While developing and implementing rigorous IP legislation in G20 countries to
  protect innovative assets and attract foreign owned technology, minimize
                                                                                                        
  transaction costs for SMEs by streamlining procedures and ensuring high-quality
  examination to increase IP signaling value
  Address SMEs and LIDCs competition concerns regarding behavior of large MNEs or
  anti-SMEs biases in the current functioning of supply chains though establishing a                    
  dialogue on inclusiveness in GVCs with the B20
  Enhance cooperation and coordination between development partners, at the
  multilateral, regional, and bilateral level, with a view to making aid work better for                
  trade, investment, and inclusive growth
  Jump-start the trade and investment action plan by few concrete actions
     Establish a trade and investment action plan for inclusiveness
     Commit to relaxing policies on rules of origin in G20 countries
     Define “nuisance tariff level” and commit to their elimination in G20 countries within a set timeline
     Aid for Trade and other programs could increase their focus on supporting SMEs preparedness to
      comply with trade and investment regulations
     Establish a collaboration with the B20 to identify key binding constraints and solutions for fostering
      supplier diversity, focusing on efficiency of logistics services delivery, and MNE-SME linkages




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
10 – EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

        G20 governments, individually and collectively, have an important role to play in supporting
 domestic reforms both at home and in partner countries. The domestic reform agenda is wide-
 ranging, but priorities for both the G20 and LIDCs include enhancing firms’ productivity by building
 internal capacities of firms and providing access to capital and connectivity, with particular attention
 to the needs of SMEs. A key requirement in this area is addressing issues related to informality. In
 LIDCs, many firms operate in the informal sector, and choose to remain so despite their growth
 potential. This is due to the fact that the marginal benefits from increased production are often
 outweighed by the marginal increase in costs (regulatory and taxes) that are imposed by going formal.
 Removing potential barriers to growth and formality in the regulatory and tax framework is required
 but incentives such as improved access to high-quality services, finance, and other requirements for
 GVC participation should also be used as channels for fostering formalization, both in LIDCs and in
 partner G20 countries. Enhancing firm’s productivity requires removing regulatory and other barriers
 to the growth and scaling of SMEs, notably young and innovative SMEs. Doing so can help LIDCs in
 developing new areas of growth and SMEs in reaching a sufficient size to engage in international
 markets. For example, promoting the development of innovation ecosystems and moving towards
 holistic approaches to evaluate creditworthiness that go beyond traditional balance sheet analysis is
 helpful.
        The reform agenda will also need to focus on enhancing productivity through fostering the
 development of managerial skills and the adoption of better management practices, and through
 vocational training and lifelong education. Particular attention to ICT and broadband connectivity is
 needed, including access to and competition in ICT networks, as ICT-enabled business processes are
 central to participating in GVCs. Producing at world class standards as required by GVCs, finally,
 means that quality certification and standards are now increasingly important as determinants of
 competitiveness. Compliance with a multitude of standards and technical regulations may be
 particularly burdensome for LIDCs firms and SMEs are often below the radar screen of consumers, so
 that the incentives to comply are lessened. Mutual recognition and convergence of dominant private
 and public standards would contribute to reducing these costs.


  Priority areas for capacity building
  What: Complement trade, investment and complementary domestic policy actions by providing the
  needed political leadership and support to collaboration across the public and private sector and
  establishment of global platforms for sharing bets practices.
  What role for the G20: To help SMEs and LIDCs in developing new areas of growth and to engage in
  international markets, a shared strategic vision and greater collective action to target the major
  constraints are needed. The G20 can offer the needed political leadership and clout with the private
  sector to leverage GVCs for a “race to the top” in participating countries.

  Addressing informality                                                            National           Collective
                                                                                   initiative           Action

  Harness the growth potential of dynamic and innovative firms
  operating in the informal economy by removing the disincentives
                                                                                                       
  of going to the formal market, particularly for informal businesses
  that seem to prevail in the downstream parts of GVCs in LIDCs.




                                              INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY – 11



 Policies for improving firms’ productivity through learning, innovation, skill building, upgrading,
 and peer exchange
    Foster the development of managerial skills and the adoption of sound
                                                                                           
    managerial practices, vocational training, and lifelong education.

    Remove regulatory and other barriers to the growth and scaling of SMEs,
    notably young and innovative SMEs, including barriers to entry, growth and             
    exit of firms.

    Encourage collaboration with lead firms and global buyers to train local staff
    as a more efficient means of knowledge transfer; information is up-to-date             
    and corresponds to the needs of the lead firms.

    Assist SMEs in the use of freely available technologies or the acquisition of
                                                                                                      
    technological licensing agreements.

    Ensure that quality certification, technical regulations, standards, and
    conformity assessment procedures are non-discriminatory and do not create
    unnecessary obstacles to trade; aid for trade programs could also focus on
    building capacity in LIDCs and for SMEs for the adoption of standards that
                                                                                                      
    lead to quality, productivity, and welfare upgrading; facilitate public and
    private sector preparedness to standards upgrading; promote convergence of
    public and private voluntary standards so to reduce costs; inform above
    processes through national and international guidelines.

    Connectivity

    ICT and broadband connectivity: Strengthen broadband networks and
    improve access and competition. Foster services sector efficiency
                                                                                                      
    improvements and collective efforts to facilitate SMEs’ and LIDCs’ access to
    ICT networks

    Provide assistance to SMEs and firms in LIDCs, including through electronic
    platforms that help domestic firms acquire foreign technology and                                 
    commercialize their IP

    Physical connectivity and logistics: Assist countries in effectively
    implementing all aspects of logistics and transport sector reforms; Support
                                                                                                      
    capacity building to customize approaches to meet specific needs,
    operational circumstances, and national connectivity priorities

    Provide a continuum of potential support activities for both ICT and physical
    connectivity, from infrastructure building to logistics and e-commerce
                                                                                                      
    performance assessments, to the development of practical implementation
    plans, to the identification of sources of financing for implementation plans.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
12 – EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


   Financing

   Enable finance that takes into account intrinsic know-how, pool
   of talent, distribution channels, business relationships, business
                                                                                            
   models, and access to technology in valuation of repayment
   ability;

   Global platforms for capacity building:

   Establish, or support scaling up of global platforms for sharing
   best practices, learning, e-learning and exchange; foster private
                                                                                                                 
   sector involvement on global platforms and use for exchange of
   goods, services, and for cross-border financing solutions.

   Provide holistic, country-focused, multi-stakeholder approach to
   capacity building, sustained over time, including engagement of
   local and international private sector (local suppliers, global
                                                                                                                 
   leads, buyers, advanced consumers) and of development
   partners and creation of private sector supplier base for advisory
   services on capacity building
   Jump-start the domestic complementary measures to the trade and investment action plan by few
   concrete actions
       Establish a collaboration with the B20 to identify key binding constraints and solutions for
        fostering supplier diversity, starting from addressing challenges in the areas of IP protection and
        technology transfer, quality, certification, standards, and efficiency of logistics services delivery
       Support mature local, regional, and global facilities in the dissemination and scaling up of best
        practices in the public and private sector sharing knowledge
       Establish an action plan for universal ICT and broadband connectivity and for empowering SMEs
        to leverage the digital economy

Investment in expanding statistical basis and technical analysis of participation in GVCs
        A significant, and often overlooked, way to facilitate successful integration within Global Value
  Chains, particularly within LIDCS, consists of identifying correctly the constraints, remedial actions,
  and efficacy of new policy measures. Country and region specific diagnostics, which also differentiate
  across firm types, are crucial to guide policy. This cuts across the gamut of the statistical information
  system, including both macro and micro (firm-level) data. Recent statistical initiatives have,
  importantly, improved our understanding of GVC, allowing estimation of trade flows in value added
  terms. The OECD-WTO TiVA database is a well-known recent example of macro-level measurement
  and analysis of trade in value added. Whilst this database currently includes 61 economies, very few
  LIDCs, particularly in Africa and Central Asia, are included; significant efforts are needed to develop
  and improve the national statistical building blocks required for inclusion within the TiVA database.
  Other standard macro-level data collection areas where further investment would be beneficial
  include: Structural Business Statistics (SBS); Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC),
  Entrepreneurship Indicators (Business Demography, BD), and Foreign Affiliate Trade Statistics (FATS).




                                                INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                       EXECUTIVE SUMMARY – 13



          All of these standard collections require good data at the firm-level. Investment in and scaling
  up of micro-data and existing data-collections and surveys is therefore also a central priority for better
  policy making. The World Bank Group Enterprise Surveys use standard survey instruments to collect
  firm-level data on the business environment from business owners and top managers. The surveys
  account for firm size and cover a broad range of topics including access to finance, corruption,
  infrastructure, crime, competition, labor, obstacles to growth, and performance measures, but not yet
  participation in GVCs. Other available datasets include microenterprise, informal, sector-specific, and
  other surveys, which could also be leveraged. Panel (longitudinal) datasets of survey results are
  available for many countries. These statistics constitute an excellent basis for expanding available
  tools to documenting better business relationships taking place in the context of GVCs. This includes
  collecting firm level information on the links between exporters and foreign buyers, and between
  local firms and multinational companies integrated in GVCs (backward and forward linkages) as well
  as information on the internal and external factors facilitating or impeding accession and upgrading of
  firms in GVCs. The nature of participation in GVCs by firms in LIDCs and different behavior between
  large and small firms in the adoption of international certification practices and regulatory standards
  or in usage of ICT and technology, are among the areas that can be better documented through
  embedding a GVC module in existing enterprise surveys. Impact evaluations of policies that can
  facilitate sustainable participation and upgrading in GVCs by SMEs and by firms in LIDCs are also
  necessary to strengthen the evidence base for policy making.

    Priority areas for expanding statistical basis and analytics

    What: Provide political support for the establishment of a realistic multi-year plan to expand and upgrade
    the statistical foundation necessary to increase the capacity of all countries to identify and implement
    policies that can contribute to stronger, more inclusive and sustainable growth and development,
    globally.
    Why the G20 can help: The G20 is ideally placed to foster and support the generation of improved
    evidence-based analysis and policy advice, at national and multilateral levels, through individual
    government action and through relevant international and regional organizations.
                                                                                     National Collective
                                                                                     initiative Action
    Investments in strengthening micro-level data collection and analysis of firms
    in LIDCs and G20 countries, including by leveraging existing tools such as the
    World Bank Group Enterprise Surveys and the other World Bank Group surveys                        
    on microenterprises, on the informal sector, and sector-specific and ad hoc
    surveys.

    Improvement in quality and availability of macro data in line with international
    standards, including Input-output and supply-use tables for the OECD-WTO                          
    TiVA databases well as SBS, FATS, BD and TEC.

    Impact evaluations of policy interventions at the firm level                                      




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
14 – 1. SETTING THE SCENE


1. Setting the scene


                                          Preview of key take-aways

          Production systems today are very complex, with multi-layered international sourcing networks
           and fast-evolving technology-enabled business models, which increasingly allow cross-border
           economic activity to grow.
          Today’s global value chains require high levels of explicit coordination that differentiate them
           from traditional arm’s-length trade. More unified global production systems and markets provide
           countries with greater opportunities to specialize in specific aspects, or stages, of the
           development and production of goods and services where comparative advantages exist.
          Rather than having to develop and manage the entire and complex production process in-house,
           GVCs offer opportunities to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and firms in low income and
           developing countries (LIDCs). GVCs help overcoming barriers to exporting by accommodating
           specialisation in narrow business functions and niche activities and they limit dependencies on
           the degree of industrial development and broader skills set in the country.
          But capitalising on GVCs requires addressing informality in the economy and the right local
           business environment. The majority of firms in many LIDCs are informal and therefore excluded
           from GVC participation. Moreover, the lack of a supporting environment can lead to higher
           production and trade costs. This in turn can result in lower productivity and growth for the
           economy as a whole, as firms with high-growth potential adopt sub-optimal expansion strategies.
          The challenges of producing at world-class standards as required by GVCs can be moreover
           harder to overcome for smaller and younger firms, and the market failures constraining their
           development are greater than those faced by large firms.



        Enhancing the integration into global markets of goods, services, investment, and knowledge of
 small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in low-, middle-, and high-income countries is a policy priority
 for the Group of Twenty (G-20) countries. It also represents a challenge for growth and job creation in
 all countries, at all levels of economic development.
        Exports play an important role in fostering economic progress. Empirical research shows that
 firms that are connected to the global economy—through exports, through foreign direct investment
 (FDI), or as suppliers to exporters—are generally more productive than firms that serve the domestic
 markets only and typically rank among countries’ most prosperous businesses. More productive firms,
 better equipped to compete in global markets in the first place, benefit from a virtuous circle that
 captures additional productivity gains through GVCs. Higher productivity is also associated with higher
 wages and more prosperous communities. In countries for which data are available, workers in firms
 and sectors with high export intensity typically earn a substantial wage premium and show above-
 average labor productivity. Similarly, there is both a wage and productivity premium associated with
 FDI. By implication, communities connected to the global economy through large numbers of export-
 reliant firms, with both inward and outward FDI, and with a strong domestic supplier base that serves
 exporters and FDI are more likely to enjoy growing tax bases.


                                               INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                       1. SETTING THE SCENE – 15



         Imports also play an important role in achieving better economic performance not only by
  making available “world-class” inputs and capital goods but also by providing incentives for firms to
  innovate as they adopt knowledge, ideas, know-how, and best practices from abroad. Openness
  allows all countries the opportunity to absorb technologies developed elsewhere and to grow at a
  faster rate. Investigations of the network of trade in value added reveals that being well integrated on
  the supply side is of paramount importance (Santoni and Taglioni, 2015). Productivity growth relies on
  the diffusion of innovation from firms at the global frontier to other firms, which is facilitated by trade
  openness and participation in GVCs (OECD, 2015). Far from being a handicap, a more open domestic
  market is a source of competitive strength, especially when complemented by a range of other
  policies to ensure sustained economic growth and diversification. For SMEs specifically, benefits also
  accrue in the form of exposure to international best practice, in the absorption of excess production
  capacity or output, in improved resource utilization and productivity, and in higher wages (Baldwin
  and Gu 2003).
         A structural shift in the international division of labour has taken place with the rise of global
  value chains (GVCs). The revolutions in information and communications technology (ICT) and
  transport, coupled with the development of ever more complex products, have allowed firms to
  establish chains that are geographically dispersed across the globe, and that are as intricate as they
  are efficient (see Box 1 for a discussion of the deep drivers of GVCs). GVCs have now become a driving
  force of global economic growth. They also have transformed the terms by which trade is conducted,
  and countries’ patterns of industrialization. Rather than producing an entire product domestically,
  countries can now grow and thrive by specializing in specific tasks that allow them to integrate into
  parts of a value chain and to reach a sufficiently large scale of production.


                                           Box 1. Understanding the drivers of GVCs

    Production systems today are very complex, with multi-layered international sourcing networks and fast-
    evolving technology-enabled business models that increasingly allow cross-border economic activity to
    grow. The drivers are diverse; while some can be measured, others cannot.
    The integration of the People’s Republic of China, the Russian Federation, and India added huge product
    and labor markets that had been all but outside the multilateral trading system before 1989, nearly
    doubling the field of play for internationalization (Freeman 2006). Faced with slow growth at home, large
    enterprises rushed to set up operations in those newly opened markets, especially in China, partly to
    carve out brand recognition and a market share in rapidly expanding consumer markets but also, through
    GVCs, to cut costs on goods produced for export to international and home markets. For goods that
    require shorter supply lines, the countries of Eastern Europe have joined traditional “export processing”
    locations, such as Mexico and North Africa. Moreover, under pressure from financial markets, large
    American and European enterprises embarked on a “second unbundling” of corporate functions during
    the 1990s (Baldwin 2011). In an effort to focus on “core competencies,” nearly every business function
    deemed “noncore” was subject to consideration for possible external sourcing from more specialized,
    more competitive, and often less unionized suppliers. *
    Manufacturing functions were among the first to be externally sourced, but services followed very soon
    after. By the 2000s, the computerization of work and the emergence of low-cost international
    communications enabled a surprisingly wide range of service tasks to be standardized, fragmented,
    codified, modularized, and more readily sourced externally and cheaply transported across long
    distances. Aspects of research and development (R&D) even fell under consideration for external
    sourcing. As in goods production, the application of information technology to the provision of services

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
16 – 1. SETTING THE SCENE

    allowed some degree of customization within the rubric of automation and high-volume production, or
    what Pine (1999) calls “mass customization.”
    The rise of industrial capabilities in less developed countries created many more options for relocating
    work, and new players came onto the field. What previously had to be done within the confines of the
    multinational enterprise (MNE) could now be externally sourced from newly competent suppliers and
    service providers with offices and factories around the world (Sturgeon and Lester 2004). The twin trends
    of external and international sourcing also meant that existing suppliers simultaneously received vast
    quantities of new work and were pressured to follow their customers to offshore locations (Humphrey
    2003). At the same time and for the same reasons, the most efficient suppliers that were based in LIDCs
    also grew rapidly from being small companies to becoming MNEs in their own right (Kawakami 2011).
    With the democratization of knowledge and with accelerating technological progress becoming a
    mainstay of the global economy in the 21st Century (Diamandis 2015), individual entrepreneurs can now
    start a company and take on functions that would have necessitated the complexity of a large MNE only
    20 years ago. That is particularly the case for digital companies, such as Instagram, that have only 13
    employees but a D1 billion valuation.
    As a result, the character of global production has changed. Large brand-carrying MNEs, such as IBM,
    Siemens, and Toyota nowadays rely on a complex web of suppliers, vendors, and service providers of all
    kinds and in multiple locations. At the same time, a set of highly influential global buyers gained scale
    and influence in the 1990s, including retailers such as Walmart and Tesco and branded merchandisers
    such as Nike, Zara, and Uniqlo (Feenstra and Hamilton 2006). Building on successful experiments in the
    1970s and 1980s by a handful of pioneering retailers such as J. C. Penney and Sears, global buyers began
    placing huge orders with suppliers around the world without establishing any factories or farms of their
    own (Gereffi 1999; Ponte and Gibbon 2005). Unlike traditional MNEs, where equity ties link headquarters
    with foreign affiliates, global buyers link to their suppliers through non-equity external sourcing ties.
    Often, intermediaries (for example, trading companies such as Hong Kong’s Li & Fung) are used to link
    buyers to producers in multiple countries.
    Peter Dicken (2011, 5) argues that the combination of those changes requires a different term:
    globalization, defined as “the functional integration of internationally dispersed activities.” Today, GVCs
    combine the traditional drivers of internationalization (arm’s-length trade and intra-enterprise trade
    related to FDI) “with external international sourcing” that requires high levels of explicit coordination
    that differentiate it from arm’s-length trade (Gereffi, Humphrey, and Sturgeon 2005). In essence,
    external international sourcing arrangements imbue inter-enterprise trade with characteristics similar to
    intragroup trade: better control from the center, higher levels of bilateral information flow, tolerance of
    asset specificity, and a harmonization and immediate integration of business processes that increase the
    potential for foreign activities to substitute for activities performed at home.
    It is this last point, in particular, that underscores the opportunities for LIDCs and for SMEs in such
    countries. Patterns of cross-border investment and trade based on product cycles—where producers
    from less developed countries receive older, outmoded products from more advanced economies
    (Vernon 1966, 1979)—are rapidly giving way to more unified global production systems and markets,
    with different countries specializing in specific aspects, or stages, of the development and production of
    leading-edge goods and services.
    * See Sturgeon (2002) for a detailed case study of the trend toward external sourcing in the electronics
    industry.

        Policy needs to respond to that new reality by helping low income and developing countries
 (LIDCs) promoting a business environment that not only makes their country an attractive for location
 for those tasks but also facilitates creating economic and social development from GVC participation.

                                               INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                    1. SETTING THE SCENE – 17



  Addressing informality in the economy is a core requirement to GVC participation. The majority of
  firms in most developing countries are informal (Andrade, Bruhn, McKenzie, 2015; and Bruhn and
  McKenzie, 2014). Therefore, harnessing the growth potential of dynamic and innovative firms
  operating in the informal economy by removing the disincentives from going to the formal market,
  particularly for informal businesses that prevail in the downstream parts of GVCs and in LIDCs is a pre-
  condition to making GVCs inclusive.
         GVCs are especially important for firms in LIDCs, as the unbundling of tasks and business
  functions typical of value chains increase opportunities to engage in global markets without having to
  develop complete products and unlock access to (and so benefits from) knowledge and technology by
  learning from and interacting with other value chain actors in an integrated production process. Some
  of the opportunities from GVC participation have been seized, as testified by the increased expansion
  of GVCs in emerging and developing economies. GVCs encourage productivity growth by accelerating
  learning and innovation and by broadening and deepening the skill set in a country. Overcoming
  obstacles to GVC participation can pay big dividends if the appropriate supply-side policies are put in
  place. Developing economies with the fastest-growing GVC participation and pro-competitive policies
  aimed at addressing supply-side investment and trade expansion in an integrated manner have gross
  domestic product (GDP) per capita growth rates 2% above average earning.
         For policy makers, the question is not only how to connect to GVCs but also how best to derive
  benefits from GVCs for the economy and society at large. As will be discussed later, opening to
  international trade and investment is necessary but not sufficient to connect to global value chains
  and to obtain benefits in employment and income growth. Both public and private investment to
  improve supply-side capabilities and the ability to exploit new market opportunities are also needed.
  Investment in people’s education and skills is particularly important—and needs to be complemented
  with effective labor market policies and social safety nets to enable displaced workers to find new
  jobs. Moreover, strong framework conditions that are aimed at minimizing coordination costs and
  improving the legal and institutional environment for intellectual property rights and contract
  enforcement, proactive investment attraction policies, and emphasis on innovation and skills are also
  needed (Kowalski et al. 2015). That is the case in Costa Rica, for example, which has gradually gained
  ground as a location for high-end manufacturing in small-scale, high value-added production (for
  example, medical devices). In short, successful participation in GVCs by SMEs and LIDCs requires a
  “whole of supply chain” approach that, internally to countries and internationally, moves away from
  the current silo approach of policy making. The approach needs to have different ministries involved
  in different parts of policy making relevant to GVCs and to open up discussions—within governments
  and internationally—across a number of policy areas that matter for value chain performance and
  that are seldom discussed holistically in international forums.

The opportunities of GVCs for LIDCs

         Many LIDCs are increasingly involved in GVCs both upstream and downstream, and their
  participation brings about economic benefits in terms of enhanced productivity, sophistication, and
  diversification of exports (Kowalski et al. 2015). Developed countries still exhibit, on average, higher
  participation rates, with European countries leading the way; but a clear trend has emerged, showing
  growing participation in GVCs beginning in the early 2000s, especially by LIDCs (figure 1). Among
  developing regions, Southeast Asia (SEA) economies and those in Europe and Central Asia (ECA) show
  the highest rates of participation, while Middle East and North Africa (MENA) countries also have
  relatively high participation ratios. In contrast, Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and South Asia


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
18 – 1. SETTING THE SCENE

 (SA), along with regions in Sub-Saharan Africa, trail behind. But even these countries saw their
 participation grow considerably, notably between 2001 and 2011.
        Cross-regional differences are significant also in the way countries integrate into GVCs around
 the world (Figure 1). SEA—the region where the most comprehensive and deepest regional
 integration agreements can be found—has the highest average share of intraregional GVC
 participation. In the rest of the developing world, the share of intraregional GVC participation is lower
 than that of extraregional links. Still, East and Southern Africa (ESA) and Latin America and Caribbean
 (LAC) show higher levels of regional integration than do SAS (South Asia), West and Central Africa, or
 Middle East and North Africa (MENA).
             Figure 1. Average total, intra and extraregional GVC participation across regions in 2001 and 2011,
                                                   % of gross exports




 Note: These figures show the combined GVC participation ratio, which combines the information about the use of foreign
 goods and services as inputs into country’s exports (backward participation) and where firms supply intermediate goods and
 services for other countries’ export activities (forward participation). The ratio is expressed as a share of gross exports.
 Source: Kowalski et al. 2015.




                                                       INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                             1. SETTING THE SCENE – 19



     Figure 2. Domestic value added embodied in third countries’ export, market share (%), selected countries,
                                                 1995 vs. 2008




      Source: World Bank computations using OECD-WTO Trade in Value Added (TiVA) Database.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
20 – 1. SETTING THE SCENE

        But there is scope for much larger gains. Take for example the decomposition of gross exports
 by value added of the source country in the three headquarter economies of GVCs (Germany, Japan,
 and the United States) for selected sectors of importance (electronics, apparel and textiles,
 machinery, and transport equipment). Between 1995 and 2008, increasing value-added shares in
 these countries’ exports originate in LIDCs. For example, the shares in US exports of apparel and
 textiles increased from 3% to 8%. They also increased from 2.8% to 5.1% in US exports of electronics,
 from 2.7% to 5.9% in German exports of transport equipment, from 2.17% to 4.94% in German
 exports of machinery, from 2% to 7% in Japanese exports of transport equipment, and from 2.63% to
 9.27% in Japanese exports of electronics (Figure 2).
        GVCs not only shape relations between developed countries and LIDCs but also affect intra-
 LIDCs’ trade and investment ties. Emerging economies are now important sources of outward FDI. If
 one looks only at firms from the BRICS (Brazil, Russian Federation, Indonesia and China), their
 outward direct investment rose from USD 7 billion in 2000 to USD 145 billion in 2012 and USD 200
 billion in 2013, that is, almost one-third of global FDI (Gómez-Mera et al. 2015). Although most of
 those investors are driven primarily by market-seeking considerations (selling products domestically),
 a subset is export-platform seeking (that is, driven by lowering production cost considerations). For
 example, the expansion of the Chinese apparel sector to lower-cost locations in Asia or the shifts of
 manufacturing activities within China are creating opportunities for learning in new territories. Some
 SMEs and firms in LIDCs have benefited from increasing participation in international production
 networks, others have increased the density of their production structure, and some have done both.
        As stated earlier, one of the more notable aspects of GVCs concerns their potential benefits for
 smaller providers, both at the level of firms and countries. Whereas size mattered greatly in the
 traditional concept of trade and investment, which allowed firms to achieve economies of scale and to
 tap into larger pools of skills and resources, GVCs now offer an opportunity to overcome some of the
 inherent challenges associated with small size.
        GVCs can be especially useful for LIDCs that might otherwise find it difficult to compete in
 global markets. Through their unbundling of production processes, they can offer less diversified and
 smaller economies new opportunities for finding their niches in the global economy. Market size still
 affects firms’ decisions on where to base either their manufacturing and service operations or their
 innovation centers, and the case for investing in a large market tends to be more compelling. Small
 countries may overcome their size disadvantage through the adoption of new policies, and opening
 their markets and linking them more closely to other, larger markets are likely to help. One of the
 principal draws for opening markets is that it allows producers in third countries to treat the smaller,
 connected country as an export platform.
Importance of SMEs for economic progress and their participation in GVCs
        SMEs are the backbone of the economy in several developing countries. Indeed, they account
 for more than half of all formal employment worldwide (IFC, 2013). A cross country study of 49,370
 firms in 104 countries finds that while small and medium sized firms (< 100 employees) have
 comparable share of aggregate employment as large firms, it is the small firms (<20 employees) with
 the largest shares of job creation, highest sales growth, and employment growth. (Ayyagari et al.,
 2014). These findings are also common in OECD countries, where 75% of new jobs are created by
 SMEs. Over the last several years, however, additional research has revamped the debate, indicating
 that size is not the relevant measure, but rather it is the age of the firm which determines
 contribution to net job creation. Evidence for the United States (Haltiwanger et al., 2013), Colombia
 (Eslava and Haltiwanger, 2013), and Morocco and Tunisia (Freund et al., 2014) show that once firm

                                            INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                     1. SETTING THE SCENE – 21



  age is controlled for, there is no systematic relationship between size and job creation, highlighting
  the role of start-ups and young firms to contribute to the creation of new jobs. But more evidence is
  needed to determine what kind of firms play a significant role in net job creation among developing
  countries.
         GVCs likewise operate to the benefit of smaller firms, as they provide opportunities to
  specialize in tasks within the chain. Whereas SMEs would have found it difficult to compete along an
  entire line of activities, in the GVC world of today they can more readily participate in those tasks in
  which they have expertise, as long as market failures that disproportionately affect SMEs are
  addressed.
        Gereffi, Humphrey, and Sturgeon (2005) discuss in some detail the principal actors in GVCs and
  the power relations between them: MNEs, their affiliates abroad, and independent suppliers in both
  domestic and foreign markets, including SMEs. Economic transactions within GVCs include intra-firm
  transactions between headquarters and affiliates, as well transactions between companies and
  independent suppliers (arm’s-length trade and transactions accompanied by specifications on quality,
  product design, etc.). The distribution of power and the direction of knowledge flows will differ
  depending on the type of GVC. They may be largely concentrated in the lead firm or MNE or may be
  shared between lead firms and (upper-tier) suppliers. Factors such as the complexity of transactions,
  the ability to codify transactions, and the capabilities in the supply bases enter the equation (Gereffi,
  Humphrey, and Sturgeon 2005), but the business model’s intrinsic characteristics matter too (Porter
  and Kramer, 2011).
         Owing to their size and capability to engage in international trade and investment, MNEs tend
  to be the leading actors in GVCs. But affiliates of cost efficiency seeking FDIs (Dunning 1995) are
  essential links in GVCs. MNEs organize global production processes across different geographical
  locations and through a complex network of affiliates (that is, offshoring), as well as through their
  arm’s-length relationships with other companies and suppliers (that is, outsourcing). MNEs dominate
  exports. In fact, cross-border trade between MNEs and their affiliates—often referred to as intra-firm
  trade—now accounts for a large share of international trade in goods. And earlier firm-level evidence,
  based on gross exports data, reveals that exports are driven by a limited number of large, often
  multinational companies. For example, Mayer and Ottaviano (2007) show that 1%, 5%, and 10% of
  companies account for no less than 40%, 70%, and 80%, respectively, of aggregate exports in Europe.
  Similar results are reported for the United States (Bernard et al. 2007), as well as for LIDCs (Cebeci et
  al. 2012).
         Although evidence may show that GVCs is a “big-firm story”, with MNEs as leading actors, those
  findings underestimate the importance and participation in GVCs of smaller firms, which often supply
  intermediates to exporting firms in their country and are, as such, integrated, indirectly, into GVCs.
  Slaughter (2013) finds that the typical US MNE buys more than USD 3 billion in inputs from more than
  6,000 US small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs)—or almost 25% of the total input purchased by
  those firms. Such domestic supplies are not reflected in international trade statistics, which count only
  direct exports; estimates for the United States show that in 2007 the export share of SMEs increased
  from approximately 28% (in gross exports) to 41% (in value-added exports), when such indirect
  exports are taken into account (USITC 2010). To quantify the direct and indirect participation of SMEs
  to Global Value Chains across countries, Section 2 of this report provides first estimates of SMEs’
  importance as upstream providers of the exporting sector. Unfortunately such data are only available
  for the countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and further
  investment in expanding the statistical evidence to cover LIDCs is warranted.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
22 – 1. SETTING THE SCENE

        And high-growth potential SME may grow over time to become lead firms in GVCs. Actors and
 linkages in GVCs may evolve as competitive (smaller) firms upgrade their activities and reinforce their
 positions. High-growth potential SMEs may see new opportunities to expand their business abroad
 (OECD 2008), although it is generally difficult for them to reach international markets, with constraints
 being particularly strong in LIDCs (see for example Farole and Winkler, 2014 for the case of Sub-
 Saharian Africa). It is normally the SMEs at the forefront of technology or those producing high value-
 added parts and components that internationalize directly (Farole and Winkler, 2014). Meanwhile,
 those SMEs whose competitive advantage is based primarily on cost or those specializing in certain
 types of services that require face-to-face interaction are more likely to participate in GVCs as
 domestic suppliers of the export sector. The supply base of the automotive industry or of the
 aerospace industry, for example, is double-tiered, with large firms in the leading positions but also
 comprising many small specialized (and smaller) global suppliers (that is, second- or even first-tier
 suppliers) that often produce very specialized and customized parts and components. Often, as car
 assemblers set up final assembly plants in new locations, they provided support or urged their
 suppliers to move abroad with them (Van Biesebroeck and Sturgeon 2011). The fragmentation of
 production together with advances in ICTs is also creating new entrepreneurial possibilities for SMEs
 to access markets abroad, giving rise to a new category of so-called micro-multinationals, which are
 small firms that develop global activities from their inception. The Internet and new business models
 make it possible for those smaller—often service-driven—companies to enter foreign markets at
 minimum costs (Mettler and Williams 2011).
         GVCs, then, hold the promise for SMEs and firms in LIDCs if policy priorities include enabling
 firms’ productivity growth through supporting their ability to build internal capacities and facilitating
 access to capital and connectivity. External international sourcing can lower barriers to exporting by
 accommodating specialization in narrow business functions, thus obviating the need for a company to
 develop a complex production process in-house and lessening its dependence on the degree of
 industrial development of the home country. Small labor force capabilities can be connected with
 complementary external capabilities, and small domestic markets can be connected with larger export
 markets. Those modes of integration share a number of requirements that allow relatively tight
 coordination and control. At the same time, the existence of GVCs poses specific challenges for SMEs.
 To start with, the leading role played by large MNEs, have led some to suggest that the emergence of
 GVCs might be a threat to development of smaller firms in general. For example, the ability of smaller
 firms to capture value depends to a significant extent on power relationships in the chain, and power
 depends on several factors: for example, ownership of technology and the competitive situation in
 different segments of the chain. MNEs that often have proprietary know-how and technology and a
 multitude of potential supply sources might be in a strong position to dictate contractual conditions to
 their smaller suppliers. Still, the MNEs, with their scale and access to markets and technology, may be
 the main channel for SMEs to participate in GVCs either directly or indirectly. Second, the fulfilment of
 strict requirements with regard to product standards and quality as required by GVCs can be harder to
 overcome for smaller and younger firms, and the market failures constraining their development
 differ from those faced by large firms. Smaller firms face specific difficulties that limit their growth and
 that range from constrained access to credit and insufficient scale to support the costs of adequate
 R&D and training of personnel, to lack of lobbying power compared with larger firms and limited
 ability to diversify and absorb local and global shocks. Moreover, the smaller production scale of SMEs
 typically increases the recovery period of any fixed costs of investment or information acquisition, and
 the smaller pool of workers restricts the scope to efficiently reallocate the workforce across, or to
 new, tasks compared with larger firms. Young, innovative and entrepreneurial SMEs may face
 additional problems, such as lack of access to risk capital, or ill-adapted entry and exit regulations that

                                              INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                        1. SETTING THE SCENE – 23



  prevent firms from experimenting with new technologies or business models (OECD, 2015), and that
  can prevent them from reaching a sufficient scale to enter global markets.
         All in all, the ability of SMEs and firms in LIDCs to be successful in GVCs (i.e. to swiftly adopt new
  technologies, to learn by doing, to innovate, and to optimize their production) depends more heavily
  on framework conditions and on externalities from the operating environment. Public goods and
  externalities that matter are wide-ranging: from world-class logistics and ICT connectivity, to open
  markets, to the business environment, to the educational and vocational system, to the existence of a
  well-functioning innovation infrastructure, and efficient forms of financing. Such challenges and how
  policy can address them are discussed below. And lack of a supporting environment can lead firms
  with high-growth potential to long-term limitations not only for themselves, but also for the economy
  as a whole. Entrepreneurs may opt for sub-optimal strategies that do not foster productivity and
  economic growth. These include seeking loans from friends and family instead of formal sources of
  capital; limiting investment in technology that would boost productivity and growth; not hiring talent
  that can help the business grow and thrive over the long term; failing to adopt tools for identifying
  new market opportunities; and not seeking opportunities for scaling their companies but instead
  putting the firms on a below-potential growth path.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
24 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS


2. Stylized facts of SMEs in GVCs


                                            Preview of key take-aways
             SMEs participation in GVCs can be achieved by direct participation in exports (of goods and
              services that feed into third countries’ production) or indirect participation by supplying other
              exporters.
             SMEs direct export participation in the goods sector is limited, based on evidence from both
              OECD countries and LIDCs.
             The majority of firms in most LIDCs is in the informal economy. Informality is one of the top 5
              constraints for small firms in developing countries in doing business.
             Exporting SMEs are significantly underrepresented in (tangible) capital-intensive sectors but
              compare favourably not only in the service sector but also in heterogeneous manufacturing
              sectors where specialization and branding may be important.
             Exclusive focus on direct exports underestimates the participation of smaller firms in GVCs.
              Accounting for SMEs' direct and indirect contribution to exports greatly reinforces their
              significance. In many OECD countries, for which such data are available, smaller firms account
              for more than half of the total exports of domestic value added, with much of it channelled
              through larger firms.
             Data on SMEs’ labour productivity show that SMEs may integrate within GVCs at the two
              extremes of the value chain: in low value-added activities and in high value-added activities.
              Survey evidence for LIDCs suggests that this is the case also in these countries – with a
              prevalence at the low value added end of GVCs.
             The degree of upstream integration of SMEs varies widely across countries. Links between
              MNEs and their local suppliers remain limited and difficult to achieve in LIDCs, even in those
              cases in which the MNE has a business interest in developing a local supplier base and actively
              pursues that objective.
             Strong links between MNEs and their local suppliers tend to result in greater diffusion of
              knowledge, technology, and know-how from foreign investors. Yes, survey evidence suggests
              that the impact of MNEs presence in LIDCs on domestic firms, including SMEs, is difficult to
              predict a priori.
         o   Short-term opportunities from MNE presence in LIDCs often come from outsourcing non-core
             activities, many of which are at the low-end of the value chain and likely to be performed by
             SMEs.
         o   Longer-term opportunities may instead exist for SMEs that focus on the upstream end of the
             value chain.
         o   Emphasis of MNEs on certification of quality and standards represents an important area of
             potential for upgrading for domestic firms. But direct technical assistance appears to be critical
             for supporting spillovers through product and process upgrading and to build skills that meet
             the standards and specifications of larger firms.




                                                 INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                           2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 25



Informality of the economy: A binding constraint

        GVCs operate in the formal market. Yet, the majority of firms in many developing countries are
  informal (Andrade, Bruhn, McKenzie, 2015; and Bruhn and McKenzie, 2014). In Sri Lanka, for example,
  only one fifth of firms operating without paid workers are registered with any government agency.
  Even among firms employing paid workers, the majority are unregistered with one or more pertinent
  agencies (McKenzie, Mel, and Woodruff, 2013). According to ILO surveys in 47 developing economies,
  the share of persons in informal employment is above 50% in a number of countries including Bolivia,
  Colombia, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, and
  Mexico.
           While more analysis is needed, World Bank assessments from the institution’s Independent
  Evaluation Group indicate that about 32% of the firms with 10 to 99 employees in a sample of
  developing countries report informality as one of the top five constraints they face in doing business.
  Other constraints for this class of firms are power, corruption, the tax rate, and political instability. By
  way of comparison, for the largest firms (300+ employees) the top constraints are: power, worker
  skills, transportation, the tax rate, and corruption.

Participation in GVCs: Direct insertion

        Firms’ participation in global value chains (GVCs) can be achieved by directly participating in
  exports (of goods and services that feed into third countries’ production) or by indirectly supplying
  other exporters such as large local firms or multinational companies.
        Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are typically less export oriented than are large firms. In
  countries members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), for
  which data on export participation by firm size are available, small and medium-size enterprises (firms
  with fewer than 250 employees) represent the vast majority of the business population (Table 1).
  They also account for the majority of employment in all OECD countries.
   Table 1. Percentage of exporters, by number of employees and foreign ownership, mining and manufacturing
                                            (ISIC rev 4 5 to 39) 2011

                                                                      Number of employees
                                                                                                                    Foreign-
                                  All firms           0–9              10–49       50–249             250+         controlled
Country                               (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)             (6)

Austria                               31               19               56           90                97              86
Belgium                               24               15               62           84                96              97
Bulgaria                              18                7               38           72                77
Canada                                28               14               44           91                100
Germany                               24               17               28           51                52              36
Denmark                               30               19               55           83                100             91
Spain                                 12                6               37           76                86              75
Estonia                               42               31               69           79                79              100
Finland                               18               11               44           72                89              81
France                                12                5               45           83                100             80
United Kingdom                        24               14               48           72                77              58




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
26 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

    Table 1. Percentage of exporters, by number of employees and foreign ownership, mining and manufacturing
                                           (ISIC rev 4 5 to 39) 2011 (cont.)


                                                               Number of employees
                                                                                                                  Foreign-
                                All firms     0–9              10–49            50–249             250+          controlled
Country                            (1)         (2)               (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)

Hungary                            20          11                63                80               87                78
Italy                              20          12                53                84               87                71
Lithuania                          21          8                 61                81               86
Luxembourg                         45          27                71                91              100
Latvia                             31          18                66                83               84
Poland                             14          8                 48                65               87               100
Portugal                           19          11                53                82               89                57
Romania                            15          5                 27                63               81
Slovak Republic                    9           4                 63                99              100               100
Slovenia                           25          19                68                78               90
Sweden                             19          12                65                80               88                78
United States                      9           5                 16                51               53

Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic Business
Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Activity of Multinational Enterprises (AMNE) Database.


         However, despite their significance, SMEs are responsible in most countries for less than half of
  the value of gross exports (Figure 3). For example, they account for less than 10% of gross
  manufacturing exports in Mexico. The share of SMEs in exports is larger in small, open economies,
  such as Ireland, Latvia, or Estonia, or in countries where small and medium-size firms have
  traditionally dominated the business landscape, such as Italy. But on the whole, large firms dominate,
  thus reflecting their greater outward orientation (Figure 4). Most large manufacturing firms engage in
  direct exports, but the percentage of direct exporters among SMEs is, generally, systematically lower
  across countries and industries, with micro-enterprises in particular rarely exporting directly.
         In most countries, only a small proportion of firms (almost exclusively large) account for a
  disproportionate share of overall exports (Figure 5). This finding is in line with much of the firm-level
  evidence of export activity from countries worldwide. In most industries, a few big firms account for
  extremely large shares of output and employment. For example, Mayer and Ottaviano (2007) show
  that 1%, 5%, and 10% of companies account for no less than 40%, 70%, and 80%, respectively, of
  aggregate exports in Europe. Cebeci et al. (2012) and subsequent research based on the World Bank
  Exporter Dynamics Database (which provides measures of exporter characteristics and dynamics
  across 45 countries of all income levels and geographic regions) confirm that similar trends hold also
  for LIDCs. They find that the top 5% of firms accounts on average for 80% of exports.




                                                   INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 27



                    Figure 3. Contribution of SMEs to gross manufacturing direct exports in 2012, %




Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic
Business Statistics (SDBS) Database.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
28 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

                           Figure 4. Export intensities: Export to turnover ratios in 2012, %




Sources: OECD Entrepreneurship at a Glance, 2015.




                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                    2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 29



                             Figure 5. Share of top exporters in total export values in 2012, %




    Source: OECD Entrepreneurship at a Glance, 2015.


         The relatively low weight of SMEs in exports at the total economy level partly reflects
  compositional effects. Exporting SMEs are significantly underrepresented in (tangible) capital-
  intensive sectors, such as transport equipment, but they compare favorably in the service sector
  (Figure 6), where fixed costs of entry are presumably lower. The same holds for heterogeneous
  manufacturing sectors where specialization and branding may drive export penetration (Figure 7).
        The data also reveal a correlation between firm size and presence in more distant markets. For
  example, in 2011, European SMEs accounted for 37% of intra–European Union (EU) exports but for
  only 28% of extra-EU exports. In line with the findings from the literature on firm heterogeneity
  (Bernard et al. 2003), SMEs in most countries typically export disproportionately more to
  neighbouring countries than do larger firms.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
30 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

                           Figure 6. Share of gross direct export value by SMEs in 2012, %




                    Source: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database.




                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                   2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 31



                              Figure 7. Share of gross direct export value by SMEs in 2009, %




  Source: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database.


         Figure 8 illustrates that for most countries, where data are available, this finding holds. In
  Mexico, where “extraregional” reflects exports to the world, excluding the United States, the data
  show that SMEs typically have a higher share of their direct exports going to the rest of the world than
  to the United States. This fact may reflect, in part, the significant processing maquiladora
  relationships developed with US firms. In many Eastern European economies, the share of exports
  outside the EU is particularly small for both large and small firms. The structure of European GVCs,
  whereby Germany plays the role of hub for final goods, may be at the origin of those results. Small
  firms in Germany have managed to diversify their export markets (exporting outside the EU) to a
  greater extent than have many large enterprises in other European economies, thereby confirming
  the strength of the German mittelstand and possibly a very effective business supporting
  environment.
         Although the participation in exports is lower for SMEs, opportunities exist to exploit high
  value-added niches in GVCs, particularly in market segments in which input costs are low. One such
  case is organic agriculture production (Staritz and Reis 2013). An industry that began retailing in the
  1980s and that is driven by high demand, it also receives high premiums over conventionally produced
  crops. For example, organic blueberries earn more than a 100% premium (USDA 2011). A study by
  Farnworth and Hutchings (2009) that surveyed organic production in Bangladesh found that firms in
  this segment had (a) greater decision power over buyers, (b) improved positions within the value
  chain, and (c) greater access to inputs and markets for organic products than for traditional products.
  The fact that those staples do not use pesticides decreases key input costs, and the fact that they are
  produced in small plots reduces the constraints from scale. Another case study of female-owned

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
32 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

 Ugandan SMEs that export organic fruits and vegetables further reveals the significant premiums paid
 for organic products. This access to low-cost capital provides opportunities for both product and
 process upgrading, as well as for increased productivity.

           Figure 8. Share of gross direct export value of small and large firms by destination in 2009, %




     Source: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database.


        Moreover, statistical evidence shows that some SMEs outperform large firms (with respect to
 the share of their output destined for export markets) in some market segments, partly reflecting
 their involvement in tasks at the higher end of the value chain—such as R&D, design, and branding—
 that drive higher relative labor productivity. Case study literature also indicates that SMEs may be
 more agile than are large firms in intersectorial upgrading, whereas start-ups (which tend to be SMEs)
 may contribute substantially not only to innovation but also to employees’ training in innovative
 sectors.
        Data for OECD countries in the “other manufacturing” sector, for example, reveal that the
 average export intensity of a country’s SMEs is high when average productivity is low or when the
 latter is high (Figure 9), thus illustrating the scope for integration through high value-added niches in
 GVCs and not just through cost-saving models.




                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                     2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 33



                              Figure 9. Export intensity (% of turnover) and labor productivity
                                                    (Euro, ‘000 per head)




      Source: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database.


Suppliers of large local and multinational firms: Indirect insertion
         The earlier findings—on direct participation—underestimate the participation in GVCs of
  smaller firms, which often supply intermediates to exporting firms in their country and are, as such,
  relatively more integrated in the domestic value chains. Slaughter (2013) calculates that the typical US
  multinational enterprise (MNE) buys more than USD 3 billion in inputs from more than 6,000 US small
  and medium-size enterprises—or almost 25% of the total input purchased by those firms. Those
  domestic supplies are not reflected in international trade statistics, which count only direct exports.
  Estimates for the United States show that in 2007 the export share of SMEs increased from
  approximately 28% (in gross exports) to 41% (in value-added exports), when such indirect exports are
  taken into account (USITC 2010).

         Exploratory work shown below links national data on SMEs within the Inter-Country Input–
  Output tables developed for the OECD–World Trade Organization Trade in Value Added initiative. It
  shows that the indirect contribution of SMEs is several times greater than the direct participation in all
  countries for which data were available. When one also accounts for the contribution that SMEs make
  to exports as upstream producers, in the majority of cases, SMEs account for more than half of the
  total exports of domestic value added (trade in value added) (Figure 10). The effect of including the

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
34 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

 contribution of upstream SME suppliers is particularly large in those countries, such as Mexico, where
 the share of SMEs in direct value-added exports is lower. At the total economy level, for example, the
 contribution of SMEs nearly doubles from around 16% to about one-third of total exports of domestic
 value added.
        But despite the higher integration within countries, significant differences remain across
 countries when one looks at the scale of integration, a picture that is reinforced when looking at
 specific sectors. For example, SMEs’ contribution to total exports of manufactured goods remained
 relatively low in 2009 in Mexico and Hungary even after including upstream inputs (from both
 manufacturing and services SME upstream suppliers) (Figure 11). With relatively high foreign
 ownership (either directly through foreign investment or indirectly through operational control of
 production chains) in both Mexico and Hungary, the relatively low contribution of SMEs (coupled with
 the relatively high foreign content of exports) points to principal “controlling” firms that use foreign
 upstream suppliers, resulting in fewer spillovers to the SME sector. That finding suggests that
 improved upstream integration in both countries could be achievable through upgrading of the SME
 population to meet the quality standards, requirements, and specifications of the exporting (larger)
 firms. But more broadly, it may also require a consideration of the informal sector, especially if one
 notes that self-employment rates are around one-quarter of the workforce in Mexico.

                             Figure 10. Share of SMEs in exports 2009: total economy, %




     Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic
     Business Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Intercountry Input-Output Trade in Value Added (ICIO/TiVA) Database.




                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                   2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 35



                                 Figure 11. Share of SMEs in exports, 2009: Manufacturing




    Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic
    Business Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Intercountry Input-Output Trade in Value Added (ICIO/TiVA) Database.

         SMEs tend to channel their value added for exports through large firms rather than through
  other SMEs (Figure 12). Integration of SMEs through larger enterprises within GVCs varies across
  countries but it is significant in all cases, thereby representing over half of total exports of value added
  by SMEs in the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico, and Poland; the case of Mexico largely
  reflects the relatively low direct exports made by SMEs.
        Noteworthy is the fact that even in those sectors where the direct contribution of SMEs may be
  marginal (for example, the motor vehicles sector), the contribution of SMEs to total domestic value
  added that is embodied in the exports of motor vehicles can be significant from both upstream
  material input suppliers and upstream SME service suppliers (Figure 13).

        In many OECD countries, SMEs are the main exporters of business services. Including the
  upstream contribution made by other SMEs reinforces their significance (Figure 14). In 2009, for
  example, one-third of the total domestic value-added content of exports in the business services
  sector in the United States originated in direct exports by business service SMEs. But when one
  accounts for upstream inputs in other service (distribution) sectors and upstream manufacturers, the
  overall contribution of SMEs to domestic value added that is embodied in service exports was greater
  than half.
          Finally, SME services contribute significantly to domestic value-added exports in manufacturing
  (Figure 15), and more generally their contribution to downstream industries (see also Figure 12) is
  significant across all countries.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
36 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

                             Figure 12. Upstream exports of SMES through large firms,
                        share of total exports of value added by SMEs, 2009: Whole economy




Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic Business
Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Intercountry Input-Output Trade in Value Added (ICIO/TiVA) Database.


               Figure 13. SME share of total domestic value added of exports of motor vehicles, 2009




Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic Business
Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Intercountry Input-Output Trade in Value Added (ICIO/TiVA) Database.




                                                 INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                   2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 37



               Figure 14. SME share of total domestic value added of exports of business services, 2009




  Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic Business
  Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Intercountry Input-Output Trade in Value Added (ICIO/TiVA) Database.


                  Figure 15. SME share of total domestic value added of exports: manufacturing, 2009




  Sources: OECD/Eurostat Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC) Database; OECD Structural and Demographic Business
  Statistics (SDBS) Database; OECD Intercountry Input-Output Trade in Value Added (ICIO/TiVA) Database.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
38 – 2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS

 Links between MNEs’ investments and SMEs’ Performance
        Strong links between MNEs and their local suppliers tend to result in greater diffusion of
 knowledge, technology adoption, and know-how from foreign investors. GVCs, through backward
 value-chain links, generate demand and assistance effects in the host countries that in turn translate
 into diffusion of knowledge and technology in the supplier industry and in increases in the availability
 and quality of inputs in the buyer industry: lead firms tend to require more and better inputs from
 local suppliers and assist them through knowledge and technology sharing, advance payments, and
 other types of assistance. In this way, local suppliers receive incentives to upgrade their technology,
 and they may also diffuse knowledge to local firms. In addition, MNEs may provide higher-quality
 inputs to domestic clients. Competition between local firms may increase, and local firms may try to
 imitate the MNEs’ products and practices. In addition, knowledge embodied in labor can transmit
 from foreign to local firms through labor turnover and MNE employees turning entrepreneurs and
 creating their own start-ups.
        Local sourcing is the critical channel for delivering positive spillovers. Supply chains, particularly
 backward links through local sourcing, appear to offer the most direct channel for short- and long-
 term gains from foreign direct investment (FDI) spillovers. They also tend to be the most visible and
 easiest to quantify, which increases their importance for policy makers. For example, in a World Bank
 survey of the mining sector, Farole and Winkler (2014) find that one-third of all surveyed local
 suppliers of foreign investors in Ghana and 42% in Chile started to export directly as a result of
 supplying foreign investors. And behaviour within the supply chain matters: assistance of foreign
 investors to local supply chain partners has an important impact on spillover outcomes so policies
 oriented to attract foreign investment are relevant to integrate SMEs in GVCs. Some of these policies
 include opening services sectors to private investment, removing investment incentives against local
 sources, and financing capacity building to help SMEs get the quality standards required by foreign
 firms. Although in some cases lead firms resist integration with a local supplier base, in other cases,
 they have an economic interest in developing a local support industry in producing countries, and
 they actively pursue such objective. That suggests that it is possible to build meaningful links over
 time. A clear finding from the surveys in the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys Database is that foreign
 investors would much prefer not to have to rely on importing goods and services where cost effective
 scope exists for domestic suppliers to compete and upgrade skills and standards, in order to benefit
 from face-to-face interactions and more responsive supply chains. Samsung, a company that has
 recently invested substantially in Viet Nam, is actively attempting to grow a local supply base. In 2013,
 the company was one of the largest foreign investors in the country with USD 9 billion invested to
 date, and an additional USD 3 billion smartphone factory under development. With a shortage of local
 suppliers,1 Samsung has attempted to grow its Vietnamese supply base by organizing workshops in
 which it trains workers on the components it would like to make locally and audits the quality of
 specific suppliers. Samsung's next planned step is to organize a workshop in which it will invite its tier
 suppliers from other countries to meet with local firms to see if they can integrate them at a lower
 level in the supply chain (World Bank field interviews).
       Despite the fact that in some industries, and in particular in some complex and sophisticated
 ones, MNEs have economic interests in creating linkages, productivity spillovers to the domestic
 economy of low-income developing countries (LIDCs) from FDI remains limited. Farole and Winkler
 (2012) used a cross-section of more than 25,000 manufacturing firms in 78 low- and middle-income
 countries from the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys Indicator Database to find evidence of overall

1.   Out of the 61 suppliers servicing its factories in the country, only four are Vietnamese ( Viêt Nam News 2014).

                                                 INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                2. STYLIZED FACTS OF SMES IN GVCS – 39



  negative FDI spillovers. They found, however, that when an important share of FDI output is sold
  domestically and a larger share of local inputs is used, higher productivity spillovers for low- and
  medium-productivity domestic firms arise.
         This evidence suggests that the impact of MNEs local presence on SMEs and firms in LIDCs is
  difficult to predict a priori. If SMEs’ insertion is concentrated in low-technology or labor-intensive
  tasks, the potential for spillovers may be limited. Moreover, foreign investors are less likely to give
  assistance to local suppliers when supply contracts are ad hoc (rather than formalized and long-term).
  It is also the case that global trends toward global supply chain management in companies are
  reducing opportunities for local supply participation at the high value-added end too. With the most
  strategic and high-value purchases being coordinated on a global or regional level, for most LIDCs
  these impose significant limits on spillovers through domestic supply links.
         Nevertheless, there are also opportunities that SMEs in LIDCs may be the first to reap. Short-
  term opportunities often come from outsourcing noncore activities, many of which are likely to be
  performed by SMEs. For example, according to the survey by Farole and Winkler (2014), in Lesotho
  and Swaziland, the most common activity provided by domestic suppliers was security services —
  beyond those were cleaning, basic maintenance, and catering. Longer-term opportunities may instead
  exist for SMEs that focus on the upstream end of the value chain. For example, according to Farole
  and Winkler (2014), in Sub-Saharan Africa, the provision of assistance to local suppliers was much
  more likely when the goods and services they provided were core parts of the upstream value chain.
  In the agribusiness sectors, local firms that are most likely to receive assistance are those providing
  raw materials for agri-processing, and in the apparel sector, they are the cut-make-trim
  subcontractors. Limited series specialized orders are also more likely to be efficiently delivered by
  smaller firms.
        MNEs’ efforts to provide assistance to local suppliers are often concentrated on their specific
  needs. For example, financial support would focus on meeting short-term working capital to avoid
  delays in production and delivery, but not on longer-term, patient, engaged types of finance, which
  would enable suppliers to invest in improving productivity and embedding spillover benefits.
         Emphasis of MNEs on quality and standards represents an important area of potential for
  upgrading domestic firms, but support tends to be linked to compliance issues, such as health, safety,
  environment, and quality. However, even when quality and standards are firm specific, they are often
  built on global foundations and have the potential to upgrade the capacities of local suppliers,
  enabling them to serve other investors or to start exporting. Although setting standards is important,
  direct technical assistance appears to be critical for supporting spillovers. Survey evidence indicates
  that demand effects alone—for example, requiring local suppliers to make specific changes to
  products or processes—may have a limited impact on spillovers in LIDCs. Instead, technical assistance,
  with or without corresponding requirements of suppliers, resulted in greater spillovers. That finding
  suggests that while the proliferation of global standards within GVCs may create an opportunity for
  firm upgrading, most firms in LIDCs will require active support in order to take advantage of the
  opportunity.
        The next section will investigate in depth the challenges and constraints of participation in GVCs
  for SMEs.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
40 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS


3. Determinants of and challenges to participation by SMEs and LIDCs in GVCs


                                             Preview of key take-aways
      Informality is one of the top 5 constraints for small firms in developing countries in doing business. It
       is also a binding constraint to integrating GVCs.
      Turning to the formal economy, the broad key challenge for suppliers that want to integrate in GVCs
       or that want to strengthen and upgrade their participation in GVCs is to increase productivity and to
       access the necessary knowledge and technology to compete in international markets and to upgrade
       to higher value added activities. Broadening the skill set, innovating, and accessing foreign
       technology allow GVC suppliers both to increase productivity and to upgrade processes, products,
       functions covered, and within sectors, i.e. by entering in new, higher value added sectors.
      Key factors internal to the firm that facilitate participation in GVCs include:
       o   Managerial and workforce skills. Firms in LIDCs and some SMEs are plagued by weak managerial
           and workforce skills and inefficient organization. Those weaknesses are reflected in low levels of
           productivity, a suboptimal use of their workforce, and waste of materials and inputs that prevent
           the firm from supplying intermediate inputs at world-competitive prices.
       o   Technology adoption. Firms have also much to gain by adopting new technologies. Technology
           adoption and knowledge absorption are particularly important priorities for SMEs and firms in
           LIDCs, as the acquisition and use of existing knowledge are less costly and less risky than creating
           new processes or products. Yet, too small production scales and narrow profit margins of firms
           plugged at the low-end of the value chain lengthens the recovery period of any fixed costs of
           investment and/or information acquisition.
       o   Innovation. Innovation is seen by SMEs as one important requirement for their successful
           participation in global value chains (OECD 2008). Process and organizational innovation increases
           firm productivity by reducing production costs. Product innovation generates new and upgraded
           products, while marketing innovation differentiates a firms’ products from those of competitors,
           helping to increase market share.
      But internal capabilities alone are not sufficient. The ability of SMEs and of firms in LIDCs to swiftly
       adopt new technologies, to learn by doing, to innovate, and to optimize their production depends
       more heavily on the operating environment, since the latter determines the costs of producing,
       exporting, and importing.
      External factors that matter are wide-ranging. For suppliers from LIDCs, access to trade finance,
       transportation and shipping costs, inadequate infrastructure, and regulatory uncertainty (often tied
       to a complex business environment) are major obstacles according to surveys. Access to information
       about export opportunities and procedures and access to finance have emerged instead as the areas
       in which SMEs would value improvement most.
       o   Trade policy. Trade policy remains a strategic policy area for ensuring success in GVCs. GVCs
           magnify the costs of protectionist measures, and trade costs fall disproportionately on SMEs and
           LIDC firms, given their often lower revenue base and structural market features. Good and cheap
           access to imports matters as much as access to foreign markets. Tariffs on inputs are particularly
           costly, because they are used directly in production and drive up costs. Market access on
           services in the international marketplace is very restricted for a number of services that act as
           essential enablers in the geographic dispersion of GVCs. Such services include ICT, supply chain

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 41




             management services (to reduce inventories, shorten lead times, and enable faster customer
             response), and improved logistic services.
        o    Trade-infrastructure, connectivity, and trade facilitation measures. Geography, good
             connectivity, and streamlined procedures for imports and exports are important determinants of
             countries’ ability to join and strengthen participation in GVCs and they are a key factor in
             determining the costs of sourcing from and supplying to global markets. Getting to the border is
             one of the most pervasive constraints for exports of firms in LIDCs while the costs of logistics
             services are disproportionately high for SMEs. Improving logistics is also where LIDCs have the
             most potential to reduce trade costs, according to recent survey. Finally, well-functioning trade
             facilitation measures enable GVC trade by reducing the time, cost, and uncertainty involved in
             importing and exporting.
        o    Access to ICT networks. Better access to ICT, including the Internet and mobile
             telecommunications is an effective way for internationalizing, in particular for firms engaged in
             digital trade. The Internet dramatically reduces the cost of finding buyers, both globally and
             domestically and ICT services enable SMEs to outsource some costly activities, reducing their
             costs and barriers to trade. Technology-enabled SMEs and firms in LIDCs are much more likely to
             export, to export to more destinations, and to survive in the marketplace.
        o    Business environment and conditions that enable SMEs to reach scale. Excessive regulations can
             affect firm dynamics (such as entry, firm growth and exit) and GVC participation by inducing an
             inefficient allocation of resources across firms and lowering productivity. Administrative burdens
             (red tape) and product market regulations can serve as barriers to entry, limiting the entry of
             young innovative SMEs and restricting competition in the market. Policies that affect firm exit
             matter too. Subsidies to incumbents and other policy measures that delay the exit of less
             productive firms can stifle competition and slow the reallocation of resources from less to more
             productive firms. Examples include regulations that are less stringent for incumbents or fiscal
             measures that favour well-established firms over newcomers.
        o    Quality and product certification and international standards. Certification of quality and
             products and compliance with international standards are also another relevant challenge for
             SMEs and for firms in LIDCs to participate in GVCs. Competitive pressures in global markets
             require firms to produce at world-class standards of quality and consumers are increasingly
             attentive to production conditions. Low labour and production costs are increasingly insufficient
             as a motivation for lead firms to invest and source from LIDCs.
        o    Access to finance. Access to external sources of funding is critical to finance SMEs and trade
             finance is one of the top perceived constraints by firms in LIDCs. Size and the intangibility of
             assets play against the creditworthiness ratings of many SMEs. Trade finance to SMEs in GVCs
             and firms from LIDCs are also likely to be constrained to engage in enhancing productivity, as
             informational asymmetries (for example, adverse selection and moral hazard problems) create a
             gap between the private innovation rate of return and the cost of capital when the innovation
             investor and financier are different entities. Access to risk capital is an additional constraint for
             innovative SMEs that are seeking to grow and achieve a sufficient scale.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
42 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

       Informality is one of the top 5 constraints for small firms in developing countries in doing
 business. It is also a binding constraint to integrating GVCs. Turning to the formal economy, the broad
 key challenge for suppliers that want to integrate into global value chains (GVCs) or that want to
 strengthen and upgrade their participation in GVCs is to increase productivity and to access the
 necessary knowledge and technology to compete. These firms, which include not only small and
 medium enterprises (SMEs) and larger firms in low-income developing countries (LIDCs) but also many
 SMEs from rich countries, are often suppliers of either low or high value-added intermediate products
 (see Section 2), which they sell on the international markets. Productivity is key to selling at world-
 competitive prices (OECD 2008; OECD, 2015).2 And broadening the skill set and innovating and
 accessing foreign technology allow both SMEs and firms in LIDCs to increase productivity and to
 upgrade.
        This upgrading takes several forms, as illustrated in Figure 16. Starting from the tasks in which
 firms in a country have a comparative advantage, based on current skills, capabilities, and capital
 endowments, a country can achieve higher value added (and hence both productivity growth and
 economic growth) through a variety of channels (OECD 2013a). First, it can increase productivity in the
 current tasks of comparative advantage. And it can do so by process upgrading. Process upgrading is
 the manner through which firms acquire capabilities to process tasks with significantly higher
 efficiency and lower defect rates. Product upgrading takes place when firms acquire capabilities to
 supply higher value-added goods compared with those provided by rivals. That result occurs through
 the adoption of cutting-edge technologies, investments in R&D, and vertical and horizontal
 innovation. Functional upgrading occurs instead when firms acquire capabilities in more
 technologically sophisticated, more human capital rich, or more integrated functions and segments of
 a GVC, which are associated with higher value added. Functional upgrading is to be distinguished from
 intersectoral upgrading, which occurs when firms acquire capabilities, often leveraging the knowledge
 and skills acquired in the current chain, to participate in new GVCs, producing higher value-added
 products or services (see Figure 17 for an example of intersectoral upgrading).
       It is worth recalling that firms—not countries or governments—are the main actors in value
 chains. They participate in GVCs first and foremost to make a profit, and do so when it is in their
 business interest. The theory of comparative advantage teaches us that firms can obtain gains from
 GVCs through specialization. And that does not necessarily require producing more sophisticated or
 technology-intensive products. Value chains offer the opportunity of inserting into increasingly
 fragmented segments of production an array of products, tasks, or functions that are needed; this is
 where SMEs can engage in fruitful participation. Determining which segments of the value chain will
 be profitable is a matter of both the characteristics of the production process and the relative skills
 and resource endowments of firms (that is, the comparative advantage) (OECD 2015).




2.       As Paul Krugman (1994, 11) famously claimed, “Productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is
         almost everything. A country’s ability to improve its standard of living over time depends almost entirely
         on its ability to raise its output per worker.”

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 43



                                        Figure 16. What types of economic upgrading?




              Source: Taglioni and Winkler (2015).
                           Figure 17. Example for possible intersectoral upgrading in Nicaragua




              *Industry value chains that are currently active in Nicaragua.
              Source: Taglioni and Winkler 2015.



INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
44 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

        Recently, and perhaps mistakenly, the concept of upgrading has therefore been seen as the
 need to capture a growing share of a product’s value.3 However, this narrow view of upgrading may
 miss the point: the volume of the activity matters just as much, or more, as the share of the product.
 For example, although it is indeed true that the manufacture of garments is a relatively labour-
 intensive process that amounts to a small share of the total value of the final product (relative to the
 design and commercialization segments), it is also true that important benefits can be derived by
 SMEs from specializing in such manufacturing activities and aiming at performing them on a larger
 scale.
       The case of specialization in electronics in Asia is illustrative of this. Several firms have become
 assemblers of electronic devices par excellence and have attracted clients that include Apple, Dell,
 Amazon, Nokia, and Samsung. When considering the total value of products made by those lead firms,
 a share of 5% of the value adds up to a relatively large sum. Although those assemblers could have
 instead launched a new mobile phone to rival the larger smartphone producers (as an alternate
 business development strategy), thereby seeking to enter the higher end of the smiley curve to
 capture larger shares of the value of the final product, they would have had to capture a significant
 market share from the established electronic device producers to succeed. From this perspective, it is
 therefore important to recognize the economic value that is created by the activities of the
 assembling or manufacturing firm, and not simply focus on the share that the firm occupies in the
 value of the final product. Similarly, SMEs in LIDCs should aim to move up the value chain by seeking
 to enhance their productivity and grow their volume of activities.
       A good illustration of some of the pitfalls associated with defining upgrading relative to the
 share rather than the value added to a product is the case of Viet Nam’s production of electrical and
 optical equipment. As can be seen in Figure 18, the domestic content of Viet Nam’s electrical and
 optical equipment exports fell from 44.7% to 30.8% between 1995 and 2011, but the volume of
 domestic value added embodied in exports increased more than twenty-fold. Although certainly other
 developments in the Vietnamese and global economies not accounted for in the figure may have
 played a role, these figures provide evidence that firms operating in Viet Nam have increased the
 foreign content of their products while multiplying their overall sales, profits, and the wage bill for the
 workers they employ.
        Lessons can also be learned from looking at the determinants of movements along the value
 chain (OECD 2015 and Taglioni and Winkler, 2015). Positive changes in foreign sourcing are associated
 with positive changes in the per capita domestic value added in exports, which suggests that a greater
 use of foreign inputs is complementary to a growing per capita domestic value added in exports.
 Similarly, countries’ value chain activity (in terms of the share of foreign value added in exports) is
 linked to growing sophistication and diversification of exports as is the use of more sophisticated
 inputs. This, a priori, suggests that SMEs should benefit from policies that reduce the costs of
 accessing foreign intermediate goods so that tariff reductions and other accompanying policy
 measures aimed at reducing trading costs (such as trade facilitation and development of national
 infrastructure) are likely to matter for SMEs in LIDCs.




3.       This idea is partly spurred by the oft-cited iPad case study, which highlights the low share of value added
         that assembly occupies in the production process—less than 5% of the sale value of the iPad remains in
         China. This example has been used to justify policy objectives that seek to increase the share of the firm’s
         value added in a given product.

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 45



                                     Figure 18. Enjoying a smaller share of a larger pie:
                                        Electrical and optical equipment in Viet Nam




        Source: OECD-WTO TiVA Database, 2015 update.


         A particularly important driver for upgrading in GVCs is investment in knowledge-based capital
  (KBC). The highest level of value creation in a GVC is often found in certain upstream activities, such as
  new concept development, design, R&D, or the manufacturing of key parts and components, as well
  as in certain downstream activities, such as marketing, branding, or customer service. Such activities
  involve tacit, non-codified knowledge in areas such as original design, the creation and management
  of cutting-edge technology, and complex systems, as well as management or organizational know-
  how.
         Investments in KBC not only drive productivity growth, they also determine the extent to which
  the final product of a value chain can be differentiated in consumer markets, which in turn determines
  the total value the GVC can create. For example, much of the success of recent Apple products is due
  to design features. The value that a firm creates within a GVC also depends on the difficulty for rivals
  to supply similar or substitutable products. When a product is easy to replicate, for example, when it
  is not tacit or not protected by intellectual property rights (IPRs), rival firms can easily develop
  substitutes for the inputs that a firm provides to a GVC.
         Different types of KBC play a role in GVCs, and there are three main categories (OECD, 2013b):
  (a) computerized information (software and databases); (b) innovative property (R&D and non-R&D
  innovative expenditures, including copyrights, designs, and trademarks); and (c) economic
  competencies (brand equity, firm-specific technological and managerial skills, networks, and
  organizational structures). A recent survey of Japanese firms, for example, emphasizes the importance
  of economic competencies for competitiveness, notably “manufacturing skills,” “brand and customer
  recognition,” and “agile and flexible organization” (Figure 19). The Japanese firms that are the most
  engaged in GVCs—those with exports or imports of intermediate goods and those that own offshore
  plants—consider such competencies more important than firms without trade or foreign plants. These
  firms also put greater emphasis on cutting-edge technology and “big data” as sources of competitive
  advantage than firms oriented toward the domestic market.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
46 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

        Further, compliance with international standards is also another relevant challenge for SMEs to
 enter into GVCs. Consumers and final-good producers around the world increasingly demand products
 and services that are simultaneously good for the economy, for the environment, and for society —the
 triple bottom line of sustainable growth. Indeed, low labour and production costs are often
 insufficient motivation for lead firms to invest and source from SMEs in LIDCs. The ability to adhere to
 environmental, labour, and quality standards matters greatly, especially for SMEs, which typically face
 more difficulty in meeting them than large companies and for firms in LIDCs, which typically face more
 difficulties in meeting them than firms in rich countries.
    Figure 19. The relevance of various forms of KBC to the competitiveness of Japanese manufacturing firms




   Note: The shares do not add up to 100% because firms are allowed to select multiple forms of KBC that they consider
   essential. The figure shows the share of firms that indicate the form of KBC concerned to be essential to competitiveness.
   Source: Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (Japan) 2012.


       The World Bank Group is working to strengthen our global partnerships with governments,
 businesses, consumer and labour groups, and other international organizations in order to help SMEs
 to comply with those standards. An inclusive partnership approach opens the door to the best insights
 and most successful models from those with experience raising standards, improving productivity,
 developing skills, and spreading prosperity through participation in GVCs.
        The Better Work program: A partnership between the World Bank Group’s International
 Finance Corporation and the International Labour Organization—exemplifies how partnerships can
 make an impact. Better Work began in 2007 in response to demand from consumers and
 multinational firms for better standards in garment factories. Today, the program has helped improve
 the lives of more than one million garment workers in eight countries by helping management and
 labour work together to provide safe, clean, and equitable working environments.
      But apart from standards, in general terms, there are internal and external factors that help
 SMEs overcome those challenges and participate in GVCs. Internal factors affect SMEs’ capabilities to


                                                      INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 47



  supply both low and high value-added intermediate products at low costs, including innovation,
  technology adoption, managerial capacity, and workforce skills. External factors involve trade issues,
  business environment, and investment climate. Although both sets of drivers are very important, the
  focus of this report is on identifying areas for collective policy action. For this reason, we will provide a
  brief account of internal determinants and focus the discussion on external determinants.

Internal determinants of SME participation and upgrading in GVCs
  Innovation and technology adoption
         Innovation is seen by SMEs as one important requirement for their successful participation in
  global value chains (OECD 2008). Process and organizational innovation increases firm productivity by
  reducing production costs and allowing firms to achieve the minimum level of efficiency required to
  cover fixed exporting costs. Product innovation creates learning-by-doing effects and helps SMEs offer
  new and upgraded products, while marketing innovation and innovative branding strategies allow
  SMEs to differentiate their products from those of their competitors and gain market share in GVCs.
  Innovative SMEs are more likely to participate in international markets than other firms (Figure 20).

            Figure 20. SMEs participating in international markets by innovation status from 2010 to 2012,
                                           % of firms in the relevant group




    Note: International comparability may be limited because of differences in innovation survey methodologies and country-
    specific response patterns. European countries follow harmonised survey guidelines with the CIS.
    Source: OECD (2015), Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2015, based on Eurostat Community Innovation
    Survey (CIS-2012) and national data sources, June 2015.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
48 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

        One particularly important dimension related to innovation is the ability of SMEs to protect
 their intellectual assets (OECD 2011b). IPRs are instrumental for SMEs for a number of reasons: (a) to
 protect their innovations; (b) to position themselves competitively vis-à-vis larger enterprises in global
 markets; (c) to signal current and prospective value competitors and partners, which can help
 enhance access to finance; (d) to access knowledge markets and networks; (e) to open up new
 commercial pathways; and (f) to segment existing markets.
        Given their lack of internal financial resources, IPRs are particularly attractive to SMEs for the
 role they can play in facilitating access to finance. That role can arise through three channels: (a) as a
 signalling device for financial markets, (b) as collateral to obtain financing, and (c) as a direct source of
 finance through licensing. Indeed, a survey of firms undertaken by the European Patent Office
 indicates that SMEs are much more likely to patent for financial reasons, rather than as means to
 protect against imitation (Rassenfosse 2011). Indeed 40% of the SMEs surveyed had strong “monetary
 motivations” to apply, that is, attracting investors or licensing. By contrast, that proportion is as low as
 15% for large applicant firms. This finding indicates that lowering transaction costs for IPRs and
 increasing their signaling value (that is, by encouraging high-quality examinations) are likely to be
 particularly valuable for SMEs. See OECD (2015) for a discussion.
       Governments that are keen on generating development from GVC participation tend to pass
 rigorous IPR legislation, while at the same time they provide assistance to SMEs; for example, through
 e-learning tools that help domestic firms commercialize their intellectual property. They also assist
 them in the use of freely available technologies or the acquisition of technological licensing
 agreements. For example, Morocco provides such assistance through the Office Marocain de la
 Propriété Industrielle in the framework of its Horizon 2015 program (Taglioni and Winkler 2015).
        Further, firms also have much to gain by adopting new technologies. Technology adoption and
 knowledge absorption are particularly important priorities for SMEs in LIDCs. The acquisition and use
 of existing knowledge are less costly and less risky than is the creation of new processes or products,
 while the productivity rewards can be substantial. Cooperation with foreign partners upstream and
 downstream is critical in this respect and can improve firm efficiency, because SMEs can obtain
 substantial benefits with regard to information flow, technology transfer, learning opportunities, and
 imitation or demonstration effects that occur in the context of interactions with suppliers and clients.
 Cooperation with universities or other knowledge institutions can be helpful too and associated with
 greater diffusion of foreign technologies (OECD, 2015).
        For example, the technologies that foreign companies frequently use are not always available in
 domestic markets. Domestic firms sometimes imitate foreign technologies to increase production
 efficiency and supply intermediate goods at a lower price (Blomström and Kokko 1998). Alternatively,
 they use the new technology to produce high-quality products at low costs. Formal or informal
 contact with affiliates of foreign firms also provides information about the pros and cons of using
 particular technologies and creates productivity spillovers (Javorcik 2004; Rodríguez-Clare 1996; Wang
 and Blomström 1992). In addition, demonstration externalities help SMEs acquire the knowledge
 needed to use more efficient production techniques. These effects are most prominent in tightly
 organized supply chains, where the local supply base is large and fragmented. Foreign investors have
 an incentive to promote demonstration effects when providing individual technical assistance is
 prohibitive or inefficient. This approach is most apparent in the agribusiness value chain, where
 foreign investors actively promote demonstration effects by supporting the upgrading of their
 suppliers through establishment of demonstration plots and nucleus farms. But spillovers from
 demonstration are constrained by limited collaboration between foreign investors and domestic firms


                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 49



  in the same sector. Findings from survey work in Sub-Saharan Africa (Farole and Winker 2014)
  indicate that in most countries in the region, sector collaboration is weak, particularly between
  foreign-owned and domestic firms. Of the three sectors studied by Farole and Winkler, only
  agribusiness showed any significant levels of collaboration between foreign firms and the domestic
  sector, particularly through links with national training centers and research institutes.
         Fostering innovation and technology adoption is not always easy and—to a large extent—
  success depends on structural features of individual GVCs. In an attempt to facilitate innovation and
  technology adoption from foreign direct investment (FDI) in the automotive sector to local firms,
  Invest in Macedonia, the investment agency of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, has tried
  to encourage FDI in the automotive sector to bring tier 2 and tier 3 suppliers to FYR Macedonia as
  well. The idea is that tier 1 global suppliers might guarantee their smaller suppliers a significant
  amount of work through long-term contracts in return for co-locating. These firms in exchange might
  be more open to forming strategic partnerships with the local automotive cluster, also composed
  predominantly of SMEs. However, small suppliers generally do not have the resources or market
  incentives to internationalize production. Moreover, suppliers of basic inputs (such as chemicals,
  semiconductors, wire, metals, and plastics) tend to be large and serve a broad customer base, but
  they have capital-intensive production facilities with very high minimum scale requirements. As a
  result, they tend to supply customers regionally and globally from a handful of production locations.

  Managerial skills and workforce capacity
         SMEs in LIDCs are generally plagued by weak managerial skills and inefficient organization.
  Those weaknesses are reflected in low levels of productivity, a suboptimal use of their workforce,
  wasting of materials and inputs, and poor efficiency at the level of the production floor (Iacovone and
  Qasim, 2013). Management can itself be thought of as a technology (Bloom, Sadun, and Van Reenen
  2013), with empirical evidence suggesting that raising managerial quality could significantly raise
  productivity (Andrews and Criscuolo 2013; Figure 20). A competitive and open business environment
  tends to favour the adoption of superior managerial practices and reduces incentives for maintaining
  inefficient business structures (e.g. via inheritance tax exemptions that may prolong the existence of
  poorly managed family-owned firms), thus facilitating within-firm productivity improvements (OECD,
  2015).
         Specifically, the ability and capacity of the entrepreneur to implement a business plan largely
  determine the success or failure of a firm at creation and during growth. Further, a skilled workforce is
  also a relevant determinant of firm productivity. Acquiring the right mix of skills, ideas, and talents is a
  challenge for entrepreneurs, especially in markets where the required skills are scarce or expensive.
  Even where available, ensuring that the right mix of skills is matched to an entrepreneurial venture
  requires reducing information asymmetry about skill sets and effective contracting mechanisms that
  guarantee the efficient allocation of skills and talent across firms (Iacovone and Qasim 2013).
  Relatively high rates of skills mismatch in many countries point to rigidities in labour market matching
  that reduce resource re-allocation and also constrain the growth of young and innovative SMEs
  (OECD. 2015).
         Foreign investors make relatively greater use of local skilled staff than they do of local suppliers
  in LIDCs, but that varies significantly across countries. In Chile’s mining sector, for example, 70–80% of
  workers in skilled positions are local, whereas across surveyed African countries, the share ranges
  from 30% to 50%. In agribusiness, 75–85% of management, supervisory, and technical workers in
  Kenya and Viet Nam are local, whereas the figures were 10–1 percentage points lower in Ghana and


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
50 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 Mozambique. Finally, in apparel, although more than two-thirds of management and technical staff
 are local in Kenya, fewer than 20% are local in Swaziland.
        Localizing skilled positions is constrained by supply. Survey results from several LIDCs indicate
 that by far the biggest constraint perceived by foreign investors to hiring more local staff in technical
 and managerial positions was the lack of skilled labour. Field interviews of GVC firms in Viet Nam, for
 instance, suggest that the local education system is poorly suited to the modern international
 business environment. Education in foreign languages and soft business skills (presentations, team
 work, and business planning, as well as sales and marketing) were found to be critical deficiencies.
 Branding, marketing, and retail services are necessary for brand development, in apparel production,
 for example. LIDCs that target upward graduation in this sector will need to enhance a firm’s capacity
 in branding, marketing, and retail services, for the domestic market and overseas markets as well. The
 problem is particularly severe for SMEs. Within these firms, branding and marketing are generally
 performed in-house with few resources invested in those activities. And for most, they comprise
 “merchandising teams,” which are responsible for organizing orders from clients, rather than “sales
 and marketing teams.”
                                  Figure 20. Managerial quality differs across countries
                                       with important implications for productivity




   Note: The overall management score is an average of responses to 18 survey questions that are designed to reveal the extent
   to which firms: (i) monitor what goes on inside the firm and use this information for continuous improvement; (ii) set targets and
   track outcomes; and (iii) effectively utilise incentive structures (e.g. promote and rewarding employees based on performance).
   The estimates in the right panel are calculated from the difference in management score between each country and the United
   States and the estimated coefficient on the management score term in a firm level regression of sales on management scores,
   capital and employment. The sample is based on medium-sized firms, ranging from 50 to 10 000 employees.
   Source: Andrews and Criscuolo 2013, based on the management scores and estimated coefficients in Bloom et al. 2012.




                                                        INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 51



         The lack of foreign-language skills in many LIDCs is also a serious impediment to GVC-driven
  growth. Take again the case of Viet Nam. Japan is an increasingly important software outsourcing
  market for Viet Nam. In fact, Viet Nam recently overtook India as the second-largest exporter of
  software services to Japan. However, Japanese-language skills are very scarce in Viet Nam. Future
  growth will depend in part on the availability of Vietnamese with Japanese-language skills. A similar, if
  less severe problem exists with the US market, which requires English-language skills.
         Localizing skilled positions may, sometimes, also be hindered by FDI corporate culture. Foreign
  investors also continue to reserve certain functions for foreign workers and suppliers that co-locate
  with them, for reasons of corporate culture; when there is a significant language gap between the
  host country and the foreign investors; or when the costs of supporting foreign workers and suppliers
  (including relocation costs) are relatively low. The Nigerian oil industry, for example, failed over the
  years to provide significant employment for local populations. The lack of job opportunities combined
  with the demise of fishing—because of pollution from the oil industry—translated into increased
  poverty and, eventually, social unrest.
         Difficulties notwithstanding, broadening the skill set in a country is possible. Some countries
  managed to leverage their initial low-cost advantage to retool their workforce toward higher skills,
  using public institutions. That is, for example, the case for Costa Rica and FYR Macedonia. The latter—
  with an unemployment rate of 30% and a large segment of the labour force suited for basic
  production work without extensive training—initially attracted FDI because of its cheap labour.
  According to World Bank field interviews, one company, assessing the opportunity to locate in the
  country, had concerns about the quality of the labour force. Before its full commitment, it met with
  the faculty of electrical and mechanical engineering at the University of Skopje, which it found was
  open to collaborating with the company. A program has been established since then to allow students
  the opportunity to spend their senior year on a curriculum that teaches skills relevant to the
  company’s in-country activities. The company has worked closely with the university in other ways as
  well, financing one of its laboratories and creating a scholarship program to finance studies for some
  engineering students. A 10- to 12-week summer internship is another part of that collaborative effort.
  The program offers students summer employment and full-time permanent employment upon
  graduation if they have satisfied the program’s requirements. Following the example of this first
  company, other FDI established similar programs too. As a result, availability of high technical skills is
  now considered one of the factors of attractiveness of FYR Macedonia.

  Creating shared value in LIDCs and SMEs
         Not all GVCs are accessible to LIDCs and SMEs. Globalized industries, with cutting-edge
  technology may not be the best entry point for the poorest among LIDCs to integrate GVCs. Gold,
  tantalum (also commonly referred to as coltan), tin, and tungsten—four minerals with a large
  production base in Sub-Saharan Africa—are necessary to the functionality or production of products,
  including integrated circuits, assembled products, and evaluation boards, which, depending on the
  product, contain one or more of these minerals (see red box in the top-left corner of Figure 21). The
  imports of these minerals are very concentrated: China and Malaysia cover more than 80% of the
  total world imports of tin, and China, the United States, Thailand, and Hong Kong, China cover more
  than 90% of the global imports of tantalum. The process of bringing such metals to an exploitable
  form usually includes mining, separation, refining, fabrication of alloys, and final manufacturing in the
  components.



INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
52 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

                                                     Figure 21. The ICT GVC




            Source: Sturgeon, Gereffi et al. 2013.




                                                        INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 53



         Building the capacity to create more local content from the industries exploiting these minerals
  may therefore be very difficult for countries that lack the skills to process such minerals and that are
  subject to frequent power outages. Although costly, the economic return of such endeavour is also
  very difficult to predict. With demand growing well above supply and because of the high
  concentrated nature of the market for these minerals, alternative technologies and innovation are
  being pursued by the big manufacturers of the end-use high-tech applications. Recycling and
  engineering out the use of such materials in valuable industries, such as the consumer electronics and
  the auto sectors, are part of the efforts of large companies such as Mitsubishi, Hitachi, and General
  Electric.
         Meanwhile, focusing on creating domestic value in areas closer to the technology frontier of
  the producing country may have higher payoffs in terms of spillovers to the domestic economy and to
  a broad base of domestic producers is more likely. That objective can be reached in several ways,
  including by improving the quality of products and production in sectors of comparative advantage, by
  identifying market-based mechanisms and business models that foster more local value creation, and
  by strengthening the domestic absorptive capacity and diversifying the local supply.
           With the risk of disruptive innovation less likely and the technological innovation and
            capabilities necessary for upgrading at closer reach, the efforts to upgrade Rwanda’s
            production of coffee is a case in point. Coffee is a key export crop of Rwanda. In 2003, an
            aggressive strategy was developed to increase total exports of coffee and move the industry
            into high-quality, specialty end markets. Major efforts put in place included participation in
            international exhibitions, demonstrations, contests, and above all strict quality control. Two
            long-term, donor-funded projects helped producers develop buyer–seller relationships and
            helped growers raise quality. Aid projects have also helped farmers form cooperatives to meet
            the requirements of “fair trade” coffee and to experiment with organic and shade-grown
            coffees, all of which command a substantial premium over ordinary coffee. Increased access
            to washing stations increased the farmers’ income by up to 55%. Washing and grading the
            coffee cherries have made it possible to obtain prices for products of higher quality, giving
            farmers an incentive to increase quality. Regulatory reform has also allowed individual
            Rwandese cooperatives and private owners to negotiate directly with specialty rosters in the
            United States and Europe, enabling them to sell at more than twice the market rate (Nielsen
            2008).
           Identifying market-based mechanisms and business models that by construction create more
            value in producing countries is also a paying strategy. An ongoing World Bank project in Haiti
            is supporting ten local development teams with capacity-building and specific financing tools.
            The objective is to create “shared value alliances” of local farmers or small manufacturers and
            international logistic companies to increase their share of value in mango, avocado, coffee,
            and garment GVCs.
           Strengthening the domestic absorptive capacity, including through a well-targeted supplier
            program is also likely to help. The Czech Supplier Development Program was designed by the
            World Bank Foreign Investment Advisory Services in 1999. The first round of the Czech
            program was implemented by CzechInvest using pre-accession European Union Phare funding
            of USD 4 million in 2000–02. The program aimed to connect Czech suppliers to global value
            chains and increase local content in the electronics sector in the first phase. Later phases
            focused on the automotive and aerospace sectors. The first phase of the program involved 32
            multinational companies and 48 SMEs that received training and intensive consultancy

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
54 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

          services. An independent evaluation undertaken 18 months after the end of the pilot showed
          that 15 companies had gained new business that they attributed to the program, with those
          contracts worth USD 18 million annually in 2003. Four companies had also found new
          companies abroad, and three companies had obtained contracts with a higher value-added
          content. The World Bank teams have used their experience advising the government of Costa
          Rica, developing a loan project in Kazakhstan, and providing technical assistance to FYR
          Macedonia.

External determinants of SME participation in GVCs

        Although firm capabilities are crucial to determine SMEs’ participation in GVCs, external
 conditions are equally relevant, as they can facilitate or impede GVCs’ participation. Understanding
 the determinants of GVC participation is a first step in unravelling how governments can target their
 policies to better spread the gains of GVC participation to the wider population. These determinants
 can be subsumed into two broad categories: (a) factors that are not easily influenced by policy, at
 least in the short to medium-term, and (b) factors that can be reflected in measures such as trade and
 investment openness. Importantly, since structural characteristics differ widely across countries, one
 cannot simply compare the level of participation across countries and say that a country with higher
 participation is “doing better” in GVCs. Larger countries, for example, tend to have lower rates of
 participation, which is attributed to the fact that they have larger domestic markets from which to
 draw their intermediate goods and services.
        Market size, level of development, industrial structure, and location are some of the main
 determinants of aggregate GVC participation, but trade and other policies can also play a significant
 role. Low import tariffs, both at home and faced in export markets; engagement in regional trade
 agreements (RTAs); inward FDI openness; trade facilitation; logistics performance; infrastructure;
 intellectual property protection; and the quality of regulations and institutions can all facilitate GVC
 engagement (Kowalski et al. 2015).

        As far as firms’ perception is concerned, a survey on Aid for Trade conducted jointly by the
 OECD and the WTO in 2013 shows that for suppliers from LIDCs, access to finance (in particular trade
 finance) is the main obstacle preventing them from entering, establishing, or moving up value chains
 (Figure 22). They also cited transportation and shipping costs, inadequate infrastructure, and
 regulatory uncertainty (often tied to a complex business environment) as major obstacles, together
 with a lack of labor force skills. Among lead firms, customs procedures ranked high as a particular
 obstacle to bringing suppliers in LIDCs into their value chains, as well as standards compliance issues.
 Informal practices and payment requests were also cited as of particular concern in their relationships
 with suppliers.




                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 55



                     Figure 22. Barriers faced by firms in entering value chains: Private sector views




     Note: LIDC suppliers in bold, as compared to lead firms.
     Source: OECD-WTO (OECD and WTO 2013).


  Access to external sources of funding4
        Access to external sources of funding is critical to finance SMEs that want to participate in
  GVCs. However, this implies overcoming several obstacles. The first obstacles have nothing specifically
  to do with value chains, but they make banks and many financial institutions reluctant to lend to
  SMEs. The way banks, in particular, approach credit underwriting and portfolio management makes
  SMEs expensive and difficult to acquire as clients, and equally expensive and difficult to serve. SMEs’
  business is too small to support the heavy hand-holding approach banks use for corporate finance,
  and they don’t have the Bloomberg screen-ready third party rating and other information corporate
  bankers need to see, nor audited accounts (nor any decent accounts, in many cases).
         In most emerging markets (and in many OECD markets) SMEs and their entrepreneurs have no
  credit report, because they’ve never borrowed from a formal financial institution. Further, size and
  the intangibility of assets, in particular for young, innovative SMEs, play against the creditworthiness
  ratings of many SMEs. Creditworthiness is indeed still mostly based on the evaluation of a company’s
  assets and liabilities recorded on its balance sheet. Routinely, banks rely on past performance, current
  turnover, and liquidity of the firm as predictors for repayment ability. For the most part, company
  valuations based on a company’s balance sheet do not include potential for future earnings in their
  decision-making processes. They fail to take into account the intrinsic worth of the firm’s know -how,
  pool of talent, distribution channels, business relationships, business model, access to technology, and


4.      The authors would like to thank the inputs provided by Matthew Gamser, Chief Operations Officer from
        the World Bank Group.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
56 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 so forth. This is increasingly an archaic measure of the true intrinsic value of a firm, particularly for
 service-oriented firms, start-ups, and GVC suppliers.
        Limitations to securing movable assets in financial transactions pose a fundamental obstacle to
 value chain finance development in many countries, including many G20 nations. The Financial
 Stability Board designated the World Bank’s ICR standard as the UNCITRAL Legislative Guides as best
 practices for protecting creditor rights. However, many G20 nations fall short of best practice
 standards in this area. Some G-20 countries still use document registration, requiring delivery and
 recording of pledge agreements (and sometimes other documents) at the registry, instead of the
 recommended “notice” system. Other countries don’t use a centralized registry or single registry for
 all types of movable assets. Some European Union countries still require physical appearance by one
 or both parties before the registry in order to register security interests. Even within the European
 Union and other regional economic entities there has been little harmonization of practice to date in
 this area. Given the limitations of G20 and developed country regimes, it is small wonder that few
 emerging market countries present encouraging environments for using movables as collateral.5
        Banks and other financial institutions’ comfort with supply chain financing will increase as they
 gain greater information on transactions in those chains, reducing information asymmetries in the
 SME market. This necessitates access to such non-conventional financial/credit information – not
 always supported in countries’ credit information regimes, particularly in countries which have a
 dominant central registry operated by a government agency. This agency, often the central bank, can
 face political obstacles as it seeks to add new supply chain data which may fall under the purview of a
 different ministry (Industry and Trade, Economy, or Commerce, for example). Even in countries where
 private credit information aggregators are present, new, post-Snowden regulations have been
 tightening conditions for data access. While consumer privacy rights must be protected, care should
 be taken to ensure an appropriate balance between this protection and the economic/employment
 benefits of greater SME access to financing.
        The implementation of Basel II/III, which already caused a ripple in trade finance systems
 before the European Union Capital Requirements Directive IV allowed for more appropriate credit
 conversion factors, will pose additional challenges to banks looking to increase supply chain financing.
 The World Bank Group’s February-March, 2015, survey of 53 emerging markets regulators for the
 Basel Consultative Group found that most believe the Basel II revisions on credit risk will have an
 adverse influence on lending to SMEs. The regulators felt that treatment of SME exposures not
 qualifying for inclusion in retail portfolios one of the main areas worthy of rethinking and possible
 revision.6
       Regardless of the outcome of Basel II/III implementation, which is some years away in many
 emerging market countries, few supervisory regimes recognize movable assets in determining lending
 reserve requirements. This ignores the practical utility of realizing securities in movables-based



5.     Data in this section taken from 2 reports from the World Bank Group. G20 analysis is from a report to the
       Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion and the Investment and Infrastructure Working Group, 23 April
       2015. EU findings are from a World Bank presentation to the European Commission with regard to its
       Green Paper on Capital Markets Integration, 30 January 2015.
6.     World Bank Survey March 2015, Basel II – Proposed Revisions to the Standardised Approach to Credit Risk.
       See also GPFI/SME Finance Forum, Small and Medium Enterprise Finance: New Findings, Trends and G-
       20/Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion Progress, Washington, DC: August 2013.

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 57



  financing discussed earlier—particularly in receivables financing done on electronic payments
  platforms—and discourages bankers from considering alternative movables-backed financing options.
         All these inhibiting factors can be overcome. A number of specialized non-bank financial
  institutions have entered the supply chain financing market. From Alibaba in the east, to OnDeck
  Capital, Kabbage and others in the west, they are a recognized and growing presence in this area.
  They can ignore many of the regulatory and supervisory issues, and can adjust their business practices
  to minimize other obstacles, while they maximize access to the growing electronic data streams that
  underlie their lending models. At the same time, as non-banks they are constrained in many markets
  in fundraising, and in all markets in the range of financial products and services they can offer.
  Policymakers should strive to improve their enabling environments to remove barriers for banks
  wishing to compete in supply chain finance, particularly if they want to see longer-term financing
  based on supply chain relationships. Such longer term financing will be critical to SMEs’ abilities to
  increase productivity and efficiency (including resource and energy efficiency), which are vital to
  keeping up with raising quality and sustainability standards in global supply chains.
         SMEs in GVCs are likely to be credit constrained for one more reason. They are likely to engage
  in productivity-enhancing activities and innovate. Innovation is intended in the broad sense. It
  includes not only evolutionary and revolutionary advances in technology, process, or product offering
  but also new approaches, new business models, new channels, new value propositions, and new
  marketing and branding strategies, that is, the broad range of activities pursued by firms willing to
  find an insertion point in GVCs and to upgrade their participation.
         There are financial market reasons for innovation underinvestment even in the absence of
  externality-induced underinvestment.7 These reasons are related to informational asymmetries (such
  as adverse selection and moral hazard problems) that create a gap between the private innovation
  rate of return and the cost of capital when the innovation investor and financier are different entities.
  Adverse selection occurs because banks don’t know the default risk of a particular borrower; they can
  base the price of a loan only on the average default risk. As a result, low-risk borrowers face higher
  interest rates than they would if there was perfect information, and they may choose not to seek a
  loan. Moral hazard emerges when banks cannot perfectly monitor the activities of the innovator after
  the loan has been approved. Consequently, an innovator may be tempted to take on a more risky
  project than what had been originally agreed, since in case of success he or she gets all of the upside,
  while in case of failure the loss is capped. Informational asymmetries are typically a more relevant
  problem for start-ups and SMEs than for large companies; exacerbating the R&D underinvestment

7.      Externality-induced underinvestment. The idea that innovation is difficult to finance in a freely competitive
        marketplace dates back to the articles of Nelson (1959) and Arrow (1962). In particular, two characteristics
        of the innovation process make innovation finance more difficult: (a) innovation produces an intangible
        asset, and (b) the returns to innovation investment are highly uncertain. See Hall and Lerner (2009) and
        Kerr and Nanda (2014) for a review. Intangible assets do not typically constitute accepted collateral to
        obtain external funding. Much of the knowledge created in innovation processes is tacit rather than
        codified and embedded in the human capital of a firm’s employees (who can leave) and its organizational
        capital. Even when this knowledge is codified and registered —for instance, in the form of a patent—its
        value is hard to measure. Further, the distribution of returns is highly skewed. There is a large probability
        of failure and a small probability of huge success. Then, since quantifying the probability of success and
        failure is typically impossible, the expected return to that investment cannot be estimated. This uncertainty
        creates significant problems for standard risk adjustment methods used by funding providers. Two types of
        uncertainty are typically present—technological uncertainty and market uncertainty —and the mixture of
        them can vary a lot (Bravo-Biosca et al., 2015).

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
58 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 problem as it is widely documented in the role that these firms play in fostering innovation (Acs and
 Audretsch 1987; Ewens and Fons-Rosen 2013).
        Markets provide in general less finance for small and medium-size companies willing to grow
 and innovate than is socially desirable. As a result, nonmarket or informal forms of financing are used
 mostly by start-ups and SMEs. A survey of Japanese SMEs and start-ups (Mitsubishi UFJ Research &
 Consulting 2012) finds that, in fewer than 25% of the cases, funds are borrowed from private financial
 institutions. The founder’s own funds and financing and support from family and relatives are by far
 the two most popular sources of capital (Figure 23).
        Most sources of financing fall in at least one of three categories of investors: (a) emotional
 investors, (b) strategic investors, and (c) financial investors. In the first category are those who invest
 out of personal emotional relationship, so investments tend to be nonmarket based. Strategic
 investors base their decision on some nonfinancial objective, such as access to R&D or a supplier–
 buyer relationship. GVC buyers or lead firms may act as strategic investors. Finally, financial investors
 are primarily or exclusively driven by a return on investment. Market failures in financing for SMEs
 that can be addressed by policy intervention fall mainly in the latter category.

                                  Figure 23. Support for start-ups and SMEs in Japan




        Source: “Mitsubishi UFJ Research & Consulting 2012.


       Although there are many different sources of capital (banks, finance companies, leasing
 companies, public government lending programs, trade credits, private investors, venture capital,
 intermediaries), the sources fall mainly into two categories: (a) debt financing, which essentially
 means the firms borrows money and repay with interest, and (b) equity financing, whereby the
 investors are rewarded with part ownership.
         Debt financing is accessible to SMEs mostly through banks after the start-up phase. As lending
          policies were made stricter in the wake of Basel III, banks have become a lot stingier with
          financing for SMEs. This is true both in developed countries (see OECD’s SME Finance
          Scorecard) and in LIDCs.
         Equity is another external source of finance for SMEs, and is particularly important for the more
          innovative SMEs. SMEs tend to prefer debt financing over equity financing, as issuing new
          equity dilutes an entrepreneur’s control of the firm and can become a source of conflict if
          disagreements among shareholders emerge. Moreover, access by SMEs to equity finance is
          sometimes constrained by demand-side weaknesses, such as lack of “investment readiness.”
          The latter means that SME owners are unwilling to seek external equity finance or that those
          who are willing to do so do not understand what equity investors are looking for and do not
          know how to sell their business propositions in a way that is attractive to potential investors

                                                     INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 59



          (Mason and Kwok 2010). The advantages of equity financing over debt financing for SMEs are
          however that it increases risk sharing and gives the entrepreneur access to the investors’
          networks and expertise.
         Acting directly on the entrepreneur is only one way to support financing of entrepreneurial
  activity. A common form of intervention in SME credit markets is represented by partial credit
  guarantee (PCG) schemes. The main objective of PCGs is to reduce the net losses that commercial
  banks may incur in case of default by SME borrowers. However, PCGs can potentially play a more
  important role, especially in countries with weak institutional environments, by improving the
  information available on borrowers in coordination with credit registries, and by building the credit
  origination and risk management capacity of participating banks. Moreover, PCGs can also play an
  important countercyclical role, providing support to small businesses during a downward economic
  cycle when a credit crunch is likely to set in.
          Results from a recent survey carried out by the Italian government seeking to promote the
  internationalization of SMEs (SIMES 2012) offer insights as to the needs for overcoming bottlenecks to
  the financing of GVC participation by SMEs. The ingredients of the approach suggested by the Italian
  agency SIMES include (a) promoting a policy that has regional connectivity, (b) connecting more than
  one region together (an LIDC and a non-LIDC region), and (c) forming a public–private partnership to
  fix all the objectives and responsibilities that defines eligibility criteria, cross-border projects and
  sectorial coverage, entry, and exit.
         Many countries have recently taken action to enhance access to equity financing, notably for
  young and innovative firms. Most measures are on the supply side, as these are perceived as being
  more direct. These range from grants, loans and guarantee schemes to tax incentives and equity
  instruments (Wilson, 2015). In OECD countries, there has been an increase in the use of equity
  instruments, but the focus has shifted from government equity funds investing directly to more
  indirect models such as co-investments funds and fund-of-funds. These later approaches seek to
  leverage private investment and a number of OECD countries are experimenting with different
  incentive structures. While supply side interventions have increased, there is little evidence of the
  impact of these instruments and whether or not they crowd out private investors.
        The demand side is also critical to success of seed and early stage financing, and can include
  both human and social capital development. Specific programmes such as incubators, accelerators,
  business angel networks and matchmaking services have become increasingly popular. Initiatives to
  create a more entrepreneurial culture are also vital. In many countries the fear and cost of failure is
  higher than perceived opportunities and/or the perceived skills to pursue those opportunities.
         Despite these policies, the business environment in a country has perhaps the most impact on
  the provision of seed and early stage finance. The development of financial markets and exit
  opportunities, whether through IPOs on a stock exchange or mergers and acquisitions by other firms,
  directly influences the development of seed and early stage financing. Bankruptcy regulations, labour
  market restrictions and other framework conditions also impact firm dynamics as well as the creation,
  financing growth of innovative firms. Regulatory barriers and administrative burdens on institutional
  investors, venture capital funds, angel investors and high growth firms can have a direct result on the
  provision of seed and early stage finance. In particular, securities legislations and more stringent
  capital requirements on institutional investors could reduce the supply of investment in venture
  capital from banks, pension funds and insurance companies, traditionally three of the largest types of
  private institutional investors.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
60 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 Bottlenecks in Infrastructure
         Geography is an important determinant of countries’ ability to join GVCs (OECD 2012, Kowalski
 et. al. 2015). Nevertheless, the trade accessibility of countries is driven by more than the geographic
 distance from their trading partners. As Figure 24 shows, major transport routes (for example, the
 shipping lanes depicted in light blue) effectively reduce remoteness for major urban areas with good
 trade and travel infrastructure. Indeed, the ability of firms and countries to participate in GVCs is
 greatly affected by the quality of physical infrastructure, such as roads, ports, and airports, as well as
 the efficiency of the procedures followed in the operation of those facilities. Getting to the border is
 one of the most pervasive constraints to SMEs’ and LIDC firms’ exports.
         In a world where just-in-time delivery is now the norm, and in which transit is rapid and storage
 is expensive, time is quite literally money. For products ranging from electronics (which can quickly
 become obsolete) to fruits and vegetables (which are perishable) to apparel (which is seasonal and
 subject to the whims of fashion), a day’s delay is equivalent to a tariff of 1% or more. That is
 evidenced by the willingness of traders to pay more for faster airfreight than they do for slower water
 freight (Hummels Lugovskyy, and Skiba 2007), even when shipping costs are significantly higher than
 tariffs or other trade costs. In their study of Africa’s exports, Freund and Rocha (2010) conclude that,
 of all the variables responsible for delays in the production chain—transit, documentation burdens,
 ports, and customs delays—the most important was transit delays. Reducing inland transit time by
 one day would increase exports by 7%; such a reduction is equivalent to a 1.5% decrease in the tariff
 of all of Africa’s importing trading partners. The effect is more important for time-sensitive goods,
 such as perishable food products.

                                            Figure 24. Travel time to major cities




   Note: The figure represents travel time to more than 8,000 cities by land, air, and water for 2000. In developed countries, only
   15% of people lived more than one hour from a major city, while in LIDCs the share was 65%.
   Source: Nelson, 2008.

                                                        INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 61



         The ability of firms and industries in LIDCs to engage in trade is determined much more by the
  quality of their port facilities (sea and air) than by the types of preferential access that they might
  enjoy in major industrialized markets. Reliable and cost-competitive infrastructure facilitates both
  trade linkages and FDI attraction. Significant gaps in the provision of infrastructure hold back
  competitiveness and the expansion of production in LIDCs. Limão and Venables (2001) estimate that
  transport costs for the median landlocked country are 46% higher than equivalent costs in countries
  with direct access to the coast. Similar conclusions are found in studies that measure the effects of
  multiple types of infrastructure together to examine the collective impact on trade. For example,
  Piermartini and Nordas (2004)—looking at the quality of ports, the density of airports with paved
  railways, and the density of Internet users and of mobile phone subscribers—find that port
  infrastructure matters for all sectors, whereas timeliness and access to telecommunication matter
  more in the clothing and automotive sectors. Limão and Venables (2001) show that landlocked
  countries face higher transport costs since their ability to trade depends also on the infrastructure of
  the neighbouring transit countries. For example, in East Africa, goods bound for landlocked countries
  face the time equivalent of at least three clearance processes of coastal countries. “Poor
  infrastructure accounts for 40% of predicted transport costs for coastal countries and up to 60% for
  landlocked countries.” Furthermore, for landlocked countries, they calculate that improvements in
  their own infrastructure from the 25th%ile to the 75th%ile would effectively overcome more than half
  the disadvantage of being landlocked (Limão and Venables 2001).
        Telecommunications infrastructure is also important, not only to support value chains of
  physical goods but also to enable the creation and trade of digital services that account for a growing
  share of total international trade.
        Infrastructure development is therefore an important element in enabling LIDCs to participate
  in GVCs. Whereas telecommunications links are crucial for participation in all GVCs, but notably in
  offshore services GVCs, transportation and energy infrastructure play a particularly important role in
  manufacturing and extractive GVCs. These economies therefore need to invest more in infrastructure,
  but above all, they need to improve the effectiveness of public infrastructure policies.
          One example of a country that successfully invested in infrastructure to reduce congestion and
  improve connectivity is Morocco. The country’s historical port, Casablanca, remains the main port for
  imports and exports. The major constraint of the port is that it is located in the city, which reduces the
  potential for expansion and imposes additional constraints on the land transportation of goods. But
  ports in Morocco have seen important changes in recent years. Tanger-Med started operations in
  2007 and is one of the largest regional development projects. The port container terminal had an
  initial capacity of 3.5 million containers and is expected to handle 8 million containers this year. The
  free zone of Tanger-Med is managed by the company operating the Dubai free zone, and the
  container terminal concessions were awarded to reputable international companies (Maersk for the
  first container terminal and MSC for the second one). The Moroccan government is currently planning
  another major portcentric development region, Nador West Med, consisting of a deep-sea port with
  transshipment capacity and focusing on the energy sector and a large industrial platform. The port is
  expected to be in service in 2019 with an initial capacity of 3 million containers, 25 million tons of
  hydrocarbons, and 7 million tons of coal.
        Another example of how to heal the infrastructure bottlenecks constraining connectivity in
  LIDCs is the Indonesian port of Jakarta. In 2008, the World Bank Group suggested ways to improve
  operations at Tanjung Priok, which handles two-thirds of Indonesia’s international trade and has seen
  a rapid rise in container traffic. A main goal of the port initiative was to reduce dwell time —the


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
62 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 average time it takes containers to clear the port. In 2011, Tanjung Priok’s dwell time was six days,
 longer than Indonesia’s regional peers (Singapore one day, Malaysia four days, Thailand five days). To
 reduce dwell time, the port operator raised storage fees (to discourage shippers from leaving
 containers for long periods) and introduced a new information technology system (to better monitor
 and direct port traffic). A scheduled expansion of the port is expected to double its container capacity
 by 2017.
        But building infrastructure alone without changes in policies to improve the efficiency of its use
 will not necessarily lead to lower transport prices. Arvis, Mustra et al. (2010), using the World Bank’s
 Logistics Performance Index, show convincingly that “logistics or trade services is more important for
 limiting the costs of being landlocked that investing massively in infrastructure and neglecting the
 functioning of logistics services.” They point out that more than half of the time it takes to transport
 cargo from the port to the hinterland is spent in ports. Dwell times in Africa average more than two
 weeks. Those dwell times are long for several reasons: volumes are low, facilities are not operated
 competitively, logistics are poorly organized, storage facilities are inadequate, charges for storage are
 high, and port management (usually a government agency) does not have adequate incentives to
 speed up the process (see Raballand et al. 2012). Coordination and effectiveness of public
 infrastructure policies are key.
        For telecommunications too, the issue is not just about infrastructure, but also about access and
 pricing. Infrastructure—which provides the foundation for global value chains, new business models
 and e-commerce—needs to be of high quality, accessible to all and available at competitive prices.
 With competition in the digital economy being challenged by several major shifts including technical
 convergence and the integration of business models among telecommunication providers as well as
 new Internet players, governments around the world must engage in efforts to protect competition,
 lower artificial barriers to entry, and strengthen regulatory coherence (OECD, 2015). Once
 infrastructure is in place, countries must implement and monitor open access policies to ensure that
 international connectivity routes, which often require significant investment, are provided by a
 sufficient number of market players.
        Notwithstanding broad commitments to expand connectivity and reduce prices, some countries
 are still applying policies that restrict connectivity, increase prices and reduce options for consumers.
 This is the case of certain Asian and African countries, such as Ghana or Pakistan. In Pakistan, for
 example, the government set up a cartel to set prices for incoming international calls, raising rates
 from USD 0.02 to USD 0.088. As result, traffic fell from over 2 billion minutes to 500 million. This in
 turn generated no increase in revenue, but rather resulted in a huge loss in consumer welfare. These
 policies contrast with those of other developing countries, such as India, where dramatic cuts in
 international termination rates, together with strong domestic competition, have seen traffic increase
 dramatically (Figure 25; OECD, 2015).




                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                            3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 63



               Figure 25. Average termination charge for outgoing traffic, United States to regions (top),
                           outgoing minutes from United States carriers to regions (bottom)

                            Average termination charge for outgoing traffic, United States to regions
                         USD
               0.18
               0.16
               0.14
               0.12                                                                                       Africa
               0.10                                                                                       India

               0.08
               0.06
               0.04
               0.02
               0.00




                                          Outgoing minutes from United States carriers to regions
                       Millions of min.
              30 000


              25 000


              20 000


              15 000                                                                                       Africa
                                                                                                           India
              10 000


               5 000


                   0




              Source: OECD (2015), Digital Economy Outlook.


        Coordination between different agencies in charge of infrastructure policies is essential for
  overcoming multiple gaps, including coverage, access, and costs. And when infrastructure projects are
  driven by the private sector, governments in LIDCs should seek to direct investments in such a way
  that domestic firms are able to reap the benefits associated with GVC participation.
         Successful infrastructure building also relies on the effectiveness of public infrastructure
  policies. That can be problematic, as many LIDCs face resource and capacity constraints to providing
  high-quality infrastructure throughout the entire economy. A crucial element of success in reducing
  the infrastructure gap of LIDCs is good governance on infrastructure-related capital expenditures,
  including the quality of budgetary execution and effectiveness in negotiations for concessions.
INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
64 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

        The quality of budgetary execution reflects the extent to which actual expenditure matches
         intended expenditure. Poor budget implementation is a major constraint for some countries.
         Budgetary predictability in capital expenditure is particularly weak in Central America and the
         Caribbean, South Asia, and Africa. More than 30% of African and South Asian countries, and
         close to 25% of countries in Central America and the Caribbean, execute less than 80% of their
         budgeted capital expenditure. For instance, Angola historically underperforms in budget
         execution, having spent only 34% of its budgeted capital expenditure in 2010. In Kiribati, a
         least-developed country in the Pacific, budget execution in 2009 was only 20%. International
         Monetary Fund and World Bank assessments confirm that low-income countries suffer from
         particularly weak budget execution (Allen and Last 2007). That does not mean that
         infrastructure financing should not increase, but additional financing will fail to reduce
         infrastructure gaps unless budget execution rises. The good execution of concession contracts
         also matters.
        Latin America’s experience with concessions in the transport sector reveals a history of
 numerous and costly renegotiations. Governments have applied the model of concessions to the
 development of airports, roads, railways, seaports, and multimodal terminals, first in the late 1980s
 and early 1990s in Argentina, Chile, and Mexico and later in Brazil, Colombia, Peru, and Central
 America and the Caribbean. Difficulties in the execution of concession contracts led some policy
 makers to question the model. In the 1990s, close to 50% of transport concessions were renegotiated
 in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Mexico. In Chile, the average concession was renegotiated
 four times between 1993 and 2007. Nearly a quarter of investment in concessions derived from
 renegotiations. Today, 40% of existent road concession contracts have been renegotiated in Latin
 America. Fifty out of the 60 road concessions in Chile, Colombia, and Peru were renegotiated up to
 2010 (Bitran et al. 2013). The additional fiscal costs amount to 50% of the initial value of the contracts.

 Trade logistics
        Infrastructure building and well-managed infrastructure policies do not guarantee better
 connectivity, if delinked from a wider logistics strategy. Indeed, inefficient logistics raises the costs of
 trading and reduces the potential for trade (Figure 26 and Figure 27). For example, Morocco’s
 Logistics Performance Index (LPI) rank jumped from 113 in 2007 to 50 in 2012, partially reflecting that
 the country has implemented a comprehensive strategy to improve logistics and connectivity and has
 taken advantage of its proximity to Europe. Combining border management reform with the
 previously mentioned large physical investments in the Tanger-Med Port, the strategy fostered the
 emergence of Morocco’s just-in-time exports to Europe (especially textiles, electronics, and
 automotive components). Morocco’s fast rise in the LPI highlights the payoffs of such a
 comprehensive approach. In 2011, for example, Morocco established an agency for logistics
 development. Banking on its location and on the success of its investment in the trans-shipment port
 at Tanger-Med, the country is pursuing a policy to develop freight and logistics facilities and services
 that reach beyond its own economy—to North Africa, Southern Europe, and West Africa.




                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 65



                        Figure 26. Supply chain bottlenecks are the primary cause of trade costs




     Source: World Bank, Logistics Performance Index (2010).


         Poor logistics is a major constraint to trade in LIDCs. Improving logistics performance and the
  efficiency of the supply chain is at the core of policies to bolster competitiveness and to boost trade
  integration. Recent trade research shows that improving logistics is where LIDCs have the most
  potential to reduce trade costs. The lower the trade costs, the more competitive, as well as globally
  and regionally integrated, a country is.
         Bilateral trade costs capture the separation between countries or the friction in international
  trade networks. They are formally defined as the ad valorem equivalent of all factors that drive a
  wedge between the price of goods at the factory or farm gate in the exporting country and the price
  paid by a consumer in the importing country. Trade costs depend on given or intangible factors, such
  as geographical distance, language, or historical connections, as well as factors that can be targeted
  by policy interventions, such as supply chain connectivity and tariff or nontariff barriers. The
  UNESCAP–World Bank bilateral trade costs database gives trade costs by country pair for
  manufacturing and agriculture. Arvis, Shepherd et al. (2013) provide an estimate of the sources of
  trade costs. As expected, distance is a major source of trade costs, but logistics performance and
  connectivity are at least as important, and more so than tariffs. And as LIDCs face much higher trade
  costs, partly because of the importance of policy in addressing their sources, policy measures can do
  much to reduce them while boosting trade integration, especially through measures that improve
  connectivity and logistics.8
         Exogenous determinants of trade such as geography are outside of a country’s control, but
  policy decisions are not. Connectivity including logistics performance can be addressed by a series of
  policy interventions. Supply chain service delivery is affected mainly by three areas: customs,
  infrastructure, and logistics services quality. All three constitute areas for policy regulations and
  should be tackled with a comprehensive approach. They are important because they affect the cost
  incurred by firms to move goods. Logistics costs include three categories: administrative, transport,

8.      World Bank Trade Cost Dataset web page, http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/trade-costs-dataset.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
66 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 and inventory costs. Differences in logistics costs are primarily associated with the reliability of supply
 chains, rather than with transportation costs (Figure 28). Logistics costs therefore reflect logistics
 performance, with clear differences across countries that are driven by their efficiency in handling
 logistics services.
        Inventory costs are the consequence of a lack of reliability of the supply chain in many LIDCs.
 Firms willing to enter global manufacturing value chains encounter a double penalty with extra
 logistics costs on both inputs and exports. The causes of unreliability are rarely found in deficient
 physical infrastructure but rather in inefficient clearance processes, especially at land borders and in
 ports, and with the performance of services available to traders, such as truck services, forwarding, or
 customs agents. As data from the 2007 and 2014 editions of the Logistics Performance Index show,
 overall logistics performance has improved, but some factors have moved faster than others, with the
 quality of logistics services rising more slowly than the quality of trade- and transport-related
 infrastructure and the performance of border agencies. This is especially true for low-income and
 lower-middle-income economies (Figure 29).

                                  Figure 27. Logistics performance and connectivity




   Note: RTA = Regional Trade Agreement.
   Source: Arvis, Duval et al. 2013.




                        Figure 28. Firm-level logistics expenditures as% of sales in 2011-2012




   Sources: For Germany: TU Berlin; for Finland and Estonia: Turku School of Economics; for Kazakhstan: World Bank.




                                                     INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 67



            Figure 29. Percentage change in LPI scores, by LPI component and income group, 2007-2014




    Source: Logistics Performance Index 2007, 2010, 2012, and 2014.


         SMEs are even more vulnerable to supply chain inefficiencies than large firms, and they
  typically face doubled logistics costs. The first reason is pure economics. Smaller firms have fewer
  economies of scale in their inventory (through a higher inventory ratio) and hence higher inventory
  costs, which can be punitively high in LIDCs with poor logistics performance. Size is also a
  disadvantage in several other respects. Small exporters tend to be more affected by a lack of
  transparency in clearance processes and depend more on independent services to move goods or
  clear them with border agencies. Logistics services may not be friendly to small shipments and
  services not available or affordable, forcing SMEs to consolidate their goods in single containers to
  reach their destination market. Consolidation services can be very expensive or not available at all.
  Non-traditional exports of fresh produce, for instance, are impossible without a cold chain and
  refrigerated containers. Lastly, the lack of continuity of logistics services beyond the main gateway
  puts SMEs in remote regions at a disadvantage to reach markets. Interisland trade in Indonesia
  provides a telling example. The high cost of transporting high-quality goods such as shrimp from
  eastern Indonesia to processing centres in Java makes them too expensive to export, or similarly it is
  cheaper to import oranges from China than to ship them from Kalimantan to Java.
        Data from a 2012 study on trends and strategies in logistics support the notion that many SMEs
  encounter disproportionally high logistics costs (Straube et al. 2013). Industrial firms with fewer than
  250 workers on average have logistics costs of 14.7% of overall revenue for the business unit. In
  contrast, industrial firms with more than 1,000 workers reported logistics costs of only 6.7% of overall
  revenue, which was in line with logistics costs as a share of the overall revenue reported by industrial
  firms with 250 to 1,000 workers (6.4% of overall revenue).
        The survey covered 113 industrial firms in various world regions. Breaking up the results by
  region or country confirmed the overall results. SMEs in China reported logistics costs of 15% of
  overall revenue, while firms with more than 1,000 workers reported only 5.2%. For South America,
  the numbers were 15.3% for SMEs and 9.4% for large industrial companies with more than 1,000
  workers.
  Trade facilitation
        Trade facilitation enables GVC trade by reducing the time, cost, and uncertainty involved in
  importing and exporting. Trade facilitation improves and streamlines the processing of trade by
  border agencies, including customs, ministries of trade, and standards (for example, sanitary and
  phytosanitary standards). Trade facilitation initiatives cover a broad range of measures. They go from
  coordinating procedures and controls across border agencies under integrated border management
  to the automation of customs procedures and extension to other procedures under single-window
  systems (Box 2). They also include introducing risk management practices to reduce the incidence of

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
68 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 physical inspection of traded goods; an authorized economic operators regime, whereby importers
 with a track record of compliance benefit from expedited procedures, including ex post auditing; and
 trade portals, where comprehensive and updated information on requirements for all product (tariff
 and nontariff requirements) are easily accessible.


                             Box 2. Implementing a single-window system in Lao PDR
   Delays at customs are problematic in many LIDCs, adding to the time and unpredictability of trading and
   inhibiting the export competitiveness of many LIDCs as well as their participation in global value chains.
   One innovative approach to border processing and clearance is the establishment of national single-
   window systems. Such systems allow traders to submit all information required by regulatory agencies
   through a single electronic gateway, instead of submitting separate information to multiple government
   entities using a variety of paper, electronic, or other interfaces.
   Establishing a single window involves significant challenges and complexity, requiring the cooperation of
   multiple government agencies, many of which must engage in significant institutional reform. Recent
   World Bank experience suggests that a number of preconditions are needed to launch a single-window
   program, including (a) the building of a strong business case, (b) careful assessment of risks and
   capabilities, (c) a strong government mandate supported by political will and stakeholder buy-in, (d)
   agreement among government agencies on the structure of governance and leadership, and (e) a work
   program with key milestones linked to appropriate resources and accountability for all participants.
   Given government commitment, even the poorest countries can make progress in this area. A good
   example is the World Bank Group’s work in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. With support provided
   by the World Bank and others, the government developed a National Trade Facilitation Strategy and
   established a National Trade Facilitation Secretariat to provide for the implementation of the strategy.
   With support from the World Bank, Lao PDR has established a Trade Information Portal that allows
   traders to access all relevant trade rules, regulations, procedures, fee schedules, and forms from all
   border management agencies through a single user-friendly website. The Trade Information Portal is an
   important first step in establishing a full electronic single-window system.
   The World Bank Group is currently engaged in a preparatory project to support Lao PDR in making
   informed decisions going forward with regard to the single-window system. This project includes
   technical support on legal and regulatory frameworks, fee models, and governance structures, as well as
   development of a comprehensive capacity-building and transition strategy.
   Source: McLinden 2013.



        Trade facilitation matters for small businesses more than for large companies since costs are
 fixed regardless of a firm’s size or revenue. Integrating SMEs and firms in LIDCs in value chains
 requires addressing their two main sources of disadvantage: (a) the lack of economies of scale and (b)
 excessive bureaucracy, uncertainty, and lack of transparency with trade-related procedures.
        SMEs often face higher obstacles to engage in international trade than large enterprises. For
 this reason, SMEs are often forced to confine their business activities to the geographical area close to
 their production site. Difficulties in exporting stem—at least partly—from high costs of transporting
 their small shipments and from greater bureaucracy.




                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 69



        Of all the trade facilitation measures, key initiatives to level out the playing field for SMEs
  include tackling information failures, improving the effectiveness of clearance processes, and
  introducing initiatives for creating awareness around key constraints.
            Delays in passing through customs have often been singled out as the villain in border delays. In
             fact, more often than not, it is the combination of other agencies—health, agriculture,
             quarantine, police, immigration, and standards—that gets systematically worse rankings in the
             World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index. Non-customs agencies are concerned more about
             their parochial risk management objectives than in speeding goods across the border; they
             frequently lack the reform blueprints and technical guidelines built from international
             experience to implement reforms that are found in the customs world. They have not
             embraced automation or risk-based management systems that have allowed many customs
             agencies to speed their processing times and improve reliability.
            Despite reforms in many customs agencies, facilitated procedures are naturally geared toward
             larger firms. For example, having small flows and fewer operations, SMEs face difficulties
             accessing fast-track programs like authorized economic operators programs. Although SMEs
             can benefit from working with logistics operators that have those regimes in place, they
             nevertheless remain disadvantaged.
          Hence, SMEs will benefit even more than large companies from measures facilitating the
  clearance of goods or improving logistics services. Reducing the asymmetry of information vis-à-vis
  public operators will increase transparency in clearance processes and other measures, including
  automation; single windows and trade portals will facilitate information, speed up border procedures,
  and reduce costs; and better coordination and cooperation between public agencies will reduce
  coordination costs for the firm. Public–private dialogue initiatives are also important, as they too
  contribute to improving access to information and creating awareness within nationwide trade
  facilitation initiatives, thereby helping bring down the cost of trading across borders for SMEs.
         The principles of successful trade facilitation are well documented and have recently been
  codified in the WTO Agreement on Trade Facilitation (Box 3). Implementation of that agreement will
  contribute to addressing some of the bottlenecks mentioned above.



                                         Box 3. WTO Agreement on Trade Facilitation
   After more than nine years of negotiations, World Trade Organization members reached consensus on a
   Trade Facilitation Agreement at the Ministerial Conference held in Bali, Indonesia, on December 7, 2013.
   The final agreement builds on the now 50-year-old trade rules covered by Articles V, VIII, and X of the
   General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and contains provisions for faster and more efficient customs
   and border management procedures. The key measures include commitments on publishing and making
   available information for traders, as well as adopting modern approaches to customs and border
   management. The principles include the following:
              Operational standards by customs agencies in terms of risk management for clearance postaudit;
              Transparency measures, such as transparency of new legislation, appeals against administrative
               decisions, and advance rulings;
              Improved cooperation between government agencies, such as in implementing national single-
               window systems; and


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
70 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS


           Guidelines for streamlining international transit procedures.
   The new agreement brings many of the standards and best practices enshrined in other international
   instruments under the formal auspices of the World Trade Organization. In many respects, the Bali
   agreement spells out only minimum common standards. The full benefits of trade facilitation will be fully
   realized only if countries are prepared to go beyond it, for example, with regionally integrated facilitation
   frameworks similar to the European Union’s.



         Other, less traditional, initiatives help too. There are positive experiences of collective actions
 and innovative solutions to counterbalance the lack of economies of scale in logistics. A successful
 example of trade facilitation measures helping SMEs participate in trade value chains by reaching
 international markets is the export of fresh mangoes from Mali to Europe. The export program,
 supported by international donors, was able to overcome several challenges, including transport and
 logistics problems, lack of market information and investment on the production level, and a
 nonconducive regulatory environment for exporters. By designing interventions along the whole value
 chain, including harvest and transport, Malian exporters were able to access the market in Europe,
 benefiting small-scale growers in Mali (Sangho, Labaste, and Ravry 2010). Another successful example
 is the Exporta Fácil program in Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, and Colombia (Box 4). These programs bear
 important lessons, including the following. For SMEs, costs and administrative burdens are the main
 impediments to trade. Cutting them is thus key. Using large physical networks to implement the
 reform is necessary to achieve success. Improvements in the producing country must be matched by
 efforts in destination and transit countries, and all stakeholders in the supply chain need to be
 involved in the implementation of a reform, since capacity development targeting only exporting
 SMEs is not sufficient. More generally, export processes should address all three dimensions of the
 export business: (a) physical handling of export items, (b) data exchange and processing, and
 (c) facilitation of financial transactions.


                                 Box 4. The Exporta Fácil Program in Latin America
   The Exporta Fácil program in Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, and Colombia was based on an initiative of Brazil’s
   public postal operator in the early 2000s, which continued a series of measures by the Brazilian
   government aimed at fostering exports by SMEs. Using the postal network’s 8,000 outlets, SMEs could
   export goods at much lower costs and with less bureaucracy than before. Thanks to cooperation between
   the government, the postal service, and customs, the number of documents needed to dispatch parcels
   under 30 kilograms with a value of less than USD 10,000 (later raised to USD 50,000) was vastly reduced.
   The postal service also acted as a precursor of a single-window system, removing the need for SME
   exporters to interact with customs, health, and environment agencies; export agencies; and others
   separately.
   The Brazil initiative was successful in raising SME exports and had demonstration effects. The Initiative for
   the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA) designed a similar project for Uruguay,
   Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador in 2007. The explicit purpose was to enhance SME competitiveness in IIRSA
   member states so that they could access regional and international markets. Cost savings during the
   export–import process for SMEs were achieved not just through the low cost of the designated operator
   (the postal service), they were achieved also because costs previously associated with trade disappeared,
   for example, exporters’ trips to major cities, contracting of customs officers or foreign trade specialists,
   training, or certificates of origin. The cost of the pilot program in four countries was USD 2.7 million. The

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 71




   results with regard to export volume have been very positive: In Brazil, export volumes using the Exporta
   Fácil program grew from USD 160,000 in 1999 to around USD 250 million in 2010. In Peru, export volumes
   using the program grew from USD 72,500 in 2007 (third quarter only) to USD 718,000 in 2010 (third
   quarter only). In Brazil, Exporta Fácil raised SMEs’ competitiveness and facilitated their access to
   international trade. A greater variety of Brazilian products was exported to more destinations. Using the
   service, between 2002 and 2008, overall about 10,000 businesses that had never exported before were
   able to engage in international trade. One in ten Brazilian exporters would have been unable to export
   without the program in 2005. The service proved to be particularly suited to the objectives of
   international development, as economic analysis showed that it was more widely used in poorer, less
   service-oriented communes.
   Among the lessons learned from the Exporta Fácil program are the following. First, for SMEs, costs and
   administrative burdens are the main impediments to trade. Cutting them is thus key. Using the postal
   service as a customs broker can help with both. Second, a large physical network such as the international
   post (660,000 branches worldwide) is required. Third, easy export solutions at the national level must be
   complemented by similar efforts in destination and transit countries to ensure effectiveness. Fourth, a
   joint effort by all stakeholders and covering all actors in the supply chain is required. That includes
   coordination within the government. Capacity development targeting only exporting SMEs is not
   sufficient. The customs administration and logistics companies should also be supported to provide easy
   and effective solutions. Fifth, easy export processes should address all three dimensions of the export
   business: (a) physical handling of export items, (b) data exchange and processing, and (c) facilitation of
   financial transactions.


  Trade policy
         Trade policy per se may figure less prominently in the GVC-led global economy than it did in
  past generations, but nonetheless it remains a critical part of the policy mix. The way that trade policy
  is conceived, however, requires some reordering. Policy makers must now give as much consideration
  to imports as they traditionally have to exports, and they must value time as much as tariffs (OECD,
  2013c). The previous sections clearly indicated that time is a priority since participation in
  geographically fragmented GVCs frequently requires often quick and inexpensive movement of goods
  over borders, and delays in those movements can be deadly to the aspirations for upgrading and
  strengthening GVC participation of an economy.
        Reducing both import tariffs and export procedures should be a priority for competitively
  engaging in GVCs, and one doesn’t substitute for the other. Tariffs are an additional cost imposed on
  imports. Not surprisingly, countries in South Asia, which have high average import tariffs compared
  with the global average, also post low integration rates in manufacturing GVCs, compared with
  countries from Southeast Asia that are well integrated in GVCs (Figure 30). For example, a country
  such as Pakistan—with an average tariff 300% higher than the average tariff prevalent in some
  countries in Southeast Asia, Latin America, or the Gulf Cooperation Council and highly distortionary ad
  hoc regulations or statutory regulatory orders—is one of the least integrated in GVCs, despite a good
  manufacturing base and the ability of Pakistani firms to produce and export world-class products,
  such as, according to Adidas, the high-end Laguiole knives and the Adidas Brazuca, the official football
  for the 2014 World Cup as well as for the national championships of countries such as Argentina,
  Colombia, Germany, Korea, Paraguay, Portugal, and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
72 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

                                Figure 30. Simple average tariffs, selected countries, 2014




     Source: World Bank computations, using WITS and national information sources.


        Tariffs on inputs are particularly costly because they are used directly in production and drive
 up costs. Tariffs on inputs not only affect the competitiveness of domestic producers, they also affect
 their ability to participate in GVCs (OECD, WTO, and UNCTAD 2013; OECD, WTO, and World Bank
 2014). The intricate structure of GVCs can multiply the effects of even nuisance-level rates of duty
 (Figure 31). In one example, a disk drive is assembled in Thailand, which acts as a hub for a supply
 network involving 43 components from ten other countries and ten components produced in Thailand
 (Baldwin 2006; Hiratsuka 2005). The disk drive is then sent to China, which serves as a similar hub for
 the assembly of a laptop computer, which is finally sent to the United States. Koopman et al. (2010)
 calculate so-called tariff-magnification ratios for manufacturing products and show that taking into
 account tariffs along all stages of the supply chain raises significantly the effective tariff protection.9
 Indeed, empirical evidence shows that this magnification effect is particularly important in sectors
 characterized by long value chains with several production stages, such as communications and
 electronics, motor vehicles, basic metals, and textiles. Driven by such mechanisms, cross-country
 studies of the effects of tariffs on growth of GDP consistently find that higher tariffs in general are
 associated with lower growth rates, and tariffs on intermediate inputs are particularly important. For
 example, Estevedeordal and Taylor (2009) find strong evidence that liberalizing tariffs on imported
 capital and intermediate goods raises growth rates by about 1 percentage point annually in the
 liberalizing countries, whereas the effects of reducing tariffs on final goods was less important.




9.      The study found that in 2004 the effective tariff rate was 17% higher than the nominal rate in the United
        States, 46% higher in Korea and as much as 116% and 171% higher in China and Mexico, respectively
        because of multiple border crossings in trade.

                                                      INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 73



                  Figure 31. Tariffs on the gross value and the domestic value-added of exports, 2009




            Notes: Applied AVE tariffs, weighted by the share of each sector and destination market in the country’s
            agricultural or manufacturing exports. For EU countries, tariffs are calculated on extra-EU exports.
            Source: OECD, WTO, and UNCTAD 2013.
         Research highlights the adverse effect of intermediate input tariffs on both industry structure
  and trade. For instance, a recent OECD study (Johansson and Olaberría 2014) suggests that if tariffs on
  electronics were to be reduced in a country where such tariffs are high (for example, Brazil) to the
  median level in the sample of countries included in the analysis, electronic exports could increase by
  26% (Johansson and Olaberría 2014). Furthermore, intermediate input tariffs not only affect exports
  in the same industry, they also have a sizable negative effect on exports of downstream industries
  (Safadi 2014). For instance, if a country with high tariffs on textiles (for example, South Africa) were to
  reduce them to the median level in the sample of countries included in the analysis, exports of
  clothing from this country, whose inputs embed more than 40% of textile products, could increase by
  more than 30%.10

10.     These effects may appear large, but it should be noted that the tariff reductions in the example are sizable,
        around 10 percentage points.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
74 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

         Some actions that countries take to facilitate the import of inputs are much less comprehensive
 and effective than the elimination of tariffs through either multilateral or regional agreements. They
 may, for example, offer special treatment to imports in competitive spaces, special economic zones
 (SEZs) or related programs, which can take on a variety of forms; examples include maquiladoras in
 much of Latin America or foreign trade zones in China or the United States. Within the framework of
 GVCs, SEZs and other competitive spaces have a clear rationale, but empirical research also shows
 that they deliver mixed results. Creating SEZs can help attract GVC activities that are highly responsive
 to tariffs, and thus may feature as a strategy for insertion. There is, however, a risk that SEZs may
 remain isolated pockets of production, and that host countries may become too vulnerable to
 changes in the strategies of MNEs. SEZs do not necessarily help create the spillovers and linkages that
 facilitate upgrading among domestic firms if participating firms engage in little more than processing
 activities. MNEs that locate facilities within SEZs may do so as part of a cost-reduction strategy, and
 may therefore be less likely than domestic firms to prioritize functional upgrading or R&D
 investments. Once wages and costs in the host country increase above a certain threshold, those
 activities may move to an economy that offers lower costs as MNEs have become increasingly
 footloose. Furthermore, SEZs or duty drawback systems do not allow second-tier domestic suppliers
 to join GVCs. High and escalating tariffs act as a kind of “currency overvaluation,” pricing out domestic
 suppliers. The risk is particularly acute for small economies where access to the domestic market or
 local knowledge is of limited importance to MNEs’ location decisions. Responding to this risk requires
 combining integration in GVCs with strengthening domestic capabilities to enhance productivity and
 innovation.
        Nontariff measures (NTMs) raise specific concerns for GVC participation (OECD, 2013d). NTMs
 consist of any policies (other than ordinary customs tariffs) that influence trade flows, and they can
 block the efficient operation of supply chains. Although NTMs should not have protectionist intent,
 they nevertheless can have an impact on trade costs that is of a much larger magnitude than tariffs
 (Figure 32).

                          Figure 32. Average level of restrictiveness imposed on imports




                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 75



          Focusing on NTMs in G-20 economies (OECD 2011a) finds that the trade cost impact of NTMs is
  more important than prevailing tariff rates in obstructing trade. That is true even in the more
  sensitive, and hence tariff-protected industrial sectors, such as motor vehicles and processed foods.
  Most NTMs are put in place to ensure that imported products comply with the same standards and
  regulations as domestic products. Trade costs and trade frictions arise from differences in regulations
  and their implementation, and obviously a “reduction to zero” is not a feasible option for those NTMs;
  a certain amount of trade costs related to those measures will always exist. Hence, in the OECD
  (2011a), the focus is on the portion of NTM-related trade costs that is actually “reducible” and finds
  significant positive overall income and employment effects of reducing them. The highest potential
  gains are observed when countries engage in their own reforms, including in African and Asian LIDCs,
  which underscores the importance of domestic policy reforms for tapping into the potential of GVCs.
         One form of trade barrier that appears to be on the rise is local content requirements (LCRs)
  (Stone et al. 2015). LCRs have been used in a number of cases by governments that have established
  domestic policies supporting the generation of electricity from renewable energy, especially wind
  energy and solar photovoltaic (PV) energy, leading to several high-profile trade disputes (Box 5).
  Within the context of GVCs, policy measures aimed at protecting domestic solar PV and wind-turbine
  manufacturers may hinder downstream investment in renewable energy–based power generation by
  raising the cost of inputs, which can result in increased installation costs and reduced demand for
  renewable energy. That in turn could lead to suboptimal levels of international and domestic
  investment throughout the solar PV and wind energy GVCs, while increasing investment risk by raising
  the prospects of trade disputes.

                 Box 5. Trade and investment barriers: The case of LCRs affecting renewable energy
   Trade and investment barriers are particularly challenging in renewable energy, as they may hamper the
   optimization of emerging global value chains (GVCs) in the production of solar photovoltaic (PV) energy
   and wind energy. The manufacture of solar PV panels, wind turbines, and intermediate components is
   increasingly spread across countries and integrated within GVCs, accounting for a growing share of
   international trade of intermediate products (especially solar PV panels).
   Over the past decade, governments from developed countries and emerging economies have provided
   substantial support to solar PV and wind energy that has been crucial in stimulating both domestic and
   international investment. Since 2008, however, the perceived potential of green energy to serve as a
   lever for growth and employment has led several governments, in a post crisis recovery context, to design
   incentive measures aimed at (a) supporting domestic solar PV and wind-turbine manufacturers, notably
   through granting preferential access to financing (for example, through low-cost loans or loan
   guarantees); (b) improving the export performance of solar PV and wind energy component
   manufacturers through targeted measures; (c) encouraging domestic and foreign firms to purchase solar
   or wind-turbine equipment manufactured locally (for example, by imposing local content requirements
   (LCRs) as a precondition for benefiting from a feed-in tariff or to win a public tender); or (d) restricting
   imports (for example, through tariffs).
   The majority of those measures aim at developing a domestic manufacturing base in solar and wind
   energy or protecting domestic manufacturers against the alleged use of trade-distorting subsidies by
   countries seeking to support their own exporting producers. OECD research shows that LCRs for solar or
   wind energy have been planned or implemented at national or subnational levels in at least 15 developed
   countries and emerging economies, for the most part since 2008. Several countries have also used direct
   financial transfers and tax credits to provide preferential access to finance for domestic solar PV or wind-
   turbine producers. Other policy impediments to international trade and investment exist, such as limits

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
76 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS


      on foreign ownership, but remain relatively limited in OECD countries. More research is needed to assess
      the importance of technical barriers to trade (for example, divergent standards) and operational
      obstacles (for example, preferential access to the grid or to land).
      The widespread use of LCRs in solar and wind energy has resulted in several World Trade Organization
      (WTO) disputes—5 out of a total of 63 WTO disputes since September 2010. The alleged use of dumping
      or harmful subsidies has resulted in an escalation of domestic trade remedies involving solar PV and wind
      energy. Since 2012, several large developed and emerging economies have launched investigations into
      alleged dumping and subsidizing, leading to the imposition of anti-dumping duties, countervailing duties,
      or both, on a variety of products associated with solar PV and wind energy.
      Sources: Stone, Messent, and Flaig 2015 and the chronological list of disputes cases on the WTO’s
      website at http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/dispu_e/dispu_status_e.htm.


        Issues affecting trade in services are similar to, but in some ways distinct from, those affecting
 trade in goods. Restrictions on market access to services in the international marketplace can have a
 direct impact on manufacturing, agriculture, and mining. That is particularly true for services that act
 as essential enablers in the geographic dispersion of GVCs. Such services include information and
 communications technology (ICT), which reduces the cost of coordination for GVCs and is an
 important enabler of trade in services; supply chain management services (to reduce inventories,
 shorten lead times, and enable faster customer response); and improved logistic services, including
 real-time monitoring of physical assets worldwide through the “Internet of Things” (OECD, 2015).
 High-quality professional, technical, and financial services also enable GVCs and help firms create
 value in GVCs through differentiation and customization (USITC 2013a, 2013b). The quality of services
 supporting GVCs in a given country depends not only on market access for qualified foreign providers
 but also on a robust national education system to train local entrants.
        The openness of national markets to foreign service providers varies widely across countries.11
 There are significant restrictions on entry, ownership, and operations, and licensing procedures
 remain highly discretionary in many countries. In both industrial and LIDCs, professional and
 transportation services are among the most protected industries, whereas retail, telecommunications,
 and even finance tend to be more open. Nonetheless, there are significant niches for LIDC provision of
 services in support of GVCs. After the Great Recession of 2008–09, cost pressures on multinationals
 led to increased outsourcing of business processes, knowledge processes, and information technology
 to LIDCs (Gereffi and Fernandez-Stark 2010).

 Certification and compliance with international standards
         Sustainable management of global value chains has become an area of increased focus for
 companies because of competitive pressures triggered by increasing demands for quality and product
 certification, as well as for sustainable use of resources and sustainable environmental, labor, and
 social conditions of production. Consumers around the world increasingly demand products and
 services that are simultaneously good for the economy, for the environment, and for society —the
 triple bottom line of sustainable growth. Incorporating sustainability standards into the global value
 chains has become critical for companies to meet several objectives, including (a) ensuring minimum
 standards in management practices, including in such areas as health and safety of workers and


11.      See the OECD Services Trade Restrictiveness Index, http://www.oecd.org/trade/services-trade-
         restrictiveness-index.htm.

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 77



  minimum working age; (b) reducing business costs while maintaining sustainability of business
  operations; and (c) sourcing materials that are environmentally and social sustainable. These trends
  are therefore leading many companies to incorporate environmental, social, and governance
  requirements based on sustainability standards into contractual relationships with local suppliers.
  Suppliers able to meet those standards are more likely to enjoy increased demand and competitive
  pricing for their products.
         The rising number of quality and safety standards is, in part, driven by concerns about
  information, coordination, and traceability, which are more acute in a world dominated by GVCs. For
  firms in LIDCs, meeting standards of global buyers and lead firms is often a necessary condition for
  being competitive. Compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary regulations is important, for example,
  for being competitive in agricultural trade. LIDCs have more than tripled their exports of high value-
  added foods—fruits and vegetables, fish, meats, and spices since 1980 (Jaffee 2006). Jaffee (2006)
  estimates that rejections at the border affect about 1% of agro-food trade. But far more inhibiting
  than border rejections for international trade are the myriad measures that preclude producers’
  countries from entering global markets at all. Disdier et al. (2008) find that technical regulations in
  agricultural trade significantly retard trade in some subsectors, but at the same time, well-designed
  regulations and conformity assessment procedures can facilitate trade (van Tongeren, Beghin, and
  Marette 2009; van Tongeren et al. 2010). Standards can also facilitate trade if they can provide
  information to potential suppliers and overcome problems of informational asymmetry that would
  otherwise stifle exports.
         One of the most important issues is about assessing the costs of complying with international
  standards as compared with the opportunity cost of serving regional markets. This is the case because
  adopting higher standards involves greater difficulties and challenges for SMEs and LIDCs than for
  larger firms and rich countries. Increases in production and trade costs can originate from the
  required compliance with a multitude of standards and technical regulations. For this reason, Cadot
  and Malouche (2012) suggest that sequencing may be important. They suggest that LIDCs and SMEs
  may first need to expand into the regional market to gain scale and learning economies and then
  adopt stringent international standards. Jensen and Keyser (2012) further argue that international
  standards would be counterproductive if applied to milk products in the East African Community
  where small-scale producers account for the bulk of production; they argue that a better strategy is
  for each country to apply its own standards, work toward establishing mutual recognition to spur
  trade, and progressively improve regional standards as the industry reaches scale and consumers
  demand higher quality.

          The costs for SMEs and firms in LIDCs are due to the complexity and heterogeneity of
  international standards to adopt. Private firms in GVCs—whether as part of intra-firm trade, captive
  suppliers, or modular trade—increasingly set and transmit information about private standards,
  enforce their application as a condition of purchase, and often have a role in their formulation. Firms
  in countries seeking to enter foreign markets will have an advantage if they can affiliate with a GVC
  with native leadership in that foreign market. Nevertheless, in the most tightly controlled GVCs,
  standards constitute an important barrier to new competition that can be surmounted only through
  affiliation with a competing chain. Moreover, the multiplication of environmental and social
  sustainability standards can also pose a barrier to entry to GVC participation by SMEs, even in those
  cases in which standards are voluntary in the country of end-product retail. The voluntary adoption of
  such standards by retailers with major market share applies a de facto obligation up the supply chain
  (for example, Walmart’s commitment to sell 100% MSC-certified fish products). To complicate


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
78 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

 matters further, private standard setting has gone beyond specifications for products to include
 production processes—often as firms have had to respond to concerns of consumers about labor
 conditions in factories. Brand-name companies have found themselves susceptible to considerable
 reputational risk unless they ensure that their suppliers provide decent working conditions. For
 example, consumer protests led Nike to establish the Nike Code of Conduct aimed at improving its
 contract factories. By 2005, the company disclosed its entire list of suppliers and in 2007, it made
 public its auditing tools (Mayer and Pickles 2010). More recently, Apple found itself under criticism for
 poor working conditions at Foxconn in China, one of the country’s largest employers and a sole
 supplier of iPads; Apple took swift action to address the critiques, and Foxconn changed many of its
 practices governing overtime work and wages (see Fair Labor Association 2012). Those experiences
 and several studies point to the fact that private standards have been most effective when a lead firm
 with a differentiated consumer product can exert power over its supply chain (Mayer and Gereffi,
 2010). The World Bank Group’s experience in supporting LIDCs (for example, Bangladesh and
 Cambodia) to comply with standards suggests that a holistic approach, country focused and sustained
 over time, is necessary (Box 6).
        At the international level, convergence of both public and private voluntary standards, through
 national or international guidelines, could help. Upstream firms supplying components to several
 destinations may have to duplicate production processes to comply with conflicting standards, or
 incur burdensome certification procedures multiple times for the same product. In food value chains,
 process standards adapted to one country’s requirements may render exporting to another country
 infeasible. Promoting the convergence of standards and certification requirements and encouraging
 mutual recognition agreements can go a long way toward alleviating the burden of compliance and
 enhancing the competitiveness of small-scale exporters. That is true for environmental and social
 sustainability standards as well as for quality and safety standards.



                            Box 6. The World Bank Group engagement in Bangladesh
   The World Bank and the International Finance Corporation have been engaged with Bangladesh on
   improving social, labour, and environmental performance in the textile sector since 2005. The experience
   gathered over the past few years has reaffirmed the importance of having a broad program based on a
   number of targeted interventions. The World Bank Group’s approach was based on driving reform
   through five key actions: (a) engaging at the firm-level, (b) strengthening the services market (supplier
   base), (c) improving infrastructure, (d) improving the business environment, and (e) creating platforms for
   public–private dialogue. Specific interventions included, for example, the Partnership for Cleaner Textiles,
   the Textile Competitiveness Project, and multiple initiatives focused on environmental and social issues
   within special economic zones. Each of those projects harnessed the World Bank Group’s expertise across
   a number of areas, especially in developing stakeholder engagement and fostering public–private
   collaboration. As a result, progress has been made, and demonstration effects are becoming visible
   within and across GVCs. Bangladesh thus offers important lessons to other producer countries on the
   challenges of reform, including (a) how to encourage and incentivize firms to join initiatives and take
   action, (b) how to nurture domestic service providers, (c) how to develop capacity in banks to provide
   greater access to finance, (d) how to design projects with social inclusivity at their core, and (e) how to
   create mechanisms to sustain reform over the longer term.




                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 79



  Conditions that enable SMEs to scale
         A range of external framework conditions also affects SMEs’ capacity to participate in GVCs by
  affecting their ability to reach a sufficient minimum scale. SMEs often face higher obstacles to engage
  in international trade than large enterprises; and for this reason SMEs are often forced to conduct
  their business activities to the geographical area close to their production site. Restrictions to labor
  mobility and immigration constraints are one of the factors that affects the ability of entrepreneurs to
  enter international markets, scale-up their production, and exploit economies of scale. While some
  programs exist at the bilateral or regional levels to facilitate entrepreneurs’ mobility internationally,
  no such schemes exist at the global level. Examples of ongoing initiatives include “APEC business
  travel card” that provides fast and efficient travel for business people within the APEC region,
  contributing to APEC's goal of free and open trade and investment. According to the APEC Policy
  Support Unit study on “The Impact of Business Mobility in Reducing Trade Transaction Costs in APEC” ,
  the ABTC scheme reduced transaction costs for ABTC holders by 38% between March-July 2010 and
  March-July 2011, representing a total savings of USD 3.7 million.12 Total at-the-border immigration
  time savings experienced by ABTC holders for the period March-July 2010 through March-July 2011
  was 62,413 hours, corresponding to a monetary value of USD 1.9 million. Another initiative is the UK
  program that allows non-EU entrepreneurs, who show the ability to invest at least 200,000 British
  pounds and have a business plan to create at least two jobs to obtain a temporary visa. In addition, a
  number of Canadian provinces launched programs to attract foreign investors, who are willing to
  invest substantial sums of money to create a new business, similar to America’s Immigrant Investor
  visa program.
        One other area where policy matters concerns firm entry. Lower entry barriers for new SMEs
  imply that new entrants can start off at a smaller size as they have more room for experimentation.
  For example, administrative burdens (red tape) and product market regulations can serve as barriers
  to entry and entrepreneurship, limiting the entry of young SMEs and restricting competition in the
  market. In addition, access to finance and capital market failures may particularly affect entrants and
  young firms and will also affect the future growth of firms through a less efficient selection of firms at
  entry (Andrews and Cingano 2014). While barriers to entrepreneurship have been lowered in many
  G20 countries over the past decade, they remain relatively high in several (Figure 33; OECD, 2015).
          Recent work at the OECD shows that in many OECD and emerging economies, young SMEs (that
  is, start-ups) do not reach a sufficient scale. Figure 34 shows differences across countries in the extent
  to which young firms grow after their entry in the market. Although there are some differences across
  countries in the size of start-ups at entry, those differences are not particularly striking. However, the
  situation is markedly different when considering older businesses. For instance, on average, an older
  manufacturing business in France is half the size of one in the United States, even though start-ups in
  France are larger than those in the United States. In some countries, such as Italy and Japan, there is
  only a small difference between the size of start-ups and that of mature firms.




12.     http://www.apec.org/About-Us/About-APEC/Business-Resources/APEC-Business-Travel-Card.aspx.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
80 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

                                        Figure 33. Barriers to entrepreneurship, 2013




        Scale of 0 to 6 from least to most restrictive.
        Source: OECD, Product Market Regulation Database, www.oecd.org/economy/pmr, June, 2015.

             Figure 34. Average size of start-up and old firms across industries and across countries




        Source: Criscuolo et al. 2014 and country submissions.



                                                          INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 81



         Policies that affect firm exit matter too, also because they limit the ability of entrepreneurial
  firms to wind down their activities and start again. Subsidies to incumbents and other policy measures
  that delay the exit of less productive firms can stifle competition and slow the reallocation of
  resources from less to more productive firms. Examples include regulations that are less stringent for
  incumbents relative to entrants (for example, the so-called new source bias in environmental and
  health safety regulations) and support measures that are more generous for more established firms
  (for example, R&D tax credits that do not have carry-forward provisions). Perhaps most important,
  bankruptcy legislation that excessively penalizes failure is likely to reduce incentives for the efficient
  exit of less productive firms, which would otherwise free up resources for more productive uses.
  Enabling firms that are not successful to exit more easily might also contribute to stronger growth
  prospects for very productive and successful businesses.
         Although entry and exit are clearly important, post entry growth is even more critical for the
  potential scale that new SMEs can reach. Policies that (unwittingly) constrain the growth of young
  innovative SMEs should be assessed with particular care. Examples include both “sticks” (that is,
  regulations that affect only those firms above a certain size) and “carrots” (that is, support
  mechanisms for which only smaller firms are eligible). Further, policies that introduce distortions in
  factor (labor and capital) and product prices also affect post entry growth, imposing constraints on the
  reallocation of resources toward more efficient firms. Those economic distortions, which reflect the
  presence of heterogeneous policy treatment of firms in the same industry, can impose significant
  barriers to firm growth. In this context, resources can be “trapped” in small and inefficient firms,
  serving as a drag on productivity growth and innovation at the firm and sectoral level (Criscuolo et al.
  2014).
        Thus, focusing on the conditions that enable start-ups to scale—if successful—or close down if
  not successful is therefore important for a more dynamic, innovative, and global SME sector, as it can
  help generate more SMEs that are able to compete in international markets. An important difference
  is the extent to which some countries are more successful than others in channelling resources
  toward innovative and high-productivity SMEs that have the best opportunities to engage with foreign
  markets in GVCs.

  Access to ICT Networks
         Although engagement of SMEs in GVCs remains difficult, there are signs that some SMEs are
  managing to internationalize thanks to better access to ICT, including the Internet and mobile
  telecommunications. The Internet dramatically reduces the cost of finding buyers for SMEs, both
  globally and domestically. Technology-enabled firms in LIDCs are much more likely to export, to
  export to more destinations, and to survive in the marketplace. Similarly, SMEs and new firms are
  likely to have a larger role in the export mix for technologically enabled trade than for traditional
  trade. Figure 33 shows comparisons between technologically enabled trade and digital trade for
  Jordan (eBay 2014); similar results are obtained for Chile, India, Indonesia, Peru, South Africa,
  Thailand, and Ukraine.
         There is even some evidence on the emergence of so-called micro-multinationals, that is, small
  and young firms that are global from their inception. New ICT tools can facilitate cross-border e-
  commerce and participation in global markets for smaller and new entrants (for example, Skype for
  communications, Google and Dropbox for file sharing, LinkedIn for finding talent, PayPal for
  transactions, and eBay and Amazon for sales). Evidence shows that an increasing number of producers
  in LIDCs are selling using the Internet, either through their own websites or through web portals such


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
82 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

  as eBay and Alibaba. Business-to-consumer e-commerce13 reached USD 1.5 trillion globally in 2014
  and is growing at 25% per year, even more rapidly in the Asia-Pacific and Middle East and North Africa
  regions (Table 2).14 Business-to-business e-commerce may be even larger. Much of this trade is export
  trade. By 2020, global online sales will amount to USD 10 trillion, with annual growth of 20% for
  business-to-consumer and 7.7% for business-to-business transactions. Much of that growth will
  originate in emerging markets, where adoption of digital technology continues to rise rapidly.


                       Figure 35. Jordan: Performance of technology-enabled vs. traditional exporters




      Source: eBay 2014, 33.


       Table 2. Global B2C E-Commerce Marketplace in 2012-17 (in billions of USD and average annual growth),

                                                           by region

                                    2012        2013            2014           2015           2016           2017       CAGR (%)

Asia-Pacific                        301.2       383.9           525.2          681.2         855.7          1052.9           50

North America                       379.5       461.0           482.6          538.3         597.9          660.4            15

Western Europe                      277.5       312.0           347.4          382.7         414.2          445.0            12

Central & Eastern Europe            41.5         49.5            58.0          64.4           68.9           73.1            15

Latin America                       37.6         48.1            57.7          64.9           70.6           74.6            20

Middle East & Africa                20.6         27.0            33.8          69.5           45.5           51.4            30

Worldwide                           1,058       1,215           1,505          1,771         2,053          2,357            25

Source: eMarketer, cited in Suominen 2014.




13.      The terms e-commerce, e-trade, and digital trade are used interchangeably in this report.
14.      See eMarketer, cited in Suominen (2014).

                                                        INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 83



         Enhancing access to ICT networks and enabling SMEs to engage in e-commerce can be an
  effective way for small firms to go global and even grow across borders where they can become
  competitors in niche markets. And some are already taking advantage of those approaches. For
  example, M-Pesa, a Kenyan mobile-money service is now active across Africa, but also in South Asia
  and Eastern Europe. This way, it is connecting Kenyan jewelry artisans and fashion designers to
  customers around the world through mobile phones and an online marketplace. In Nepal, Young
  Innovations develops mobile apps, software solutions, and data analysis tools, thus engaging in the
  services trade.15 In Serbia, the Farmia exchange leverages the Internet to bring farmers and buyers of
  livestock closer together, in an innovative matchmaking, information exchange, and transport
  solution.16 Innovations such as these, along with the many SME exporters using global platforms like
  eBay, Amazon and Alibaba, are able to substantially enhance their global reach and reduce the
  transaction costs of trade.
         Thus, enhancing access of small firms to broadband networks can enable them to reach foreign
  markets more easily. Data and statistics available for OECD countries reveal a few important facts. In
  the Republic of Korea and France, almost all small and medium-size firms now have such access
  (Figure 36), but access is still below 90% in Turkey (for small firms, 10–49 employees) and in Japan.
  More important is the use that different firms make of such networks that matters, that is, on
  whether they are being used to engage in value chains or to outsource certain activities. In Italy,
  almost 40% of firms with 10–49 employees used cloud computing services in 2014, compared with
  10% or fewer in France, Germany, and Korea. In Germany, almost 20% of firms with 10–49 employees
  in 2014 used supply chain management tools that automatically linked their business process to those
  of their suppliers, their customers, or both. In Italy, that number was almost 14%, but only around
  10% of small firms in France and the United Kingdom used such tools.

                             Figure 36. Broadband connectivity, by size of firm, 2010 and 2013

                                  Percentage of enterprises in each employment size class




      Source: OECD 2014.




15.     Young Innovations website, http://younginnovations.com.np/.
16.     Farmia website, http://farmia.co/.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
84 – 3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS

        Access to ICT networks is key to enable small firms to engage in electronic commerce, a low-
 cost way for firms to engage in trade, either to buy or sell. In Australia, almost 40% of small firms
 (with 10–49 employees) are engaged in electronic commerce, compared with fewer than 10% of such
 firms in Italy and Turkey (Figure 37). Such engagement can contribute substantially to turnover; for
 example, in Korea, firms with 10–49 employees derived more than 28% of their turnover from
 electronic commerce in 2012, compared with only just over 2% in Italy. Increasingly, electronic
 commerce crosses borders, sometimes going beyond the closest neighbours. For example, out of all
 firms in Italy engaged in electronic commerce, 56% had sold to other EU countries and 38% to
 countries outside the European Union. In the United Kingdom, 34% of all firms engaged in electronic
 commerce had sold to countries outside the European Union, and some 24% of such firms in France
 and Germany (OECD, 2014). Such commerce goes beyond business-to-business transactions and also
 involves consumers. For example, over 60% of Canadian consumers had ordered goods or services
 over the Internet from partner countries in 2013, mostly from the United States, though 20% had also
 bought from the rest of the world. In Turkey, only 4% of consumers had bought from partner
 countries, and only 2% from the rest of the world (OECD 2014).
        The high cost of ICT adoption and a lack of adequate financing help explain why smaller firms
 are less likely to adopt the technologies (OECD 2013a). Recent research points to a set of additional
 challenges: (a) reluctance of managers to technological change, possibly because of a lack of
 knowledge, time, or mistrust; (b) consideration of the Internet’s potential for cutting cost rather than
 for expanding commercial opportunities; (c) costs of ICT infrastructure; (d) lack of ICT skills and
 expertise; and (e) lack of motivation or resources to train employees or to recruit specialists (Consoli
 2012).

                    Figure 37. Enterprises engaged in sales via e-commerce by employment size

                                                       2008 and 2012*




     * As a percentage of enterprises in each employment size class.
     Source: OECD 2014.




                                                      INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                         3. DETERMINANTS OF AND CHALLENGES TO PARTICIPATION BY SMES AND LIDCS IN GVCS – 85



          The Internet—and ICT more generally—lowers important barriers for SMEs and
  entrepreneurship, but many potential gains could be lost without changes to the basic framework
  conditions facing SMEs. One important component concerns the regulatory burden. The
  administrative burden generated by governments for starting and running companies can be
  significant, but online government portals for information on business creation and registration can
  help lower the burden. There are also still barriers that limit competition that need to be addressed in
  order for economies to fully benefit from the Internet. Regulatory and trade barriers persistently
  inhibit entrepreneurs from accessing domestic and foreign markets.
         For firms in LIDCs, further challenges exist, as there are significant impediments to the ability of
  SMEs to fully exploit the Internet for exporting. Over 60% of the world’s population is still offline,
  inhibited by shortcomings in infrastructure, lack of basic and digital literacy, low incomes and high
  costs of going online, and weak incentives (McKinsey & Co. 2013). Infrastructure issues include access
  to electricity and building the Internet backbone—submarine cables and satellites, Internet exchange
  points, and “last-mile infrastructure” (Schumann and Kende, 2013; OECD, 2015). In middle-income
  countries, many SMEs have Internet access but do not have websites through which they can do
  business, or they have limited understanding or capability of how to leverage the Internet as part of
  their business plan. For example, mobile application developers in Nepal struggle trying to launch
  their products in global app stores. According to studies from Sri Lanka, India, South Africa, Egypt,
  Argentina, and China, there are also a number of systemic and cultural barriers to digital trade—an
  important enabler of GVC participation, particularly in the services sector, faced by entrepreneurs.
  These barriers include, among others, (a) inadequate or costly telecom infrastructure, including
  Internet access; (b) lack of digital literacy and skills, resulting in an unqualified labour force and
  uninformed consumers; (c) unclear legal and regulatory systems and standards; (d) difficulties with
  accessing electronic payment systems; (e) complex and unreliable logistics and distribution networks;
  and (f) lack of “one-stop shop” facilities to ease digital trade. With regard to cultural barriers, digital
  trade can be hampered by (a) a lack of face-to-face bargaining or social interactions, (b) distrust of
  online businesses and concerns about privacy and fraud, (c) low use of e-commerce by competitors
  and supply chain partners, (d) unclear benefits from e-commerce, (e) language barriers, and
  (f) perception of e-commerce as a costly and impractical way to do business.
         Reducing existing barriers to digital trade, and thus improving access to global markets, will
  take a holistic approach. Multilateral organizations are working with clients to improve regulatory
  clarity, invest in digital literacy and entrepreneurship skills, identify digital economy opportunities in
  export markets, improve payment systems, and integrate SMEs into value chains.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
86 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS


4. Policies to Promote SME and LIDC Participation in GVCs



                                               Preview of key take-aways

      With determinants of success in international markets ranging from productive capacity to
       infrastructure and services, to the business environment, to the assurance of efficient trade and
       investment flows and good connectivity overall, the scope of policy initiatives that can be helpful in
       addressing the challenges of GVC integration managerial skills and inefficiency for SMEs and firms in
       LIDCs is broad.
      Problems of human capital, including weak organization of production, can be addressed by policies
       that combine high-quality initial education with lifelong learning opportunities for all to help ensure
       that workers are well prepared for the future. Other useful approaches include (a) developing and
       implementing global platforms for sharing best practices and e-learning, with attention to vocational
       training and to all functions (including sales, marketing, knowledge of languages); (b) leveraging
       buyers to train local staff as an efficient means of knowledge transfer; and (c) harnessing informal
       entrepreneurship, particularly the informal businesses that seem to prevail in the downstream parts
       of GVCs in LIDCs and by SMEs; (d) reducing skills mismatch and facilitating resource allocation across
       the economy.
      Innovation and technology adoption involve product innovation, process and organizational change,
       and even marketing and branding strategies. With SMEs standing to face the most severe
       challenges, policies should include a number of complementary elements: from developing and
       implementing rigorous intellectual property legislation to providing assistance to SMEs and firms in
       LIDCs through electronic platforms that help domestic firms acquire foreign technology and
       commercialize their intellectual property and assisting SMEs in using freely available technologies or
       the acquisition of technological licensing agreements. Strengthening collaboration with universities
       and multinational firms within the national economy can also enhance access to knowledge and
       technology.
      Trade and trade-related policies remain important as GVCs magnify the cost of protectionist
       measures, and trade costs fall disproportionately on SMEs. Reordering priorities in trade policy,
       giving as much consideration to imports, upstream services, and timeliness as to exports and market
       access is important. That includes prioritizing import tariff streamlining and simplifying export
       procedures, which ensure a more level playing field for SMEs. The swift and effective ratification and
       implementation of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement and the improvement of services sector
       efficiencies are key priorities. Generally speaking, it is important to design reforms as coherent
       packages of hard and soft infrastructure of domestic and international initiatives.
      Efficient logistics is also important, with costs for SMEs estimated to be double the costs for large
       companies and structural difficulties for SMEs in remote areas of LIDCs in serving global markets
       with high-value products, such as fresh agri-produce. Effective approaches require assisting
       countries in designing and implementing customized solutions that are able to meet specific needs,
       operational circumstances, and national connectivity priorities, and providing a continuum of
       potential support activities, including logistics performance assessments, development of practical
       implementation plans, and identification of sources of financing for implementation plans. Domestic
       initiatives need to be matched with supporting initiatives in transit and destination markets to be
       effective, as some successful experience from Latin America has shown. Hence, international


                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 87




          cooperation and dialogue are important in guiding effective reform of logistics system and global
          physical connectivity.
       Beyond physical connectivity, ICT connectivity is also important and requires investment in
        infrastructure and policies to ensure access at competitive prices. Services sector efficiency
        improvements and collective efforts to establish global online platforms and facilitate SMEs’ and
        LIDCs’ access to ICT networks go a long way in (a) helping those firms internationalize; (b) fostering
        the emergence of “micro-multinationals” (that is, small and young firms that are global from their
        inception); and (c) leveraging ICT.
       With increased public and private focus on certification of quality and products and standards for
        the sustainable management of global value chains, but high costs of compliance for SMEs, there is
        a large role to be played by collective action. Mutual recognition and convergence of dominant
        private and public standards would reduce the costs and burden of certification and compliance for
        SMEs and firms in LIDCs. Moreover, a holistic, country-focused, multi-stakeholder approach to
        capacity building sustained over time is necessary. Global platforms for sharing best practices and
        learning are likely to be useful instruments for identifying solutions that maximize productivity and
        economic growth while supporting certification and compliance with standards.
       As markets provide in general less financing for SMEs willing to grow and innovate than socially
        desirable because of their smaller size and greater intangibility, innovative financial instruments are
        necessary to support young and innovative SMEs and firms in LIDCs in participating in GVCs.
        Financing that takes into account intrinsic know-how, pool of talent, distribution channels, business
        relationships, business model, and access to technology in valuation of repayment ability is
        important. For that reason, forms of equity financing and bank guarantees are likely to be better
        adapted to the needs of SME and LIDC suppliers to GVCs than traditional debt financing based on
        balance sheet data, past performance, current turnover, and liquidity as predictors of repayment
        ability. Promoting policies that include regional connectivity between LIDCs and non-LIDCs, public–
        private partnerships and engagement, creation of a private market for financial services provision,
        cross-border projects, and sectoral coverage is likely to help.
       Finally, a significant, and often overlooked, barrier to successful integration within Global Value
        Chains, particularly within LIDCS, is a poor statistical capacity, which prevents identifying correctly
        constraints, remedial actions, and their impact. Investment in better statistics across the gamut of
        the statistical information system, including both macro and, crucially, micro (firm-level) data is
        desirable.


        The opportunities for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and firms in low-income developing
  countries (LIDCs) to integrate within global value chains (GVCs); to increase productivity and upgrade
  products, processes, and functions within GVCs; and to transition to more productive activities and
  sectors depend not only on the types of GVCs in which they operate but also on external and internal
  factors that affect firms through their life cycle.
         As emphasized in previous analyses submitted to the Group of Twenty (G-20) (see, in particular,
  OECD, WTO, and UNCTAD 2013; OECD, WTO, and World Bank 2014), openness to trade and
  investment, efficient services regulations, and open access to information flows through, inter alia,
  efficient telecommunication services are a precondition for success in international markets;
  however, alone they are insufficient. External constraints may also originate from an unfriendly
  business environment, the firm’s access to capital, labor, technology, and other inputs.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
88 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS

        Internal constraints also matter a lot, including the capabilities of the entrepreneur to innovate
 and adopt new technologies, the management and the organization of the firm, and the capacity of
 the firm to tap into relevant networks. In short, for the wider private sector to thrive from countries’
 participation in GVCs, appropriate policy frameworks are needed that allow countries and firms to
 capitalize on their existing productive capacities and to create spillover benefits from foreign
 investment, knowledge, and innovations. What follows builds on the previous two reports to the G-20
 and focuses in addition on elements of critical importance to SMEs and LIDCs.
        Successful GVC participation by firms from LIDCs and SMEs from rich countries and LIDCs alike
 requires that reforms are implemented as coherent packages. It also requires a sustained,
 coordinated, and long-term approach, based on the design of incentive mechanisms that are tailored
 to the specific needs of countries, types of firms, and value chains. Two sets of concurrent actions are
 necessary: furthering openness and ensuring that the benefits trickle down (to SMEs) and across (to
 LIDCs), while also building the necessary supporting measures for maximizing dynamic gains.

Furthering international trade openness

        Trade-related reforms have been at the center of the agenda of G-20 trade ministers in recent
 years. But much still needs to be done and—for many countries—that includes reordering priorities
 on trade policy. Facilitating imports and ensuring timeliness in the two-way flows of goods are as
 important as facilitating exports and market access. Improving trade-related infrastructure and
 streamlining border management are obvious priorities, but for many economies, improving the
 efficiency of the services sector, increasing competition in the domestic economy, and addressing
 nontariff measures that unnecessarily raise the price of imported inputs are equally important.

 Trade facilitation
       Trade facilitation has become central to the economic agenda of every world region. Tackling
 some of the key barriers that saddle traders in LIDCs with high trade costs and long delays will result
 in increased bilateral trade, greater export diversification, enhanced foreign investment, and
 improved national competitiveness.

                 Figure 38. Trade facilitation measures: Potential cost reduction in goods trade, %




                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 89



         The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has developed a set of
  trade facilitation indicators that identify areas for action and enable the potential impact of reforms to
  be assessed. These indicators cover the full spectrum of border procedures, from advance rulings to
  transit guarantees, for 133 countries across income levels, geographical regions, and development
  stages. Analysis shows that trade facilitation measures can benefit all countries in their role as
  exporters, as well as importers, allowing better access to inputs for production and greater
  participation in GVCs. Analysis of the indicators also shows that comprehensive trade facilitation
  reform is more effective than isolated or piecemeal measures Figure 38). The potential reduction in
  trade costs of all the trade facilitation measures adds up to almost 15% for low-income countries, 16%
  for lower-middle-income countries, 13% for upper-middle-income countries, and 10% for OECD
  countries.
         The Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) reached in Bali in 2013 by the members of the World
  Trade Organization (WTO) is an important step toward facilitating trade. The TFA allows WTO
  members to customize implementation of the agreement according to their capacities and technical
  assistance needs, along with a better support structure to help target, monitor, and coordinate
  implementation. To date (May 2015), only Singapore, Hong Kong, the United States, Mauritius, and
  Botswana have lodged their ratification protocols with the WTO. The WTO TFA will come into force
  when two-thirds of WTO members have lodged their protocol of ratification. The target is the WTO
  Ministerial Conference in Kenya in December 2015. That is an ambitious target, but with the European
  Union (EU) likely to ratify the agreement soon, there will be a big boost toward the two-thirds
  needed.
         An early implementation of the TFA is not only a sign that the implementation objective of the
  G-20’s 2015 agenda has been achieved but also a “win–win” situation for all countries, with the
  benefits falling disproportionality to LIDCs as their traders typically face significantly higher costs that
  reduce their capacity to compete in regional and international markets (as demonstrated by evidence
  in Figure 31). For this reason, the World Bank Group has been a major supporter of trade facilitation
  for many years and has financed more than 120 projects and many technical assistance activities that
  are closely aligned with the measures included in the TFA. The World Bank Group’s current trade and
  integration portfolio totals USD 13.3 billion with over half devoted to trade facilitation. Results have
  been aimed at improvements in areas such as customs and border management, streamlined
  documentary requirements, trade infrastructure investment, port efficiency, transport security,
  logistics and transport services, regional trade facilitation and trade corridors, transit, and multimodal
  transport. This type of concrete, practical assistance is critical to improving the national
  competitiveness of the poorest countries in the world.
         Although all measures covered by the TFA offer genuine benefits to the trading community,
  experience suggests that regionally integrated facilitation frameworks similar to the EU are also
  necessary. Moreover, early efforts to strengthen stakeholder coordination through the establishment
  of national trade facilitation committees can have a very positive impact on building and sustaining
  reform momentum. The OECD finds that in the Philippines and Indonesia, for example, reforms in
  border agency cooperation rendered clearance processes less opaque, enabling traders to plan more
  confidently, supporting just-in-time processes, and reducing the costs associated with uncertainty
  (OECD, WTO, and World Bank 2014). More in general, stakeholder coordination has proved critical to
  supporting implementation of complex, long-term, projects, such as establishing trade information
  portals and single-window regimes. In line with this thinking, the World Bank Group is focusing
  increased attention on establishing appropriate national governance and coordination mechanisms
  and on the design phase of projects to ensure appropriate sequencing of reforms.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
90 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS

        The international community, multilateral organizations, and the G-20 can do a lot to support
 LIDCs and their SMEs to maximize benefits from ongoing trade facilitation efforts. The international
 community can help by supporting LIDCs in taking an active role in the multilateral and regional
 negotiations, as well as by assisting LIDCs in effectively implementing all aspects of trade facilitation
 agreements in ways that ensure genuine trade facilitation benefits for the trading community. It can
 help in the following ways:
        Implement trade facilitation reforms as coherent packages of hard and soft infrastructure. The
         international community can further foster strategies designed to assist countries in effectively
         implementing all aspects of multilateral and regional trade facilitation agreements in ways that
         ensure genuine trade facilitation benefits for the trading community, rather than mere
         compliance with the legal text. Development institutions should respond as rapidly as possible
         to demand from LIDCs, with customized approaches to meet specific needs, operational
         circumstances, and national trade facilitation priorities, providing a continuum of potential
         trade facilitation support activities, aligned with the principles of the agreements. Those include
         on-the-ground gap assessments to validate needs, project design assistance to support the
         development of practical implementation plans, and, where appropriate, identification of
         sources of financing for implementation projects; support for establishing and strengthening
         national trade facilitation committees; provision of short- to medium-term technical assistance
         and capacity-building support to implement specific measures and build implementation
         momentum; and support for regional solutions to support and facilitate regional integration.
        Facilitate information on costs, benefits, and implementation challenges and provide practical
         guidelines on establishing technical support and capacity building for reform, which are an
         important and concrete way to help LIDCs and SMEs. That includes providing countries with
         practical guidelines on establishing a technical support mechanism for negotiators in
         agreements; including real-time analysis and advice on content and cost implications of
         proposals tabled (see, for example, the Trade Facilitation Support Guide developed by the
         World Bank Group). It also includes providing practical information to countries and their firms
         on potential costs and implementation challenges of different agreements (see, for example,
         the in-country assessments by the World Bank Group, International Monetary Fund, and World
         Customs Organization).
        Enhance cooperation and coordination between development partners, at the multilateral,
         regional, and bilateral level to avoid duplications and to support regional activities of trade
         facilitation and programs integrating both national and regional aspects. Ongoing efforts in
         these areas include the World Bank Group support to regional bodies, including the West
         African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), Central African Economic and Monetary
         Community, Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and Economic Community of
         West African States in Africa and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in East Asia. In the
         case of UEMOA, support started with a TFA needs assessment of each of the eight member
         states. In turn, this new program will drive a series of technical assistance activities at the
         regional and national levels. Regional activities are particularly useful if directed toward
         improving the efficiency of gateway ports, streamlining and harmonizing land border-crossing
         procedures, revision of legislation, and—given the importance of efficient transit arrangements
         to landlocked LIDCs—improving the operation of transit regimes through regional integration
         and trade corridor projects.



                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 91



         Identify practical means for harnessing private sector contributions to the implementation
          process of trade facilitation initiatives. This may include partnering with major industry
          associations to identify and support trade facilitation–related initiatives that provide a strong
          demonstration effect. It also means contributing to forums, such as the Global Facilitation
          Partnership for Trade and Transport that bring together international and regional
          organizations as well as private sector associations and companies interested in facilitating
          trade.
         Conduct analytical work for monitoring and evaluating the performance and design of policy.
          The OECD heralds such work with a variety of tools. The World Bank Group prepares the
          Logistics Performance Index and the Doing Business survey, which provide focused analytical
          tools, indicators, and data sets to assist both national policy makers and development partners
          in identifying and tackling key trade facilitation bottlenecks. These tools are used to guide
          efforts in the design and implementation of targeted trade facilitation projects.

  Logistics infrastructure and services and policies affecting their use
         As the discussion above evidences, trade facilitation alone cannot lead to an effective and
  substantial strategy of participation in higher value-added trade and investment attraction,
  particularly by SMEs and firms in LIDCs. It can be only an element of a wider strategy. Needs for
  infrastructure and ancillary services also need to be developed. Infrastructure needs cover areas as
  diverse as the development of ports, roads, cargo-handling facilities, and broadband and other
  information and communications technology (ICT) systems. Experience shows the complementarities
  between hard and soft interventions, especially in low-income regions. For example, improvements in
  trade facilitation are implemented more easily with physical investment to develop or rehabilitate
  international transport infrastructures, such as road or rail corridors.
         Logistics infrastructure and efficiency are now high on the agenda of policy makers, private
  firms, and international organizations. In this case, as in the case of trade facilitation, reforms must be
  implemented as coherent packages, and they require sustained, long-term attention. There is not one
  unique institutional arrangement for countries to implement logistics-related reforms. Policy making
  is a responsibility shared among government agencies in charge of transportation policies and
  investment, commerce, industry, and customs and border management. No country has a ministry for
  logistics. Instead, a collective framework that includes the private sector is important for consistent
  implementation. Canada, China, Finland, Germany, Malaysia, and Morocco have all introduced
  councils or similar coordination mechanisms.
         The focus and leadership of logistics reforms depend on local circumstances. In advanced and
  emerging economies, transportation agencies have often led the coordination, increasingly with an
  environmental focus. In LIDCs, the agencies in charge of commerce and economic development have
  also played a major role in promoting the facilitation and logistics agenda.
        Also in this area, the international community, multilateral organizations, and the G-20 can help
  with a combination of hard and soft interventions, including the following:
         Information on costs, benefits, and implementation challenges and practical guidelines on
          establishing technical support and capacity building for reform.
         Assistance to countries in effectively implementing all aspects of logistics and transport reform
          in ways that ensure genuine benefits for the trading community and for SMEs. This implies
          customizing approaches to meet specific needs, operational circumstances, and national

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
92 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS

         connectivity priorities, providing a continuum of potential support activities, including (a)
         logistics performance assessments, (b) development of practical implementation plans, (c)
         identification of sources of financing for implementation plans, and (d) support for the chosen
         domestic institutional arrangement to implement logistics-related reforms.
        Cooperation and coordination between development partners, including multilateral
         institutions, regional development banks, donors, and other stakeholders to ensure effective
         coordination and to minimize the possibility of needless duplication.
        Identification of practical means for harnessing private sector contributions to the
         implementation process of reform initiatives in the logistics sector, including partnering with
         major industry associations and key players in logistics.
        Analytical work for monitoring and evaluating the performance and design of policy is also
         important and should continue to be developed.

 Trade policy
       Trade policy matters. Along with domestic reform, it is a powerful engine of GVC integration,
 provided that it responds rapidly and effectively. “Trade policy as usual” needs some adjustments
 when thinking about GVCs and participation in the latter by SMEs and LIDCs.
        GVCs are a new lens that underscores the importance for policy makers to appreciate fully the
 importance of the synergies between the core areas of trade and investment regulation and well-
 tailored complementary measures. In most countries, agencies with a role in setting and enforcing
 regulation that may affect value chain and supply chain efficiency are many. They also often legislate
 and implement regulation in an uncoordinated manner. That happens because regulators set policies
 with domestic regulatory objectives in mind. As a consequence, international coordination in these
 matters is not necessarily able to foster GVCs’ production and supply chain trade. Fear that
 international coordination conflicts with domestic regulatory objectives may explain why existing
 trade agreements, investment agreements, and similar forms of international cooperation are rarely
 designed to foster GVC participation (Hoekman 2014).
        The G-20 and the multilateral organizations can help in identifying and lifting the key binding
 constraints by advocating for a multistakeholder and pragmatic approach to trade policy reform that
 tackles the so-called deep issues. But efforts are needed also in the traditional trade policy issues. In
 the absence of multilateral reductions in tariffs, LIDCs should seek trade agreements on tariffs, tariff
 escalation, and standards harmonization with other LIDCs. Previously, LIDCs focused on securing trade
 agreements with developed-country markets. Today, the trade of intermediate goods in regional and
 global chains is often between LIDCs, and emerging economies are becoming important end markets.
 Import and export tariffs between these countries continue to be relatively high, and these countries
 are also plagued by a variety of nontariff measures, including quantitative restrictions, technical
 barriers to trade, and difficulties in allowing harmonization, mutual recognition, and low compliance
 costs. They sometimes restrict trade unnecessarily and in these cases, simplification and liberalization
 should be a priority.
       Many relevant trade- and investment-related actions to foster participation in GVCs are of a
 domestic nature. Hence, unilateral action is crucial. Fortunately, most GVC-enhancing reforms will
 also have a positive impact on non-GVC trade, and on overall competitiveness and economic
 development more generally. But international cooperation matters greatly too.


                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 93



         Advancing cooperation at the international level requires addressing the regional versus
  multilateral dimension. Regional trade agreements are important ways to push forward deep
  integration agendas that are particularly beneficial to SMEs and LIDCs. The OECD (2012) provides
  abundant “case story” examples of the importance of regional trading initiatives. For example, the
  Greater Mekong Subregion undertook to enhance trade by constructing bridges and roads in
  conjunction with its Cross-Border Transport Agreement (CBTA) in 2006 among Viet Nam, Lao PDR, and
  Thailand. The CBTA covered nearly all aspects of goods and services flows—including customs
  inspections, transit traffic, and road and bridge design. As a consequence, average trade value rose by
  more than 50%—to USD 142 million in 2006–07 from USD 93.5 million in 1999–2000. Average travel
  times were cut by half along the corridor. Time spent crossing selected borders also fell by 30 –50%,
  and the average number of vehicle crossings per day increased. Finally, in June 2009, a CBTA allowed
  issuance of licenses for some 500 trucks to operate along the corridor without trans-shipment fees.
  Brülhart and Hoppe (2012) recount a case where potential regional trade has not yet materialized,
  precisely because of the absence of CBTA-type collaboration. Kinshasa-Brazzaville is the third-largest
  urban agglomeration in Africa and is destined to be the largest by 2025. But it has a river border
  running through it. Republic of Congo imports from the Democratic Republic of Congo are a mere 1%
  of its total, and daily cross-river passenger travel is only 20% of the volume of passenger traffic
  through the Berlin Wall in 1988. The authors calculate that the transit costs would be equivalent to
  charging Californians commuting from Oakland to San Francisco (about the same distance)
  USD 1,200–USD 2,400 per trip.
         More recent regional trade agreements often contain provisions on government procurement,
  arrangement of business conditions for investment, or the protection of intellectual property rights.
  They can facilitate closer cooperation and continuous exchange between public officials from the
  countries involved to reduce barriers to commerce. These provisions often have a higher payoff in
  trade expansion than simply removing tariffs. Jensen and Tarr (2011), using CGE (computable general
  equilibrium) prospective analysis, found that mutual reductions in tariffs as part of a comprehensive
  free trade agreement between Armenia and the EU would provide some gains for Armenia, but these
  were dwarfed by actions that would liberalize services, reduce border costs, and harmonize
  standards. What is critical to emphasize in our present context is that regional trade agreements
  should serve as a means of achieving deeper integration while continuing to move forward at the
  multilateral level.
        Other important areas of international cooperation include promoting coherence between
  preferential trade agreements (PTAs) and the WTO and enabling LIDCs’ GVC participation through Aid
  for Trade. Priority areas for the latter include financing investment in trade-related infrastructure;
  reducing standards compliance costs, in particular for SMEs; improving customs operations and
  border crossings; and enhancing regulatory capacity, particularly in the services sector.
         Possible tensions in the international arena are however possible. Different interests may arise,
  as some countries seek either to preserve their domestic value added or to enact policies of
  indigenization. Areas of tension may include tariff escalation policies, subsidies, export restrictions,
  local content requirements, intellectual property rights, competition policy and regulations on state-
  owned enterprises, and level of appropriate standards. Moreover, as GVCs move forward to the next
  generation, responding to the push of “next generation” technologies, additional problematic issues
  may arise. For example, they may include the balance between privacy and data trade opening, the
  rules on intellectual property protection and diffusion of new technologies, or cross-border spillovers
  of domestic regulations. An example of the latter is provided by the recent French law allowing


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
94 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS

 extraterritoriality in the prosecution of crimes committed by French corporations in their supply chain
 abroad.

 The services liberalization agenda
        The shift in manufacturing worldwide determined by the increasing dominance of GVCs has
 been accompanied by important changes in the services sector too, underscoring the importance of
 the nexus of goods, services, and foreign direct investment (FDI) (section 1). Service trade and the role
 of services in boosting the economy as a whole have increased: more than 60% of the current stock of
 global FDI is in services. The composition of services has also changed, with modern services gaining in
 importance at the expense of traditional services. FDI is also a main engine of growth for service
 trade. Mode 3 (delivery through foreign affiliates) covers about 50% of overall service trade (Saez
 et al. 2015). Not only has service trade increased over time, but services have also increased their
 importance as a determinant of competitiveness in the economy as a whole, and SMEs integrate GVCs
 predominantly as service providers (Section 2). Countries with a higher content of services in the
 downstream economy are also those producing more complex goods (Saez et al. 2015).
        The explosion of services and service trade is due to falling trade and investment barriers as
 well as new digital technology, which have reduced costs for service delivery across borders and
 transformed many goods into services (Taglioni and Winkler, forthcoming) The deregulation in air and
 road transport, the abolition of antitrust exemptions for maritime liner transport, the privatization of
 ports and port services, and the divestiture and breakup of telecommunications monopolies are,
 according to Hoekman (2014), the main examples of regulatory measures that have reduced the cost
 of service delivery across borders. However, substantial barriers remain in some of the services sector
 that act as essential enablers in the geographic dispersion of GVCs. Liberalization of those services
 that allow connecting competitively to the world economy and that allow more efficient access to
 resources is a priority. Such services include ICT, supply chain management services (to reduce
 inventories, shorten lead times, and enable faster customer response), and improved logistic services.
       The policy agenda in services should emphasize the relevance of services liberalization for
 competitiveness in trade and GVCs as well as focus on regulations and requirements pertaining to
 areas critical to successful GVC participation, such as the following:
        Cross-border transfer of data and money
        Costs of telecommunication services
        Competitiveness and costs of port and logistics services
        Air transport regulations

Ensuring that openness benefits reach beyond large firms and the G-20 to SMEs and LIDCs

       Many reforms that are essential to raising global welfare will need to take place in some of the
 world’s poorest countries. The G-20 ministers’ discussion provides an excellent opportunity to
 consider how trade-related reforms can lead to benefits in economies outside the G-20 and how this
 can trickle down to SMEs both at home and in input-supplying countries. There are a number of
 measures that G-20 and the multilateral cooperation can foster and promote.




                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 95



  Quality and product certification and compliance with international standards
        Mutual recognition or convergence of both public and private voluntary standards, through
  national or international guidelines, could help. Upstream firms supplying components to several
  destinations may no longer incur burdensome certification procedures multiple times for the same
  product or have to duplicate production processes to comply with conflicting standards. In food value
  chains, for example, process standards adapted to one country’s requirements may render exporting
  to another country infeasible. Promoting the convergence of standards and certification requirements
  and encouraging mutual recognition agreements can go a long way toward alleviating the burden of
  compliance and enhancing the competitiveness of small-scale exporters. That is true for
  environmental and social sustainability standards as well as for quality and safety standards.
         Improving standards requires much more than simply adopting and enforcing new rules. It
  requires long-term commitment and the incentives and mechanisms tailored to the particular needs
  of specific countries and specific value chains. The international community should foster or trigger a
  “race to the top” by developing a common approach for upward graduation through standards
  implementation. That will require a holistic, country-focused, multi stakeholder approach to capacity
  building, sustained over time, including the following:
         Engagement of the private sector (local suppliers, global leads, and buyers)
         Creation of a local supplier base for advisory services
         Improvement of infrastructure
         Improvements in the business environment.
          Acting at those many levels requires the active involvement of many actors:
         Partnerships. The G-20 could work to strengthen global partnerships with governments,
          businesses, consumer and labor groups, and international organizations. An inclusive
          partnership approach opens the door to the best insights and most successful models from
          those with experience in raising standards, improving productivity, developing skills, and
          spreading prosperity through participation in GVCs. The Better Work program—a partnership
          between the World Bank Group’s International Finance Corporation and the International Labor
          Organization—exemplifies how partnerships can make an impact. Further, the G-20 could
          provide support to B-20 initiatives geared to strengthen SMEs’ ability to comply with
          international standards. For example, providing support to set a MNE working group within the
          B-20 Trade or SME & Entrepreneurship Task Force with the objective of elaborating a blueprint
          on responsible and inclusive GVCs with pledges to provide SMEs the tools and knowledge
          required to their successful compliance with international standards could be very useful.
         G-20 countries. These countries are showing increasing interest in helping LIDCs identify growth
          and development opportunities from meeting high international standards for goods and
          services. But it is their knowledge, as much as their financial assistance that can make the
          difference. Many of their governments have experience to share on how to establish regulatory
          measures and policies that support higher standards and foster productivity and shared value in
          GVCs. Being home to many of the world’s leading firms, enhancing the capacity to comply
          throughout global production chains helps all parties. Being home to the largest consumer
          markets, they also have a role to play in ensuring transparency and awareness on challenges
          faced by SMEs and LIDCs in joining GVCs and leveraging them for economic and social
          development.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
96 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS

        LIDCs. Increasingly aware of the triple bottom line of sustainable growth, many countries have
         adopted legislation to protect workers and the environment and are working to strengthen the
         enabling environment. But enforcement offices generally have limited resources; they need the
         know-how, the skills, and the capacity to phase in adherence to internationally recognized
         standards. The process can be self-perpetuating as the likelihood of countries to comply with
         standards increases with greater revenues. Prioritizing attraction of GVCs whose business
         models allow greater value-added growth may help, by generating the economic space to
         implement standards.
        Private sector and civil society. Lead firms’ emphasis on quality and standards represents an
         important area for potential spillovers in the domestic market. Many of these firms are already
         providing technical assistance to local suppliers and producers to improve activities along
         production chains—the business case is strong. But their focus is often on the legal coverage
         and a narrow gamut of issues. Meanwhile, civil society’s advocacy campaigns and technical
         assistance help mainstream sustainable practices and adherence to international standards.
         These organizations also help by providing innovative solutions to difficult problems, especially
         in bringing transparency and in monitoring and evaluating progress. The G-20 could help by
         endorsing initiatives by non-state actors.

 Addressing credit constraints
        Although production in GVCs is taking place at international and often global scale, financing
 economic activity is still largely done at national scale, and in a fragmented way with little continuity
 across financial service providers and along the value chain. Moreover, SMEs face specific challenges.
 Size and intangibility play against their creditworthiness. Markets provide in general less financing for
 SMEs willing to grow and innovate than socially desirable, while routinely banks rely on balance sheet
 data, past performance, current turnover, and liquidity as predictors of repayment ability.
        Because of these constraints and challenges, policy action may be helpful. This report, for
 example, highlights the need for financing that takes into account intrinsic know-how, pool of talent,
 distribution channels, business relationships, business model, and access to technology in valuation of
 repayment ability. Forms of engaged, patient equity financing and bank guarantees are likely to be
 preferred to traditional debt financing. Finally, promoting policies that have a multipronged approach
 may also be helpful. Results from a recent survey carried out by the Italian government seeking to
 promote the internationalization of SMEs (SIMES 2012) offer insights as to the needs for overcoming
 bottlenecks to the financing of GVC participation by SMEs. The ingredients of the approach suggested
 by the Italian agency SIMES include (a) promoting a policy that has regional connectivity, (b)
 connecting more than one region together (an LIDC and a non-LIDC region), and (c) forming a public–
 private partnership to fix all the objectives and responsibilities and that defines eligibility criteria,
 cross-border projects, and sectorial coverage, entry, and exit.

 Maximizing dynamic gains through the broader set of productivity-enhancing policies
       Although the policies mentioned before create the necessary framework conditions for SMEs
 and LIDCs to participate in GVCs, their effects may not be sufficient to ensure that firms in LIDCs will
 be successful in participating in GVCs, as the broad key challenge for suppliers that want to integrate
 GVCs or that want to strengthen and upgrade their participation in GVCs is to increase productivity.
       Fostering productivity growth is, however, challenging and requires interventions in multiple
 areas simultaneously to address both internal and external constraints to firm-level efficiency (OECD,

                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 97



  2015). These interventions are geared to have a positive impact on the within and between
  components of productivity growth. The within component is related to individual firms becoming
  more productive, that is, increasing the amount of output they produce with a constant amount of
  input, by strengthening their internal capabilities; whereas the between component is associated with
  the reallocation of factors of production, such as labor and capital, toward more efficient firms,
  forcing inefficient firms to exit the market and creating the right market conditions for productive
  firms to thrive. Recent OECD work points to three areas that are particularly important for
  productivity growth (OECD, 2015): (i) fostering innovation at the global frontier and facilitate the
  diffusion of new technologies to firms at the national frontier; (ii) creating a market environment
  where the most productive firms are allowed to thrive, thereby facilitating the more widespread
  penetration of available technologies; and (iii) reduce resource misallocation, including skill
  mismatches. Reviving diffusion and improving resource allocation has the potential to not only sustain
  and accelerate productivity growth but also to make this growth more inclusive, by allowing more
  firms, notably SMEs, to reap the benefits of the knowledge economy.
         Productivity-enhancing policies, which are crucial to make the SMEs involved in GVC activities
  resilient to external shocks, are frequently part of the national agenda. However, coordinated efforts
  at the regional level can pay significant rewards as GVCs are usually a regional phenomenon. A key
  policy that increases firm productivity is fostering innovation. Given its cross-cutting and systematic
  nature (OECD, 2015), the innovation agenda requires coordinated interventions both nationally and
  regionally, with multiple actors, ministries, and agencies participating in the policy making and
  implementation of reforms. It also needs organizational and institutional change to be successful
  (Fagerberg et al. 2009).
         Policies oriented toward promoting innovation should focus on building comprehensive
  innovation ecosystems and should operate at different levels: (a) improving framework conditions by,
  for example, promoting product market competition, strengthening intellectual property rights
  systems, and financing innovation (including seed and venture capital funds; (b) building innovation
  capacity and innovation skills through, for example, creating research and technology organizations,
  quality and technology transfer systems, and training centres; and (c) facilitating connectivity and
  system articulation by, for example, supporting public-private collaborations for innovation,
  articulating actors in the technology transfer process, facilitating venture acceleration networks, and
  promoting the creation of clusters and knowledge spillover effects.17
         Improving access to digital networks is of particular importance, given its dual role in enhancing
  productivity and strengthening SMEs’ access to global markets. Although considerable progress has
  been made in strengthening access of emerging and developing economies to communications
  infrastructure, being connected is only the first step (OECD 2013a; OECD, 2015). A reliable and
  competitive offer has to be available in markets before the Internet economy can truly take root,
  which requires policies focused on competition and access. Emerging economies can benefit from
  new technological developments, however, such as mobile and cloud computing, that can help
  overcome lack of resources and infrastructure at the domestic level. However, access to cloud
  resources requires the build-up of domestic infrastructure as well as policy frameworks, for example,
  to ensure privacy and security. Standardization is also key to the further deployment of cloud services

17.     A successful example of a regional initiative oriented toward fostering business innovation is the Western
        Balkans Enterprise Development & Innovation Facility, funded by the EU and implemented in cooperation
        with the World Bank Group, OECD, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and European
        Investment Bank, with the purpose of improving access to finance for innovative SMEs in the region.

INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
98 – 4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS

 in emerging and LIDCs. Finally, ICT skills adapted to the new dominant technologies have to be
 developed. They include not only hard-core technical skills but also soft skills and the ability to
 navigate the complex and ever-growing opportunities, open-source technologies and services, and
 information available at the global scale.
       Given the range of policies that affect innovation across the government, close coordination
 and appropriate governance mechanisms are essential too, as is monitoring and evaluation to ensure
 a process for policy improvement and learning over time (OECD 2015).
       Further, the productivity agenda should also focus on facilitating access to talent at both the
 managerial and workforce levels. SMEs in LIDCs are frequently plagued by weak managerial capacities
 and inefficient organization. Those weaknesses are reflected in low levels of productivity, a
 suboptimal use of their workforce, waste of materials and inputs, and low efficiency at the level of the
 production floor. These firms also suffer from the lack of a skilled workforce, thus they are incapable
 of conducting both simple and complex GVC activities at competitive prices. Policies oriented toward
 addressing both issues include interventions geared to improving managerial skills and fostering a
 long-term entrepreneurial view, increasing the supply of skilled workers in sectors where there is
 excess demand, and improving workforce skills while reducing skill mismatch. General business
 education and training programs are the most popular components of entrepreneurship support
 programs to foster firm productivity. Vocational training, direct financial assistance to local initiatives
 aimed at fostering work-based learning, facilitation of public–private dialogue to incorporate private
 sector needs into vocational training and university curricula, and support for the development of
 sector skills councils that help match firms with employees also contribute to reducing the skills
 mismatch and enhancing firm productivity.
        Finally, the agenda should also consider the elimination of economic distortions in factor and
 product prices, which affect firms’ optimal input choices and end up facilitating the survival of large
 and inefficient firms. These distortions, which reflect heterogeneous policy treatment of firms within a
 sector, create significant dispersion of firm performance, even within very narrowly defined sectors.
 Firm productivity dispersion, a measure of allocative inefficiency, negatively affects aggregate
 productivity at the sectorial and economy levels, diminishing the impact of productivity-enhancing
 policies, such as those aimed at fostering product market competition to ignite innovation or
 promoting exports through the reduction of fixed costs, when these policies target the average firm.

Investment in expanding the statistical basis and technical analysis of participation in GVCs
        A significant, and often overlooked, way to facilitate successful integration within Global Value
 Chains, particularly within LIDCs, consist in identifying correctly constraints, remedial actions, and in
 assessing the efficacy of new policy measures. This cuts across the gamut of the statistical information
 system, including both macro and, crucially, micro (firm-level) data. The OECD-WTO TiVA database is
 one of the well-known recent examples of statistical initiatives to provide country and sector level
 evidence for supporting GVC analysis. Whilst this database currently includes 61 economies, very few
 LIDCs, particularly in Africa and Central Asia, are included and significant efforts are needed to
 develop and improve the national building blocks required for inclusion within the TiVA database.
 Needed improvements include: national supply-use and input-output tables of better quality; and
 more granularity for trade in services data, developed in line with international accounting standards
 – the System of National Accounts and the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position
 Manual. Other standard macro-level data collections areas where further investment would be
 beneficial include: Structural Business Statistics (SBS); Trade by Enterprise Characteristics (TEC),
 Entrepreneurship Indicators (Business Demography, BD), and Foreign Affiliate Trade Statistics (FATS).
                                                    INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                  4. POLICIES TO PROMOTE SME AND LIDC PARTICIPATION IN GVCS – 99



         All of these standard collections require good data at the firm-level. Investment in and scaling
  up of micro-data and existing data-collections and surveys is a central priority for better policy
  making. The World Bank Group Enterprise Surveys use standard survey instruments to collect firm-
  level data on the business environment from business owners and top managers. The surveys account
  for firm size and cover a broad range of topics including access to finance, corruption, infrastructure,
  crime, competition, labor, obstacles to growth, and performance measures, but not yet participation
  in GVCs. Other available datasets include microenterprise, informal, sector-specific, and other surveys.
  Panel (longitudinal) datasets of survey results are available for many countries. These statistics
  constitute an excellent basis for expanding available tools to documenting better business
  relationships taking place in the context of GVCs. This includes collecting firm level information on the
  links between exporters and foreign buyers, and between local firms and multinational companies
  integrated in GVCs (backward and forward linkages) as well as information on the internal and
  external factors facilitating or impeding accession and upgrading of firms in GVCs. The nature of
  participation in GVCs by firms in LIDCs and different behavior between large and small firms in the
  adoption of international certification practices and regulatory standards or in usage of ICT and
  technology, are among the areas that can be better documented through embedding a GVC module in
  existing enterprise surveys. Impact evaluations of policy interventions that can facilitate access and
  upgrading of participation in GVCs by SMEs and by firms in LIDCs is also necessary to help prioritise
  interventions, strengthen the evidence base for policy making, and coordinate actions among actors,
  often from different countries.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
100 – REFERENCES




                                                  References


Acs, Zoltan J. and David B. Audretsch. 1987. "Innovation, Market Structure and Firm Size," Review of Economics
         and Statistics, 69(4), 567-575.
Acs, Zoltan J. and David B. Audretsch. 1988. "R&D and Small Firms," Testimony before the Subcommittee on
         Monopolies and Commercial Law, Committee on the Judiciary, US House of Representatives,
         February 24.
Allen, Richard and Duncan Last. 2007. “Low-Income Countries Need Upgrades,” IMF Survey Magazine, 19 July.
Andrade, Gustavo Henrique, Miriam Bruhn and David McKenzie “A Helping Hand or the Long Arm of Law?
        Experimental Evidence on What Governments Can Do to Formalize Firms”. The World Bank Economic
        Review, pp.1-31.
Andrews, Dan and Federico Cingano. 2014. "Public policy and resource allocation: evidence from firms in OECD
       countries," Economic Policy, CEPR; CES; MSH, vol. 29 (78), pages 253-296, 04.
Andrews, Dan and Chiara Criscuolo. 2013. "Knowledge-Based Capital, Innovation and Resource Allocation," OECD
       Economics Department Working Papers 1046, OECD Publishing.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inventions,” in Nelson, R.R. (ed.),
        The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors . Princeton University Press.
        Princeton.
Arvis, Jean-François, Yann Duval, Ben Shepherd, and Chorthip Utoktham. 2013. “Trade Costs in the Developing
          World, 1995–2010,” Policy Research Working Paper 6309, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Arvis, Jean-François, Monica Alina Mustra, Lauri Ojala, Ben Shepherd, and Daniel Saslavsky. 2010. “Connecting to
          Compete 2010: Trade Logistics in the Global Economy.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Arvis, Jean-François, Gaël Raballand, and Jean-François Marteau. 2010. “The Cost of Being Landlocked: Logistic s
          Costs and Supply Chain Reliability.” Policy Research Working Paper 4258, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Arvis, Jean-François, Ben Shepherd, Yann Duval, and Chorthip Utoktham. 2013. “Trade Costs and Development: A
          New Data Set.” Economic Premise Note 104, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ayyagari, M., Demirguc-Kunt, A., and V., Maksimovic. 2014. “Who creates jobs in developing countries?” Small
        Business Economics, 43:75-99.
Baldwin, Richard. 2006. "Managing the Noodle Bowl: The Fragility of East Asian Regionalism," CEPR DP 5561;
        published in Singapore Economic Review, 53, 3, 449-478. 2008.
Baldwin, Richard. 2011. “Trade and Industrialisation after Globalisation’s Second Unbundling: How Building and
        Joining a Supply Chain Are Different and Why It Matters.” NBER Working Paper 17716, National Bureau
        of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baldwin, John, and Wulong Gu. 2003. “Export-Market Participation and Productivity Performance in Canadian
        Manufacturing.” Canadian Journal of Economics 36 (3): 634–57.
Bernard, Andrew B. , J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. 2003. Falling Trade Costs, Heterogeneous Firms, and
        Industry Dynamics. NBER Working Paper 9639, April.
Bernard Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. 2007. "Firms in International
        Trade," Journal of Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association, vol. 21(3), pp. 105-130,
        Summer.


                                                 INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                                     REFERENCES – 101



Bitran E., S. Nieto-Parra and J. S. Robledo. 2013. “Opening the Black Box of Contract Renegotiations: An Analysis of
          Road Concessions in Chile, Colombia and Peru”, OECD Development Centre Working Papers 317, OECD
          Publishing.
Blomström, Magnus, and Ari Kokko. 1998. “Multinational Corporations and Spillovers.” Journal of Economic
        Surveys 12 (3): 247–77
Bloom, Nicholas, Eiffert, Benn, Mahajan, Aprajit, McKenzie, David and Roberts, John. 2012. Does Management
        Really Matter? Evidence from India.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2013), 1-51.
Bloom, Nicholas B., Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen. 2013. “Management as a Technology?” Research
        paper, Stanford University.
Bravo-Biosca, A., Cusolito, A., and J. Hill (2015). “Financing Business Innovation. A Review of External Sources of
        Funding for Innovative Businesses and Public Policies to Support Them.” World Bank Group.
Brülhart, Marius, and Mombert Hoppe. 2012. “Economic Integration in the Lower Congo Region: Opening the
         Kinshasa–Brazzaville Bottleneck.” In De-fragmenting Africa: Deepening Regional Trade Integration in
         Goods and Services, edited by Paul Brenton and Gözde Isik, 33–41. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Bruhn Miriam and David McKenzie (2014) “Entry Regulations and the Formalization of Microenterprises in
       Developing Countries”. The World Bank Research Observer.
Cadot, Olivier, and Mariem Malouche. 2012. “Overview.” In Non-tariff Measures: A Fresh Look at Trade Policy’s
        New Frontier, edited by Olivier Cadot and Mariem Malouche, 1–19. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Cebeci, Tolga, Ana M. Fernandes, Caroline Freund, and Martha Denisse Pierola. 2012. “Exporter dynamics
         database,” Policy Research Working Paper Series 6229, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Criscuolo, C., Gal, P., and C., Menon (2014), “The Dynamics of Employment Growth: New Evidence from 18
         Countries”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy Papers no. 14, OECD Publishing,
         http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5jz417hj6hg6-en.
Diamandis, Peter. 2015. “You can manufacture what you want.” The WorldPost.
Dicken. 2011. Global Shift: Mapping the Changing Contours of the World Economy . Guilford Press.
Disdier, Anne-Celia, Fontagne, Lionel and Mondher Mimouni. 2008. The Impact of Regulations on Agricultural
          Trade: Evidence from the SPS and TBT Agreements. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Volume
          90, Issue 2.
Dunning, John. H. 1995. What’s Wrong and Right With Trade Theory. International Trade Journal, 1995, 9(2),
        pp. 153-202.
eBay Inc., 2014. “Commerce 3.0 for Development: The Promise of the Global Empowerment Network.” An ebay
         Report Based on an Empirical Study Conducted by Sidley Austin LLP .
Estevadeordal, Antoni and Alan M. Taylor. 2009. Is the Washington Consensus Dead? Growth, Openness, and the
        Great Liberation.” IDB Working Paper Series Number 138. November.
Ewens, Michael and Christian Fons-Rosen. 2013. The Consequences of Entrepreneurial Firm Founding on
        Innovation.” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2291811 or
        http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2291811.
Fagerberg, Jan, Srholec, Martin and Verspagen, Bart. 2009. "Innovation and Economic Development," MERIT
        Working Papers 032, United Nations University - Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on
        Innovation and Technology (MERIT).
Fair Labor Association. 2012. “Foxconn Verification Status Report.” Fair Labor Ass ociation, Washington, DC,
         August 21.



INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
102 – REFERENCES

Farole, Thomas, and Deborah Winkler. 2014. Making Foreign Direct investment Work for Sub-Saharan Africa. The
         World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Farnworth, Cathy and Jessica Hutchings. 2009. Organic agriculture and Women’s Empowerment. IFOAM, April
Feenstra, Robert, and Gary Hamilton. 2006. Emergent Economies, Divergent Paths: Economic Organization and
        International Trade in South Korea and Taiwan . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Freeman. Richard 2006. “The great doubling: America in the new global economy.” Usery Lecture, April 8, Georgia
       State University. Electronic access:
       http://emlab.berkeley.edu/users/webfac/eichengreen/e183_sp07/great_doub.pd
Freund, Caroline, and Nadia Rocha. 2010. “What Constrains Africa’s Exports?” Policy Research Working Paper
5184, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Freund, Caroline, Bob Rijkers, Hassen Arrouri, and Antonio Nucifora. 2014. “Which Firms Create the Most Jobs in
Developing Countries: Evidence from Tunisia”. Labour Economics, 2014, Vol. 31:84-102.
Gereffi, Gary. 1999. “International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel Commodity Chain.” Journal of
          International Economics 48: 37–70.
Gereffi, Gary, and Fernandez-Stark, Karina. 2010. The Offshore Services value Chain, Developing Countries and the
          Crisis. Policy Research Working Paper, the World Bank, April.
Gereffi, Gary, John Humphrey, and Timothy Sturgeon. 2005. “The Governance of Global Value Chains.” Review of
          International Political Economy 12 (1): 78–104.
Gómez-Mera, Laura, Thomas Kenyon, Yotam Margalit, Josó Guilherme Reis, and Gonzalo Varela. 2015. New Voices
       in Investment: A Survey of Investors from Emerging Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hall, Bronwyn H. and Josh Lerner. 2009. The Financing of R&D and Innovation. NBER Working paper Series 15325,
         September.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., and J. Miranda. 2013. “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs. Young”. Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 347-361.
Hiratsuka, D. 2005. “Vertical Intra-Regional Production Networks in East Asia: A Case Study of Hard Disk Drive
        Industry”, in D. Hiratsuka (ed.), East Asia’s De Facto Economic Integration, Palgrave McMillan, London.
Hoekman, Bernard. 2014. Supply Chains, Mega-regionals, and the WTO. CEPR
Hummels, David, Volodymyr Lugovskyy, and Alexandre Skiba, 2007. “The Trade Reducing Effects of Market Power
      in International Shipping.” NBER Working Paper 12914, National Bureau of Economic Research,
      Cambridge, MA.
Humphrey, John. 2003. “Globalization and Supply Chain Networks: The Auto Industry in Brazil and India.” Global
       Networks 3 (2): 121–41.
Iacovone, Leonardo, and Qursum Qasim. 2013. “Entrepreneurship Policy Brief: A Tool for Analysis and
        Promotion.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
IFC. 2013. “IFC Jobs Study. Assessing Private Sector Contributions to Job Creation and Poverty Reduction”.
Jaffee, Steve. 2006. “Sanitary and Phytosanitary Regulation: Overcoming Constraints.” In Trade, Doha, and
          Development: A Window into the Issues, edited by Richard Newfarmer, 353–70. Washington, DC: World
          Bank.
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska. 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms?
          In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages.” American Economic Review 94 (3): 605–27.
Jensen, Jesper, and David G. Tarr, 2011. “Deep Trade Policy Options for Armenia: The Importance of Trade
         Facilitation, Services and Standards Liberalization.” Economics: The Open Access E-Journal 6 (1): 1–54.

                                                  INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                                     REFERENCES – 103



Jensen, Michael F., and John C. Keyser. 2012. “Standards Harmonisation and Trade: The Case of the East African
        Dairy Industry.” In Non-tariff Measures: A Fresh Look at Trade Policy’s New Frontier, edited by Olivier
        Cadot and Mariem Malouche, 187–209. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Johansson, Åsa, and Eduardo Olaberría. 2014. “Global Trade and Specialisation Patterns over the Next 50 Years.”
        OECD Economic Policy Paper 10, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Kawakami, Momoko. 2011. “Inter-firm Dynamics of Notebook PC Value Chains and the Rise of Taiwanese Original
       Design Manufacturing Firms.” Chapter 1 in, Momoko Kawakami and Timothy Sturgeon (eds), The
       Dynamics of Local Learning in Global Value Chains; Experiences from East Asia . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave
       Macmillan
Kerr, William R. and Ramana Nanda. 2014. "Financing Innovation," NBER Working Papers 20676, National Bureau
         of Economic Research.
Koopman, Robert, Powers, Williams, Wang, Zhi and Wei Shang-Jin. 2010. Give Credit Where Credit Is Due: Tracing
      Value Added in Global Production. NBER Working paper Series 16426, September.
Kowalski, Przemyslaw, Javier Lopez Gonzalez, Alexandros Ragoussis, and Cristian Ugarte. 2015 . “Participation of
        Developing Countries in Global Value Chains: Implications for Trade and Trade-Related Policies.” OECD
        Trade Policy Paper 179, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Krugman, Paul. 1994. The Age of Diminished Expectations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Limão, Nuno, and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. “Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvantage, Transport Costs, and
        Trade.” World Bank Economic Review 15 (3): 451–79.
Mason, Colin, and Jennifer Kwok. 2010. “Investment Readiness Programmes and Access to Finance: A C ritical
        Review of Design Issues.” Local Economy 25 (4): 269–92.
Mayer, Frederick and Gary Gereffi. 2010. Regulation and Economic Globalization: Prospects and Limits of Private
        Governance. Business and Politics, Volume 12, Issue 3, Article 11.
Mayer, Thierry and Ottaviano, Gianmarco. 2007. The Happy Few: The Internationalisation of European Firms; New
        Facts Based on Firm-Level Evidence. Brussels, Belgium: Bruegel Blueprint Series
Mayer and Ottaviano. 2007. The Happy Few: The Internationalization of European Firms. Bruegel.
Mayer, Frederick W. and John Pickles. 2010. “Re-embedding governance: global apparel value chains and decent
        work.Capturing the Gains: Economics and Social Upgrading in Global Production Networks ”. Working
        Paper 2010/1: Manchester, UK.
McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff. 2015. Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing Countries.
        Policy Research Working Paper 7405. World Bank Group
McLinden, Gerard. 2013. “Single-Window Systems: What We Have Learned.” Trade Post (blog), World Bank, April
        30, 2013. http://blogs.worldbank.org/trade/single-window-systems-what-we-have-learned.
Mettler Ann and Anthony Williams. 2011. The Rise of the Micro-Multinational: How Freelancers and Technology-
         Savvy Start-Ups Are Driving Growth, Jobs and Innovation. Lisbon Council Policy Brief.
Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (Japan). 2012. “The Survey on Global Value Chain.” November, Tokyo.
Mitsubishi UFJ Research & Consulting. 2012. “Survey of Business Startup Conditions.” Commissioned by the Small
        and Medium Enterprise Agency, Tokyo, November.
Richard R. Nelson. 1959. "The Economics of Invention: A Survey of the Literature," The Journal of Business,
         University of Chicago Press, vol. 32, pages 101.
Nelson, Andrew (2008) Travel Time to Major Cities: A Global Map of Accessibility . Office for Official Publications of
         the European Communities, Luxembourg. DOI:10.2788/95835, ISBN:978-92-79-09771-3.


INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
104 – REFERENCES

Nelson, R. and Rosenberg, N. (1993). Technical innovation and national systems. In: Nelson, R. (ed). National
         innovation systems: a comparative analysis. New York, Oxford: Oxford University.
Nielsen, Peter Bøegh (ed.) 2008. International Sourcing - Moving Business Functions Abroad, Statistics Denmark,
         www.dst.dk/publ/InterSourcing.
OECD. 2008. Enhancing the Role of SMEs in Global Value Chains. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. 2011a. “The Impact of Trade Liberalisation on Jobs and Growth: Technical Note.” OECD Trade Policy
        Working Paper 107, OECD Publishing, Paris.
OECD. 2011b. Intellectual Assets and Innovation: The SME Dimension . Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. 2012. “A Survey of Policy Makers.” Prepared for the OECD project on Fostering Small and Medium -Sized
        Participation in Global Market, OECD Centre for SMEs, Entrepreneurship, and Local Development, Paris.
OECD. 2013a. “Interconnected Economies: Benefiting from Global Value Chains.” OECD Synthesis Report, OECD,
        Paris. doi: 10.1787/9789264189560-en.
OECD. 2013b. Perspectives on Global Development 2013: Industrial Policies in a Changing World . Paris: OECD
        Publishing.
OECD (2013c), Perspectives on Global Development 2013: Industrial Policies in a Changing World, OECD
        Publishing, Paris. doi: 10.1787/persp_glob_dev-2013-en.
OECD (2013d), “Trade Policy Implications of Global Value Chains: Case Studies”, OECD Trade Policy Papers,
        No. 161, OECD Publishing, Paris. doi: 10.1787/5k3tpt2t0zs1-en.
OECD (2013x), Supporting Investment in Knowledge Capital, growth and Innovation , Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. 2014. Measuring the Digital Economy: A New Perspective. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. 2015. OECD Innovation Strategy 2015: An Agenda for Policy Action. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2015x), The Future of Productivity, Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2015xx), Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2015, Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2015xxx), Digital Economy Outlook 2015, Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD (2015xxxx), Entrepreneurship at a Glance, Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD and WTO. 2011. Aid for Trade at a Glance: Showing Results. Paris: OECD and WTO
OECD and WTO. 2013. Aid for Trade at a Glance 2011: Showing Results Emerging from the Case Stories. OECD,
       Paris, and WTO, Geneva.
OECD, WTO, and UNCTAD. 2013. “Implications of Global Value Chains for Trade, Investment, Development, and
       Jobs.” Report prepared for the G-20 Leaders Summit Saint Petersburg (Russian Federation).
       http://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/G20-Global-Value-Chains-2013.pdf.
OECD, WTO, and World Bank. 2014. “Global Value Chains: Challenges, Opportunities, and Implications for Policy.”
       Report prepared for the G20 Trade Ministers Meeting, Sydney, Australia, July 19.
Pine, B. Joseph II. 1999. Mass Customization: The New Frontier in Business Competition . Cambridge, MA: Harvard
          Business School Press.
Nordås, Hildegunn Kyvik and Piermartini, Roberta. 2004. "Infrastructure and Trade," WTO Staff Working Papers
        ERSD-2004-04, World Trade Organization (WTO), Economic Research and Statistics Division.
Ponte, Stefano, and Peter Gibbon. 2005. “Quality Standards, Conventions and the Governance of Global Value
         Chains.” Economy and Society 34 (1): 1–31.



                                                 INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
                                                                                                   REFERENCES – 105



Porter Michael and Mark Kramer. 2011. "Creating Shared Value". Harvard Business Review; Jan/Feb2011, Vol. 89
        Issue 1/2, p62-77, 16p, 5
Raballand, Gaël, Salim Refas, Monica Beuran, and Gözde Isik, 2012. Why Does Cargo Spend Weeks in Sub-Saharan
        African Ports? Lessons from Six Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Rodríguez-Clare, Andrés. 1996. “Multinationals, Linkages, and Economic Development.” American Economic
        Review 86 (4): 852–73.
Saez Sebastian, Daria Taglioni, Erik van der Marel, Claire Hollweg, and Veronika Zavacka (2015). Valuing Services in
        Trade : A Toolkit for Competitiveness Diagnostics", Washington DC: The World Bank.
Sangho, Yéyandé, Patrick Labaste, and Christophe Ravry. 2010. “Growing Mali’s Mango Exports: Linking Farmers
         to Markets through Innovations in the Value Chain.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Santoni, Gianluca and Daria Taglioni. 2015. “Networks and Structural Integration in Global Value Chains”, in
         Amador and di Mauro eds. The Age of Global Value Chains. CEPR.
SIMES. 2012. The Mediterranean Partnership Fund. SIMES, Rome.
Staritz and Reis. 2013. Global Value Chains, Economic Upgrading, and Gender : Case Studies of the Horticulture,
          Tourism, and Call Center. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Stone, Susan, James Messent, and Dorothee Flaig. 2015. “Emerging Policy Issues: Localisation Barriers to Trade.”
         OECD Trade Policy Paper 180, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Straube, Frank, Robert Handfield, Hans-Christian Pfohl, and Andreas Wieland. 2013. Trends und Strategien in
          Logistik und Supply Chain Management. Hamburg, Germany: Deutscher Verkehrs-Verlag.
Sturgeon, Timothy. 2002. “Modular Production Networks. A New American Model of Industrial Organization,”
        Industrial and Corporate Change. 11(3):451-496.
Sturgeon, Timothy, Gary Gereffi, Andrew Guinn, and Ezequiel Zylberberg. 2013. A Indústria Brasileira e as Cadeias
        Globais de Valor: Uma Análise Com Base nas Indústrias Aeronáutica, de Dispositivos Médicos e de
        Eletrônicos. Rio de Janeiro: Elsevier.
Sturgeon, Timothy, and Richard K. Lester. 2004. “The New Global Supply -Base: New Challenges for Global
        Suppliers in East Asia.” In Global Production Networking and Technological Change in East Asia , edited by
        Shahid Yusuf, M. Anjum Altaf, and Kaoru Nabeshima. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Taglioni, Daria, and Deborah Winkler. 2015. “Making Value Chains Work for Development.” World Bank,
          Washington, DC.
USITC. 2010. Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises: Characteristics and Performance. USITC Publication 4189.
        Washington, DC. USITC. 2010.
USITC. 2013a. The Economic Effects of Significant US Import Restraints: Eighth Update 2013. Special Topic:
        Services’ Contribution to Manufacturing. USITC Publication 4440. Washington D.C.
USITC. 2013b. Global Value Chains: Investment and Trade for Development , World Investment Report, UNCTAD,
        Geneva.
Sturgeon Timothy J. Sturgeon & Johannes Van Biesebroeck, 2011. "Global value chains in the automotive industry:
        an enhanced role for developing countries?," International Journal of Technological Learning, Innovation
        and Development, Inderscience Enterprises Ltd, vol. 4(1/2/3), pages 181-205.
van Tongeren, Frank, John Beghin, and Stéphane Marette. 2009. “A Cost-Benefit Framework for the Assessment
        of Non-tariff Measures in Agro-Food Trade.” OECD Food, Agriculture, and Fisheries Working Paper 21,
        OECD Publishing, Paris.




INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
106 – REFERENCES

van Tongeren, Frank, Anne-Célia Disdier, Joanna Ilicic-Komorowska, Stéphane Marette, and Martin von Lampe.
        2010. “Case Studies of Costs and Benefits of Non -tariff Measures: Cheese, Shrimp, and Flowers.” OECD
        Food, Agriculture, and Fisheries Working Paper 28, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Viêt Nam News. 2014. “Samsung Chooses Few Vietnamese Suppliers.” October 17.
        http://vietnamnews.vn/economy/261534/samsung-chooses-few-vietnamese-suppliers.html.
Wang, Jian-Ye, and Magnus Blomström. 1992. “Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer: A Simple Model.”
        European Economic Review 36 (1): 137–55.
Williams, Karel. 2000. “From Shareholder Value to Present-day Capitalism.” Economy and Society. 29:1 February:
         1–12 Williams. 2000.
Wilson, K. (2015), “Policy Lessons from Financing Innovative Firms”, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Policy
         Papers, No. 24, OECD Publishing, Paris.




                                                INCLUSIVE GLOBAL VALUE CHAINS : JOINT OECD AND WORLD BANK GROUP REPORT © 2015
Inclusive Global Value Chains
Policy options in trade and complementary areas
for GVC Integration by small and medium
enterprises and low-income developing countries


OECD and World Bank Group Report




              www.oe.cd/gvc
  www.worldbank.org/en/topic/trade/brief/
          global-value-chains
