                                                                                      100236

                                       Approach Paper
Systematic Country Diagnostic and Country Partnership Framework Process
                               Evaluation

                                          June 26, 2015
Introduction
1.      The new World Bank Group Strategy1 aims to focus country programs on accelerating
progress toward sustainably reducing poverty and building shared prosperity (known as the “twin
goals”). It recognizes that while today’s country programs are broadly aligned with the Bank
Group’s mission, they need to provide countries with more coordinated and focused programs:
activities and interventions need to be better prioritized according to their expected impacts on
the twin goals. The new strategy incorporates two instruments that will be used to enhance
country engagement: A new Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) will use data and analytic
methods to support country clients and Bank Group teams in identifying the most critical
constraints to, and opportunities for, reducing poverty and building shared prosperity sustainably,
while considering the voices of the poor and the views of the private sector. The Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) will discuss focus areas for Bank Group support, aligned with the
country’s own development agenda and selected primarily to address the key constraints.

2.      The Bank Group’s Board of Executive Directors and senior management have high
expectations for this new process. Hence, the Board requested that IEG evaluate the new country
engagement model as it is being implemented. This process evaluation will have the following
objectives:

          To explore whether the guidelines, directives, and other resource materials related to
           the new country engagement process have thus far helped World Bank Group teams
           produce SCDs and CPFs that are focused on helping countries to tackle key constraints
           to poverty reduction and shared prosperity in accordance with the Bank Group’s
           comparative advantage, as well as whether they have fostered coordination among the
           Bank Group institutions.
          To provide the Board and management with early information about the functioning of
           the SCD/CPF process and the extent to which the shortcomings related to the previous
           processes have been addressed, so as to enable changes to improve the process.
          To identify good practice examples and lessons learned thus far.

3.     This is a real-time process evaluation to provide early, evaluative input into the
operationalization and roll-out of the Bank Group’s new country engagement approach. The
evaluation will assess the first group of SCDs and CPFs that will have been presented to the
Board by the end of December 2015.




1   World Bank Group Strategy, World Bank Group, Washington DC, October 2013.

                                                 1
Background and Context
4.       Country strategies at the World Bank Group have evolved from internal management
tools to public documents that strive to be country-owned, results-driven, and flexible.2 For most
of its early history, the Bank engaged with countries mainly though lending operations without
articulating a broader country strategy. Internal planning of the lending programs at the country
level began in the early 1970s with the Country Program Papers. When the Board of Executive
Directors began to seek information on the strategy for individual countries in the late 1980s,
individual lending operations began to be put in the context of the Bank’s program of country
activities. Then, in 1990, IDA deputies asked that strategies be prepared for all IDA countries
and discussed with the Board as part of Bank operations. These early country assistance
strategies (CASs) were 10- to 15-page notes appended to loan documents. They were Bank-
centric and rarely involved consultation with country governments or other stakeholders.

5.      The Board extended the preparation of CASs to all active Bank borrowers, IBRD as well
as IDA, in 1992. At that point, CASs were prepared in parallel with internal country strategy
papers prepared for management. In 1994, the CAS became a free-standing document and the
sole strategy document for both management and Board review. The change to a free-standing
document effectively delinked CAS discussions from lending operations in 1996. With the
advent of public disclosure in the late 1990s, the CAS process began to include consultations
with key stakeholders and ultimately became the center of Bank-government interaction.

6.      The starting point for these CASs was the country’s own development strategy. To
ground the CAS program in the country context, a good strategy started with a careful diagnosis
of country conditions and a clear description of the government’s own priorities and
development strategy. Over time, the coverage of the government’s agenda and development
priorities improved and by late 1997 the government’s development agenda and priorities were
covered substantively in a separate section of the document. By then, more than 90 percent of
CASs discussed the goals and implementation of the government’s ongoing policy and reform
programs, and roughly two-thirds did so in some detail and relatively well. However, in fiscal
1998 only about 40 percent of CASs put ongoing reforms in perspective by examining the
effectiveness of past reforms, and only 20 percent did so systematically.

7.      The early CASs focused mostly on Bank products and activities, but as they evolved, they
came to reflect more strategic engagement based on country development results. As CASs aimed
to address an expanding range of issues, however, they became more complex, less strategic, and
longer. They were being overloaded with goals and agendas. Addressing this concern, the first
CAS retrospective in 1998 devoted considerable attention to strategic selectivity, providing




2This section is based on four country assistance strategy retrospectives (1998, 2000, 2003, and
2009) and on Results Focus in Country Assistance Strategies: A Stocktaking of Results-Based CASs,
Operations Policy and Country Services, World Bank, Washington DC, July 2005.


                                                 2
quantitative analysis of sectoral selectivity, defining strategic selectivity as a matter of qualitative
judgment based on three criteria,3 and recommending actions to strengthen selectivity and focus.

8.       As experience grew, the focus of the CASs shifted from inputs—a series of products and
activities—to development results. With this evolution, CASs started to be designed to attain
certain development outcomes. Results-based CASs were piloted between 2003 and 2005, and
were mainstreamed after that. The results-based CAS was meant to help make country programs
more strategic as well as more selective. The central innovation was the results framework, which
specified links between the Bank’s interventions and long-term development goals. Measurable
indicators of progress would be tracked through CAS implementation, encouraging active
management of CAS programs and allowing both self and independent evaluation. The new
approach was expected to create a better strategy, with greater chances of success and of
development effectiveness.4

9.      In fiscal 2005, management established a four-year CAS cycle with a midpoint Progress
Report. It also introduced the Interim Strategy Note for use when a full CAS could not be
prepared, as typically happened in fragile or conflict-affected states, and it initiated the use of the
CAS Completion Report. Around this time, the Bank also adopted a new title for the documents.
The Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), as it was now called, was thought to better reflect a
relationship with the country client based on mutual learning and responsibility.

10.     As it evolved, the CAS also became more flexible, allowing Bank teams to customize
Bank services to the country’s own needs and priorities as well as to changing circumstances.
Changes in country demand during the CAS period meant that the Bank needed to remain
flexible during the CAS implementation to ensure continued alignment with country priorities. In
higher-income countries with access to alternative financing and knowledge services, as well as
in fragile and conflict-affected states—where needs can change quickly—the Bank needed to
change and adapt its services during implementation.

11.     As the importance of the CAS increased, it became clear that IBRD and IDA-funded
activities would have greater development impact if they were designed and implemented as part
of an integrated Bank Group–wide approach. CAS guidelines called for joint Bank-IFC CASs in
all countries where there was substantial scope for collaboration and synergies in private sector
development activities. Synergies ultimately would be a matter of collaboration at the
operational level, but Bank staff believed that joint CASs could set the stage by articulating the
private sector role—and thus IFC’s role—in addressing key development challenges.

12.   CASs are often implemented in uncertain environments and are thus subject to risks. All
CASs now have a section that discusses the main risks and what the Bank intends to do in case a




3Potential magnitude of impact, likelihood of country action, and additionality of Bank
contribution.
4Results Focus in Country Assistance Strategies: A Stocktaking of Results-Based CASs, Operations
Policy and Country Services, World Bank, Washington DC, July 2005.

                                                    3
given risk materializes. However, the 2009 retrospective of CASs5 noted that even when the risks
were well articulated and comprehensive, it was difficult to distinguish how the perceived risk had
been addressed in the development of the strategy, the instruments, and the choice of interventions.

13.      The 2009 CAS Retrospective also pointed out that a CAS was expected to reflect the
existing state of country knowledge; the country program; dialogue with government, donors, and
others; and relationships with stakeholders. While the CAS was not meant to be analytic, upstream
analysis, including on the sources of growth, macroeconomic sustainability, determinants of
poverty, and public expenditure and financial management systems, was expected to be carried out
regularly, in advance of CASs, and to explicitly inform the CAS diagnosis and the design of Bank
support.

14.        Despite the evolution of CASs, Bank staff have identified four important shortcomings:

           The Bank’s sector and corporate objectives (such as for infrastructure, finance, and
            social security) have often been in tension with the country’s vision and priorities. The
            government may or may not prioritize the strategic objectives that the Bank espouses.
            Moreover, the Bank has not always appeared to invest resources in a way that would
            maximize the chances of achieving both country and Bank objectives. Weak results
            frameworks were partly to blame, as a list of activities spread across many sectors
            failed to constitute a critical mass of interventions needed for maximum development
            impact.
           Despite the emphasis on results, some CASs have still taken a transaction-focused
            approach instead of concentrating on more strategic objectives and expected
            development outcomes. While Bank interventions have broadly aligned with the
            mission of poverty reduction, in some cases they have lacked focus and have not
            concentrated on issues likely to have the greatest impact on countries’ development. A
            need remained for more selectivity and focus.
           The Bank and IFC have not operated in unison in countries. While the formality of
            joint CASs after fiscal 2009 enhanced World Bank–IFC cooperation during strategy
            formulation, cooperation during program implementation has remained erratic.
           The discussion of risks has been weak in many CASs, without explicit links between
            identified risks and the CAS program or without sufficient discussion of the ways in
            which risks would be managed. A more pointed identification of risks and measures
            was required to deal with them in CASs.

A New Bank Group Strategy and Its Instruments
15.    Against this background and the weaknesses identified, the new World Bank Group
Strategy (October 2013)6 aims to focus country programs on accelerating progress toward
reducing poverty and building shared prosperity (known as the “twin goals”) in a sustainable
manner. It recognizes that while today’s country strategies are broadly aligned with the Bank

5Country Assistance Strategies: Retrospective and Future Directions, Operational Policy and
Country Services, World Bank, Washington DC, September 1, 2009.
6   World Bank Group Strategy, World Bank Group, Washington DC, October 2013.


                                                   4
Group’s mission, they need to provide countries with more coordinated and focused programs,
and activities and interventions need to be better prioritized according to their expected impact
on the twin goals. It also recognizes that the Bank Group needs to establish an effective
mechanism to reconcile country demands with the twin goals and move away from a supply-
driven approach (where that existed).

16.      The new strategy sets two ambitious goals: end extreme poverty by reducing the
percentage of people living on less than $1.25 a day to 3 percent by 2030; and promote shared
prosperity by fostering income growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population in every
country in a sustainable manner. To accomplish these goals the Bank Group would: align all of
its activities and resources to the twin goals; use its strengths as a global institution by supporting
clients in delivering development solutions; and work as “one World Bank Group” by leveraging
the strength of all constituent agencies (World Bank, IFC, and MIGA). The Bank Group would
strengthen the focus of its country programs by developing a more evidence-based and selective
country engagement model in the context of country ownership and national priorities, and in
coordination with other development partners.

17.     Implementation of the strategy started in 2014 with a reorganization of the Bank Group
into global practices intended to help accelerate progress toward the twin goals through a new
form of problem-solving engagement with countries. In parallel, the Bank Group’s engagement
with country members is being revamped7 as outlined below to make country programs more
strategic and strengthen analytical aspects of the engagements, ensuring that the twin goals are at
the center of the engagements while also concentrating efforts and resources in areas that are key
for the country development strategy.

18.     Two instruments will underpin the enhanced country engagement model (Figure 1). A
new Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) will use data and analytic methods to support country
clients and Bank Group teams in identifying the most critical constraints to, and opportunities
for, reducing poverty and building shared prosperity sustainably, while considering the voices of
the poor and the views of the private sector. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF),
evolving from the CAS, will discuss focus areas for Bank Group support, aligned with the
country’s own development agenda and selected primarily to address the key constraints and
opportunities identified in the SCD.

    Figure 1. The New Approach to Country Engagement


           Systematic                Country                      Performance &    Completion & 
           Country                   Partnership                  Learning         Learning 
           Diagnostic                Framework                    Review           Review

    Source: World Bank Group: A New Approach to Country Engagement, March 2014.



7World Bank Group: A New Approach to Country Engagement, World Bank Group, Washington
DC, April 29, 2014.

                                                           5
19.     The SCD will be prepared upstream of the CPF and will identify priority areas for the
country to accelerate progress toward achieving the twin goals in ways that take into account the
sustainability of the program. The SCD will be prepared in consultation with national authorities,
the private sector, and other stakeholders, but it will reflect the evidence and analysis of the Bank
Group. It will become the reference point for client consultations and help focus the country, the
Bank Group, and other development partners on goals with the most potential for impact on
achieving the twin goals.

20.     The CPF will replace the CAS as the main tool guiding the Bank Group’s support for
member countries’ development programs. The CPF will maintain the Bank Group’s country-
driven model and will start from the country’s vision of its development goals as set out in its own
strategy. The Bank and the country will further draw upon the SCD and together develop the CPF
objectives. The objectives will be derived from those country development goals that reflect the
Bank Group’s comparative advantage as well as align with the twin goals, as identified in the SCD.
The keys to selecting CPF objectives require that each objective: (a) focuses on areas identified
by the SCD or other analysis as critical for achieving the twin goals in a sustainable manner, (b)
is consistent with the World Bank Group’s comparative advantage and capacity to deliver based
on past experience, and (c) is congruent with the country’s own development goals and capacity
to deliver (see Figure 2). In the end, while selectivity is multidimensional and complex, IEG’s
evidence from Country Program Evaluations and country strategies suggests that selectivity can
be enhanced by paying careful attention to client country capacities, grounding all operations in
solid analytical work, taking a long-term view and sequencing interventions accordingly,
properly factoring in design and implementation risks to results delivery, and taking account of
the Bank’s comparative advantage.8

    Figure 2. CPF Selectivity Filters




                              Country              CPF Objectives                 Twin 
                              Development                                         Goals
                              Goals


                                                    Bank Group 
                                                    Comparative 
                                                     Advantage



    Source: World Bank Group: A New Approach to Country Engagement, March 2014.




8   Selectivity in Country Strategies: The Evidence, IEG, 2014.


                                                           6
21.     The new approach is expected to emphasize learning at all stages. During
implementation, the country and the Bank Group are to engage in a continuous process of
monitoring and learning. Every two years, this will lead to a Performance and Learning Review
(PLR, the third block in Figure 1), which will be used to adjust the program and to update the
Board on progress. The PLR will be used to flesh out details on development objectives and the
necessary activities to achieve those objectives that were not clear when the CPF was originally
prepared or last updated. At the end of the CPF period, a PLR may be used to extend the CPF by
up to two years.

22.     At the end of the CPF period, the Bank Group will engage with the country to complete a
self-assessment and issue a Completion and Learning Review (CLR, the fourth block in Figure
1). The CLR will be both a means to enhance the Bank Group’s knowledge and to increase
development effectiveness and a tool for accountability. As part of the CLR, the country team
will complete a self-assessment of the program’s performance, Bank Group performance, and
how well aligned the strategy was with the twin goals. The self-assessment will be based upon
the results framework of the most recent PLR, and IEG will validate the Bank Group’s self-
assessments and verify its findings.

23.    Working as one Bank Group—intra-agency cooperation—is central to the new strategy.
The CPF is expected to mainstream joint business planning as the backbone for strengthening
operational collaboration. The Bank Group is expected to increase the number of joint projects
and review its portfolio of products and services to improve synergies and eliminate overlap.
These initiatives will be reinforced by stepped-up efforts to align policies and practices and
promote changes in the operational culture of each agency. A new Regional Coordination
Mechanism is to formalize country- and regional-level coordination among the Bank, IFC, and
MIGA, and help the Bank Group with its regional engagements.

24.     The CPF is to improve the identification and managing of risks to the Bank Group program.
The risk section will take a systematic approach to risk based on the Systematic Operations Risk-
Taking Tool (Figure 3),9 to ensure that teams consider all major risks to achieving CPF objectives, as
well as any unintended adverse consequence that may be associated with the program. The risk
section is designed with the intention to increase transparency by better informing stakeholders of
program risks. Teams are expected to identify risks and propose measures to manage or mitigate
them, and may also discuss the risks of not engaging in the proposed program, thereby highlighting
the program’s risk-reward trade-offs.

25.     The risk assessment will take into account the likelihood of the risks materializing and the
severity of their impacts on the achievement of the intended results. The assessment will be based on
current residual risk, that is, after taking into account the impact of mitigation measures that have
already been implemented but not presuming any future additional mitigation measures (Figure 3).
The risk categories have been designed with the intention to capture the key risks that could affect
programs in CPFs. The categories are: political and governance, macroeconomic, sector strategies


9Framework for Management of Risk in Operations: Proactive Risk Management for Better Results,
OPCS, World Bank, Washington DC, August 21, 2014.

                                                  7
and policies, technical design of program, institutional capacity for implementation and
sustainability, fiduciary, environment and social, stakeholders, and other.

 Figure 3. Likelihood of Risk and Impact

                                                   High impact                                         High impact 
                                                   Low likelihood                                      High likelihood
                   Impact on development results




                                                    Low impact                                         Low impact 
                                                    Low likelihood                                     High likelihood

                                                                    Likelihood of risk materializing




 Source: Framework for Management of Risks in Operations—Proactive Risk Management for Better Results (2014).


How Will the New Approach to Country Engagement Address Problems
Identified in the CASs?
26.     The new approach to country engagement intends to address the identified weaknesses of
the previous CAS process as follows:

           Tensions between Bank objectives and the need to align with the country’s own visions
           and priorities. The SCD is intended to identify country priorities based on the twin
           goals. The CPF would then identify a common set of priorities with the country’s
           development agenda that would underpin the Bank Group’s program. The Bank Group
           program would focus on those priorities where it has a comparative advantage.
          Lack of selectivity and focus. The main objective of the SCD is to identify key
           development priorities in the country relying on existing and ongoing analytical work.
           The CPF will sharpen and order those priorities in consultation with countries and take
           into account the Bank’s comparative advantage.
          Weakness in Bank Group coordination. Protocols for cooperation are expected to be
           strengthened and reinforced by stepped-up efforts to align policies and practices, and
           promote changes in the operational culture of each agency.
          Lack of systematic risk analysis. In CPFs the risk analysis is to be strengthened by
           using a much more systematic approach to risk based on the Systematic Operations
           Risk-Taking Tool.




                                                                          8
27.     The Bank Group has issued guidelines for producing SCDs and CPFs.10 Based on those
guidelines, SCDs are owned by the Country Management Unit, which is to nominate a task team
leader with integrative and analytical skills. Task teams are expected to draw on expertise across
global practices and across the Bank Group. All SCDs will be joint Bank Group products, with
IFC participating more extensively in countries where it has a deeper presence and country
knowledge; MIGA is represented by the relevant regional economist. The guidelines foresee a
robust and contestable review process of SCDs, chaired by regional vice presidents (for IFC and
the Bank). All SCDs are to be approved by Bank, IFC, and MIGA managements. Finally,
disclosure of SCDs will follow the Access to Information Policies of three institutions. As of
June 25, 2015, concept reviews were completed for 42 SCDs and decision drafts were completed
for 24 SCDs. Ongoing SCDs span all regions and country types. Concept reviews were
completed for 15 CPFs, of which six (Albania, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Myanmar, Panama and
Serbia) had been presented to the Board.11

28.     Based on the Board Update on implementation of the new strategy,12 there is a strong
pipeline of SCDs aligned with twin goals and sustainability, and underlying a first group of CPFs
scheduled for Board discussion in CY15. The Board Update also states the need to identify the
biggest country challenges and be more selective, improving quality and periodicity of data,
especially to better benchmark shared prosperity and poverty, and continue to make knowledge
more accessible, cutting edge, and evidence-based.

Conceptual Aspects of the Evaluation
29.     This will be a real-time process evaluation that aims to provide early, evaluative input
into the operationalization and roll-out of the Bank Group strategy through the new country
engagement approach. The evaluation will assess the first group of SCDs and CPFs produced by
the Bank Group.

30.     As SCDs and CPFs are new products and the new country engagement model is being
tested with the authorities, it is quite possible that the production of SCDs and CPFs and the
engagement model itself will evolve through experiential learning. IEG expects to contribute to
this evolution by assessing the preparation process and quality of SCDs and CPFs. Given that the
new CPFs are only being approved now, IEG will not have country-level implementation results
from the new country engagement model and will rely instead on evidence on steps taken to
produce SCDs and CPFs, both from desk reviews and field visits. The evaluation will assess
SCDs and CPFs against the key issues the new country engagement model seeks to overcome
(see para. 26), and will validate its assessment through stakeholder interviews and field visits that


10Interim Guidelines for Systematic Country Diagnostics, February 21, 2014, and World Bank Group
Guidance for Country Partnership Framework Products, December 24, 2014. Both were posted on
the internal Bank Group website.
11Systematic Country Diagnostic—An Update, March 20, 2015 and OPCS Country Partnership
Framework Pipeline Database.
12World Bank Implementation Update, SecM2015-0029, January 20, 2015 (presentation for informal
Board meeting on Thursday, January 29, 2015).

                                                 9
will look into country ownership, realism, and inclusiveness (in the country and with other
partners). In doing these assessments, the evaluation team will take appropriate note of any
modifications that may take place in the SCD and CPF processes, and will also seek to benefit
from the results that might become available from ongoing internal stocktaking exercises by
Bank Group management. The early evaluation findings will also help shed light on whether the
guidelines and directives on the SCD and CPF need additional revisions.

Links to Previous Evaluations
31.     The evaluation will substantially benefit from earlier IEG products, including country and
corporate evaluations. IEG’s country-level evaluations, such as Country Program Evaluations
(CPEs) and CAS Completion Report (CASCR) Reviews, provide in-depth prior evaluative
evidence for an exhaustive list of countries, including those that will be the subject of country
case studies. These evaluations will provide insights into the extent of selectivity, focus,
effectiveness, and Bank Group collaboration at the country level under the previous CAS model.
Also, IEG’s ongoing assessment of Bank Group assistance in a cluster of resource-rich countries
will provide an analytical framework on how to compare and contrast the Bank Group approach
in addressing similar development challenges across countries both in terms of diagnostics and
country program design.13

32.     The evaluation will also benefit from findings and lessons learned related to political
economy analysis and its integration in and impact on country strategies from IEG’s recent
evaluation of Bank Group assistance to fragile and conflict-affected countries.14 IEG’s learning
product on Maximizing Development Impact in IDA, which is being prepared in parallel, may
also provide findings relevant to the SCD/CPF process evaluation. Finally, IEG’s annual review
of Bank Group results and performance in 2013,15 which assessed performance of country
strategies and projects including by the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA, will serve as an important
source for learning as it provides in-depth analysis of country and project performances and
determines the contributing factors.

33.     IEG’s other thematic evaluations and learning products on poverty, results frameworks,
selectivity, and Bank-IFC cooperation will help guide both SCD and CPF assessments. IEG’s
recent poverty evaluation16 will be an input for both SCD and CPF assessments as it analyzes the
poverty focus of the World Bank interventions and support for poverty data and poverty
diagnostics. It also evaluates the poverty focus of country strategies and studies the consistency
between formulated country strategies and poverty diagnostics. Finally, the evaluation will use




13Clustered Country Program Evaluation for Resource Rich Developing Countries: Cases of Bolivia,
Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Zambia, IEG, 2015.
14   World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries, IEG, 2014.
15   Results and Performance of the World Bank Group, IEG, 2014.
16   The Poverty Focus of Country Programs: Lessons from World Bank Experience, IEG, 2015.


                                                   10
lessons and findings from IEG’s three learning products on results frameworks,17 selectivity in
country strategy,18 and Bank-IFC cooperation.19

Purpose, Objectives, and Audience
34.    Purpose: This evaluation is being undertaken at the request of the Board of Executive
Directors, and will:

            Provide information about how the SCD/CPF process is working.
            Identify areas that can be strengthened to enhance country engagement throughout the
             production of SCDs and CPFs.

35.    The findings and lessons of the evaluation will give particular attention to alignment with
the twin goals, ownership, realism, selectivity, quality of results frameworks, coordination of
Bank Group institutions, and inclusiveness (in the country and with other partners).

36.     The assessment will focus on four dimensions for each SCD and CPF (see Attachment 3).
For the SCD, these will be: evidence basis and framing of the issues; growth, poverty, shared
prosperity, and sustainability; identification of priorities for achieving the twin goals; and
process and one World Bank Group integration. For the CPF, the dimensions will be: alignment
with country development priorities and the twin goals, and sustainability; country ownership,
selectivity, realism, and systematic accounting of risks; quality of results frameworks; and one
World Bank Group integration.

37.         Objectives: The evaluation has three objectives:

            To explore whether the guidelines, directives, other resource materials related to the
             new country engagement process have thus far helped Bank Group teams produce
             SCDs and CPFs that are focused on helping countries to tackle key constraints to
             poverty reduction and shared prosperity in accordance with the Bank Group’s
             comparative advantage and whether they have fostered coordination among the Bank
             Group institutions.
            To provide the Board and management with early information about the functioning of
             the SCD/CPF process and the extent to which the shortcomings related to the previous
             processes have been addressed, so as to enable changes to improve the process.
            To identify good practice examples and lessons learned thus far.

38.     Audience: The main audiences are the Board and senior management of the Bank Group,
as both have high hopes for the new country engagement model and are eager to see if the initial
batch of SCDs/CPFs justifies those hopes. Moreover, the Board, management, and staff would
like to have feedback about the process of SCD/CPF production across regions, which could
contribute to improving the engagement with countries and the quality of SCDs and CPFs. Some

17   Results Frameworks in Country Strategies—Lessons from Evaluations, IEG, 2014.
18   Selectivity in Country Strategies: The Evidence, IEG, 2014.
19   Past and Future—Bank-IFC Cooperation at the Country Strategy Level, IEG, 2014.

                                                     11
regions may be interested in learning how others tackled selected issues involved in SCD/CPF
preparation, with the intention of applying effective practices to their own regions. Task teams
also could learn useful lessons from the experience of teams in other regions facing similar
issues with implementation of the new country engagement model.

Evaluation Questions and Coverage/Scope
39.    The key evaluation questions are designed to explore the extent to which the new
country engagement model enhances selectivity and Bank Group coordination in establishing
evidence-based country priorities that are aligned with the twin goals. Three main questions are
supported by multiple sub-questions (also see Attachment 3).

40.    Question 1: Has the SCD identified priorities in a convincing analytical way that helped
design a program of selective interventions under the CPF?

41.     The new approach is expected to help ensure that country development objectives in the
CPF are aligned with the Bank Group’s corporate strategy and comparative advantage. It begins
with a new country diagnostic that is expected to provide a rigorous and timely analysis of a
country’s development challenges and opportunities, particularly in relation to the twin goals, to
underpin the subsequent partnership document. This first step is crucial for the new engagement
model to work well and will therefore be the focus of the first evaluation question. Specifically:

        Did the SCD use high quality analytics (including political economy analysis), and
         identify key challenges and opportunities related to accelerating the country’s progress
         toward development goals with primary impact on poverty and shared prosperity?
        Did the SCD identify a limited number of areas on the critical path to achieving the
         twin goals, and thus inform strategic discussions with clients about priority areas for
         Bank Group interventions? Was the prioritization in the SCD specific enough to help
         guide selectivity in the CPF?
        Did preparation of the SCD reflect the “one World Bank Group” objective? That is,
         was IFC an integral part of the team and did the SCDs reflect IFC and MIGA
         participation? Furthermore, were appropriate internal reviews conducted and were the
         comments and suggestions from those reviews addressed?
        How was the engagement with Global Practices (GPs)?

42.     Question 2: Has the CPF designed a program of lending and knowledge activities that
aligns (not necessarily one-to-one) with country priorities and opportunities identified in the
SCD and that makes the best use of Bank Group resources and comparative advantage, including
joint World Bank–IFC-MIGA projects where appropriate?

43.     Country Management Units are expected to produce a CPF focusing on key areas of
intervention to achieve the twin goals. Per the guidelines, the CPF will start from the country’s
vision of its development goals as defined in its strategic documents. The Bank Group and
country counterparts will further draw upon the SCD to develop the CPF objectives together,
deriving them from those country development goals that reflect the Bank Group’s comparative
advantage as well as alignment with the twin goals, and taking into account opportunities for
leveraging the private sector to provide sustainable solutions to development problems. The CPF


                                                12
will then outline a selective and flexible program that will help the country achieve CPF
objectives. This step in the new country engagement model will be the focus of the second
question of the evaluation. Specifically:

        Does the CPF present an assessment of the government’s program, identify divergent
         views between the country and the Bank Group, highlight country poverty and
         prosperity goals, and discuss how they align with the twin goals? Does it explain
         clearly and concisely the reasons why some key priorities from the SCD may not have
         been included in the CPF?
        Is there evidence—taking into account the limited available sample of countries—of
         appropriate collaboration and division of labor between the Bank, IFC, and MIGA in
         working toward CPF objectives, and are IFC-MIGA interventions included in the
         results framework with appropriate, measurable indicators?
        Were the criteria for selecting the portfolio under preparation discussed in the CPF, was
         the overall program contribution to CPF objectives explained, and was the framework
         based on outcomes (rather than outputs/inputs/processes) that are measurable and
         measured (with a system set up for measuring them)? Was the comparative advantage
         of the Bank in the selected activities explained?
        Does the CPF articulate in its results framework—measured with relevant indicators—
         the links of Bank Group activities to poverty, shared prosperity, and sustainability?
        Does the CPF propose analytic work that is consistent with the CPF objectives and
         SCD recommendations?
        To what extent does the CPF consider major risks to program implementation—
         including national, international and Bank-related risks—and identify options to
         manage the most serious ones?

44.    Question 3. Has the new country engagement model fostered country ownership,
realism, and selectivity?

45.     The CPF process is expected to be built around broad consultation and engagement with
stakeholders. The voice of primary stakeholders, including government, citizen groups, and the
private sector, are to be taken into account. In keeping with this emphasis, the new approach is to
reflect extensive internal and external consultations, both to formulate the Bank Group strategy
and to improve the effectiveness of country programs. The CPF process is expected to integrate
learning more systematically than the previous CAS process, allowing country teams to adjust
more readily to country needs and delivery experience. It is also expected to integrate systematic
risk assessment, which was previously done in a perfunctory way in a number of CASs.
Therefore, the third question of the evaluation will focus on aspects related to country ownership,
realism, selectivity, and risk assessment, and also reflect on the Board’s engagement with the
strategy process. Specifically:

        Were there consultations with stakeholders, and were those consultations reflected in
         broad commitment (particularly from the government) and in the design of the strategy
         and interventions, with identification of any important differences of view between a
         government and the Bank?



                                                13
          Does the Bank Group country program match government capacity for implementation
           and is government commitment accurately assessed?
          Taking into account the Bank’s financing constraints, do CPF objectives concentrate
           resources on areas that intersect with country development goals, contribute toward the
           attainment of twin goals identified in the SCD, and are consistent with the Bank
           Group’s comparative advantage?
          Has the SCD identified the key knowledge and data gaps, and are these addressed in the
           knowledge program outlined in the CPF?
          Does the Bank Group program explore synergies with other multilaterals and bilaterals
           and reflect the Bank Group’s comparative advantage?

46.      Scope. The evaluation will cover SCDs and CPFs presented to the Board by the end of
December 2015 (but if the current delivery program should prove optimistic, the evaluation
might apply a later cut-off in order to ensure a reasonable universe of available documents). It
will assess analytic quality and other attributes prescribed in the Bank guidelines for SCDs and
CPFs. The evaluation will not discuss country-level development results—it is too early for
that—but rather, focus on the process used to put together SCDs and CPFs. It will explore what
lessons can be learned from the initial batch of SCDs/CPFs. Given the newness of the approach
it will also be particularly important to assess the relevance of SCDs in the design of CPFs, in
particular issues such as:

          Whether the guidelines, directives, and technical resources present a good basis for
           Bank Group teams to prepare SCDs and CPFs. Whether the guidelines, directives, and
           current practices provide reasonable assurance that the SCD is an independent and
           objective piece of analysis, including in its prioritization of objectives.
          What has it cost to prepare SCD/CPFs thus far, and how does the cost compare to that
           of the earlier country assistance strategy preparation? Was the incremental effort of
           producing two separate documents reflected in the quality of the CPFs? Was this
           incremental effort at the expense of other products? Has the internal World Bank Group
           coordination been productive? What is the source of any visible inefficiency? Based on
           the early information that may be available for the evaluation, do the documents give
           appropriate weight to private sector issues?
          Was the new approach helpful in integrating the work of the three institutions (World
           Bank, IFC, and MIGA), their strategic approaches, and interactions with government
           authorities and private sector, taking into account the differences between the three
           institutions in their ability to plan their work programs?

Evaluation Design
47.    Analytical Framework: The evaluation will build on the Bank Group’s preparation
guidelines and directives to assess the SCD and CPF preparation process and content. The
evaluation team already arranged two workshops with the Bank Group and IEG staff to
understand the new processes to help develop the methodology for reviewing SCDs and CPFs.
Attachment 3 provides a more detailed outline of the assessment methodology.

48.       The evaluation will use the following building blocks:



                                                 14
        Systematic review of SCDs and CPFs. IEG will undertake a systematic desk review
         of SCDs and CPFs completed and submitted to the Board through December 2015. IEG
         will strive to include at least two countries in each region, and a total of about 20,
         subject to SCDs/CPFs being completed in each region by end December 2015 (or later
         if the Bank Group’s delivery program should be delayed). The desk reviews will
         evaluate SCDs and CPFs based on a specifically designed assessment template (see
         Attachment 3) and supplement the SCD/CPF review with other available evaluative
         evidence to form a comprehensive view on the content of SCDs and CPFs and their
         preparation process. Document reviews will be supplemented by key informant
         interviews to help gain insights into the SCD and CPF preparation process.
        Field visits will be carried out, tentatively to 12 countries with ideally two countries in
         each region, with completed SCD and CPF. The consultations with country authorities
         and other stakeholders through these visits are very important to validate and expand
         the findings of the desk reviews and gain insights from country counterparts and Bank
         Group country team members.
        Consultations within the Bank Group, including interviews with the Bank regional
         chief economists, global practices, IFC and MIGA chief economists, country directors
         and country representatives, and SCD and CPF team leaders.
        Literature survey of relevant materials concerning the new country engagement
         model.

49.     Sampling Strategy. The Bank Group expects to present SCDs and CPFs for 23 countries
to the Board by the end of December 2015.20 Given this relatively small universe of products, the
evaluation will strive to include all countries where both documents have been completed by the
cut-off date. The evaluation will also note any limitations to the findings from the small initial
universe of SCD-CPF countries. Countries for field-based case studies will be selected, to the
extent possible, to ensure a mix of IBRD and IDA countries, balanced regional representation,
and Bank Group engagement. Subject to completion of SCD/CPFs by the cut-off date, two
countries per region will be selected for field visits.

50.      The strength of the evaluation resides in its timing and ability to help Bank Group
management take corrective action in the application of the new country engagement model if
warranted or receive confirmation that the process used is in line with the Bank Group’s stated
objectives and expectations. Since this is a real-time formative evaluation, the evaluation team
will be able to examine Bank Group staff and country counterparts’ recent experience and
capture the advantages and challenges encountered while they are still fresh in participants’
minds. The limitation of such an evaluation is that it will not be able to establish the extent to
which the new approach is delivering high-impact development results in the pursuit of the twin
goals. Therefore, this will by necessity be a partial assessment of the new engagement model. A




20The SCD/CPF preparation schedule suggests that SCDs and CPFs for 23 countries should be
discussed by the Board through the end of December 2015, including 6 in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2
in East Asia and Pacific, 5 in Europe and Central Asia, 7 in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2
in Middle East and North Africa, and 1 in South Asia.

                                                15
more definite evaluation on its development effectiveness will need to be undertaken once the
initial and early repeat crop of CPFs have been completed and implemented.

Quality Assurance Process
51.     The evaluation will be overseen by Nick York, Director, and Monika Huppi, Acting
Manager, of IEGCC. Peer reviewers will be James Adams (former World Bank Vice President
for Operations Policy and Country Services [OPCS] and East Asia and Pacific Region), David
Dollar (former World Bank Country Director for China), and Mwange Kimenyi (Director of
Africa Growth Initiative, Brookings Institution). The critical skills required for this evaluation
include a deep understanding of the process of Bank Group engagement with countries, how
country partnership strategies are put together and implemented, including the macroeconomic
analysis, growth, and poverty knowledge, substantial prior operational and evaluation
experience, and in-depth knowledge on sustainability and country risk assessments. The highly
experienced evaluation team possesses all these skills.

52.    The evaluation team will be led by Ismail Arslan (extensive country, operational, and
evaluation experience). The core team includes Monika Huppi (focus on evaluation design;
extensive operational and evaluation experience with a broad range of Bank country
engagements and lending operations across sectors and income groups); Juan-Jose Fernandez-
Ansola (focus on evaluation design and SCD/CPF reviews; extensive knowledge on
implementation of Bank country partnership strategies); Nils Fostvedt (focus on SCD/CPF
assessments; extensive operational and evaluation experience on country engagement and
economic and sector work); Xue Li and Kendra White (focus on economic and portfolio
analysis; advanced skills in statistical methods and in data research and country portfolio
analysis); Basil Kavalsky (focus on SCD/CPF assessments; former country director with broad
experience in macroeconomic analysis and country engagement); Paul Levy (focus on SCD/CPF
assessments; extensive operational and evaluation experience on country engagement and
economic and sector work); Neeta Sirur (focus on poverty and human development; wide-
ranging experience in country strategies in Latin American and Western Balkan countries); and
Aurora Medina Siy (focus on evaluation design; extensive operational and evaluation experience
on IFC /MIGA). The team will be supplemented with sector specialists as needed.

Expected Outcomes and Dissemination
53.     The output will be a process evaluation report for the Committee on Development
Effectiveness (CODE) and the Board. Separate reports on the SCD and CPF assessments will be
shared with the relevant country teams for their information and comments. The final evaluation
report will be disclosed in the normal manner. The demand for special internal or external
dissemination will be assessed at a later stage.

54.     In light of the potential value of the results of this real-time process evaluation to the
operationalization and roll-out of the Bank Group strategy through the new country engagement
approach, the evaluation team will engage early with IEG’s communication and learning
specialists with a view to developing an outreach strategy that will involve innovative means and
methods through which key messages and learning can be effectively communicated and
disseminated among all relevant Bank Group stakeholders and actors.


                                                16
Resources
55.     Timeline and budget. Work on SCD and CPF assessments is ongoing via pilot testing of
the assessment templates. Scoping missions to Myanmar and Panama were completed in June
2015. The remaining field visits will take place between October 2015 and March 2016, with the
exact schedule determined by the schedule of CPF approvals. The draft report will be shared
with IEGCC management in June 2016 with a one-stop review meeting in July 2016 and
finalization August–September 2016. However, if there should be delays in the completion of
SCDs and CPFs, this timeline could slip modestly in order to ensure a reasonable universe of
evaluable documents.

56.     The budget needed for this evaluation is $1.250 million over two fiscal years (FY15-16).
The desk reviews of SCDs and CPFs and field visits will constitute the core of the work and a
large share of the total cost. The cost of field visits may be controlled to some extent through
combining visits to more than one country on the same trip, and ensuring that relevant desk
assessments have been completed prior to the visits. The project team will also review within
IEG any possibilities for combining visits for different purposes.




                                               17
Attachment 1: Bibliography
IEG. 2011 World Bank Progress in Harmonization and Alignment in Low-Income
       Countries.
————. 2014a. Results Frameworks in Country Strategies—Lessons from Evaluations.
————. 2014b. Selectivity in Country Strategies: The Evidence.
————. 2014c. Past and Future—Bank-IFC Cooperation at the Country Strategy Level.
————. 2014d. World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-
   Affected Countries.
————. 2014e. Results and Performance of the World Bank Group.
————. 2014f. Results Frameworks in Country Strategies – Lessons from Evaluations.
————. 2015a. Clustered Country Program Evaluation for Resource Rich Developing
   Countries: Cases of Bolivia, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Zambia.
————. 2015b. The Poverty Focus of Country Programs: Lessons from World Bank
   Experience.
OPCS. 1998. Country Assistance Strategies: Retrospective and Outlook.
————. 2000. Country Assistance Strategies: Retrospective and Implications.
————. 2003. Country Assistance Strategies: Retrospective and Future Directions.
————. 2005. Results Focus in Country Assistance Strategies: A Stocktaking of
   Results-Based CASs.
————. 2009. Country Assistance Strategies: Retrospective and Future Directions.
————. 2014. Framework for Management of Risk in Operations: Proactive Risk
   Management for Better Results.
World Bank Group. 2013. World Bank Group Strategy.
————. 2014a. Interim Guidelines for Systematic Country Diagnostics.
————. 2014b. A New Approach to Country Engagement.
————. 2014c. World Bank Group Guidance for Country Partnership Framework
   Products.
————. 2015a. World Bank Implementation Update.
————. 2015b. Systematic Country Diagnostic – An Update.




                                         18
Attachment 2: Evaluation Design Matrix
SPECIFIC EVALUATION QUESTIONS, SUB-QUESTIONS, AND DATA SOURCES
Question                                                                Data sources
Q1: Has the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
identified priorities in a convincing analytical way that
helped design a program of selective interventions under
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)?
- Did the SCD use high quality analytics (including            Interviews, document reviews,
    political economy analysis), and identify key              case studies
    challenges and opportunities related to accelerating
    the country’s progress toward development goals
    with primary impact on poverty and shared
    prosperity?
- Did the SCD identify a limited number of areas on the        Interviews, document reviews,
    critical path to achieving the twin goals, and thus        case studies
    inform strategic discussions with clients about
    priority areas for Bank Group interventions? Was the
    prioritization specific enough to help guide selectivity
    in the CPF?
- Did preparation of the SCD reflect the “one World            Interviews, document reviews,
    Bank Group” objective? That is, was IFC an integral        case studies
    part of the team and did the SCDs reflect IFC and
    MIGA participation? Furthermore, were appropriate
    internal reviews conducted and were the comments
    and suggestions from those reviews addressed?
- How was the engagement with Global Practices                 Interviews, document reviews,
    (GPs)?                                                     case studies
Q2: Has the CPF designed a program of lending and
knowledge activities that aligns (not necessarily one-to-
one) with country priorities and opportunities identified
in the SCD and that makes the best use of Bank Group
resources and comparative advantage, including joint
World Bank–IFC-MIGA operations where appropriate?
- Does the CPF present an assessment of the                    Interviews, document reviews,
    government’s program, identify divergent views             case studies
    between the country and the Bank Group, highlight
    country poverty and prosperity goals, and discuss
    how they align with the twin goals? Does it explain
    clearly and concisely the reasons why some key
    priorities from the SCD may not have been included
    in the CPF?
- Is there evidence – taking into account the limited          Interviews, document reviews,
    available sample of countries- of appropriate              case studies
    collaboration and division of labor between the Bank,
    IFC, and MIGA in working toward CPF objectives,


                                               19
    and are IFC-MIGA interventions included in the
    results framework with appropriate, measurable
    indicators?
-   Were the criteria for selecting the portfolio under     Interviews, document reviews,
    preparation discussed in the CPF, was the overall       case studies
    program contribution to CPF objectives explained,
    and was the framework based on outcomes (rather
    than outputs/inputs/processes) that are measurable
    and measured (with a system set up for measuring
    them)? Was the comparative advantage of the Bank in
    the selected activities explained?
-   Does the CPF articulate in its results framework—       Interviews, document reviews,
    measured with relevant indicators—the links of Bank     case studies
    Group activities to poverty, shared prosperity, and
    sustainability?
-   Does the CPF propose analytic work that is              Interviews, document reviews,
    consistent with the CPF objectives and SCD              case studies
    recommendations?

-  To what extent does the CPF consider major risks to      Interviews, document reviews,
   program implementation—including national,               case studies
   international, and Bank-related risks—and identify
   options to manage the most serious ones?
Q3: Has the new country engagement model fostered
country ownership, realism, and selectivity?
- Were there consultations with stakeholders, and were      Interviews, document reviews,
   those consultations reflected in broad commitment        case studies
   (particularly from the government) and in the design
   of the strategy and interventions, with identification
   of any important differences of view between a
   government and the Bank?
- Does the Bank Group country program match                 Interviews, document reviews,
   government capacity for implementation and is            case studies
   government commitment accurately assessed?
- Taking into account the Bank’s financing constraints,     Interviews, document reviews,
   do CPF objectives concentrate resources on areas that    case studies
   intersect with country development goals, contribute
   toward the attainment of the twin goals identified in
   the SCD, and are consistent with the Bank Group’s
   comparative advantage?
- Has the SCD identified the key knowledge and data         Interviews, document reviews,
   gaps, are these addressed in the knowledge program       case studies
   outlined in the CPF?
- Does the Bank Group program explore synergies             Interviews, document reviews,
   with other multilaterals and bilateral and reflect the   case studies
   Bank Group’s comparative advantage?



                                             20
Attachment: 3 Methodology Note for Review of SCDs and CPFs
QUESTIONNAIRE GUIDANCE

1.      The guidance to the attached Basic Template Questionnaire is based on the guidelines for
SCD and CPF preparation, the Bank Group strategy of October 2013, and a note on the new
approach to Bank Group country engagement (see references in footnotes 10, 11, and 12). It
takes into account the application of the questionnaire to a few pilot cases, lessons learned from
those pilots, as well as lessons learned by IEG and presented in learning notes on results
frameworks, selectivity, and World Bank–IFC cooperation (see footnotes 17, 18, and 19). The
questionnaire will enable panelists to assess SCDs and CPFs systematically.

SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTICS

2.       Dimensions to be assessed in the SCD review:

         Evidence basis and framing of the issues
         Growth, poverty and shared prosperity, and sustainability
         Identification of priorities for achieving the twin goals
         Process and one World Bank Group

3.     The attached template provides the questions to be answered for each dimension. The
evaluators will rate each dimension using a 6-point scale based on criteria set out in the attached
Rating Scale Table.

4.      Evidence basis and framing of the issues will assess the quality of the background
analytical work and data the SCD used to frame the main issues and challenges facing the
country in question. It also will assess how the SCD identified and addressed data gaps and
weaknesses found during its production.

5.     Growth, poverty and shared prosperity, and sustainability will assess whether the SCD
convincingly shows the key opportunities and constraints the country faces. It will assess
whether sources of growth are properly identified, their impact on poverty and inclusiveness, and
prospects of economic growth (fiscal and debt), social, and environmental sustainability. These
issues will be analyzed against the background of the twin goals.

6.      Identification of priorities for achieving the twin goals will assess whether the SCD
identified some key areas (sufficiently narrow in scope to reflect an effective selectivity process)
on the critical path to reducing poverty and enhancing shared prosperity, including progress
achieved so far. The review will assess whether priorities are aligned to government
development priorities, while spelling out quantitative aspirations for poverty reduction and
shared prosperity. The report will assess whether future priorities are in the context of growth,
inclusiveness, and sustainability. This dimension also will assess whether the SCD had an
adequate discussion of trade-offs between short- and long-term goals.

7.     Process and one World Bank Group will assess whether the production of the SCD, and
any consultation, reflected a unified approach by the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA to underpin

                                                 21
the new country engagement model. It also will assess the quality of corporate review, and the
adequacy of the Bank Group’s interactions with the government and civil society stakeholders
during SCD preparation.

COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORKS

8.       Dimensions to be assessed in the CPF review:

         Alignment with country development priorities and the Bank Group’s opportunities to
          achieve the twin goals identified in the SCD, and sustainability
         Country ownership, realism, and selectivity
         Quality of results framework and systematic risk assessment
         One World Bank Group

9.      As with the SCD, for each dimension of the assessment the evaluators will provide a
rating on the 6-point scale based on criteria set out in the attached Rating Scale Table.

10.     Alignment with country development priorities and the twin goals, and sustainability will
assess whether the CPF (following its guidance note) found the proper intersection between
country development goals and opportunities to achieve the twin goals identified in the SCD
when putting together the Bank Group interventions and the results framework of the program.
Clarity of the country’s development strategy and definition of its priorities in the CPF will be
key in that assessment. The sustainability of policies also will be assessed in this section.

11.     Country ownership, realism, and selectivity will assess the extent to which the CPF took
advantage of consultations with stakeholders—and particularly with the government—to develop
a program whose success is enhanced by an adequate assessment of country capacity and
government commitment to the policies. This section will also assess selectivity by evaluating
whether resources were concentrated in areas representing an adequate intersection of country
development goals, the twin goals, and the Bank Group’s comparative advantage. This section
will also assess whether proposed analytic work is relevant and consistent with CPF priorities
and SCD findings. Moreover, it will assess the extent to which the CPF adequately considers
major risks to the implementation of the Bank Group program and options to manage the most
serious ones.

12.    Quality of results framework and systematic risk assessment will assess the
appropriateness and realism of the results framework, focusing on the results chain running from
Bank Group interventions to specified outcomes. It will also assess whether objectives are
achievable, outcome indicators are appropriate to measure progress toward the objectives, and
whether they are measurable and tracked through a system set up for measuring them.

13.   One World Bank Group will assess evidence of appropriate collaboration between the
World Bank, IFC, and MIGA in working toward CPF objectives, and whether the results
framework offers evidence of joint interventions by these institutions




                                               22
Documentation

14.    The IEG reviewers will have access to relevant documentation for the SCD and CPF
review. The main documents are the following:

           Concept Notes for SCD and CPF
           Systematic Country Diagnostic Decision Draft
           Systematic Country Diagnostic Final Report
           Country Partnership Framework Decision Draft
           Country Partnership Framework Board Version
           Minutes of the Operations Committee (OC) and Regional Operations Committee
            (ROC) meetings for the SCD and CPF
           Comments provided in the context of the OC and ROC meetings
           Latest IMF Article IV Consultation
           Other relevant recent reports

INTERVIEWS WITH MANAGEMENT, STAFF, BORROWER, STAKEHOLDERS, AND PARTNERS

15.      After the desk review and initial assessment of the SCD and CPF, the reviewers will
identify information gaps and determine whether interviewing specific people is necessary,
specifying the proposed agenda and questions. The interview can take the form of e-mails, phone
calls, face-to-face meetings, or short questionnaires. During field visits, the IEG team will meet
stakeholders in the country (government, disenfranchised groups, academia, private sector,
NGOs, etc.) and multilateral and bilateral partners, to validate consistency of views reflected in
the SCD and CPF documents. The task manager(s) for the SCD/CPF evaluation will sign off on
all the interviews.

QUALITY ASSURANCE OF THE SCD/CPF ASSESSMENTS

16.     The IEG staff or consultant conducting the SCD/CPF review will be responsible for the
quality of the assessments. [Some assessments may be peer reviewed.]

Basic Template for Systematic Country Diagnostic and Country Partnership
Process Evaluation
   I.        SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC (SCD)

   A. Evidence basis and framing of the issues

           To what extent is the SCD providing a basis for outlining the main issues and
            challenges for the country?
           Are gaps in evidence and areas where additional work is required identified during the
            SCD preparation period or during the CPF?
           Are the quality of the data discussion and the steps that have been taken to address data
            gaps and weaknesses, including the proxies used for missing data, appropriate?
           Are there synergies on the priorities and opportunities identified across the themes of
            growth, inclusion, and sustainability?
                                                  23
B. Growth, poverty and shared prosperity, and sustainability

         To what extent is the SCD identifying key opportunities for overall economic growth?
         To what extent is the SCD analyzing adequate and equal opportunities, especially the
          distribution of the gains from growth among the poor and the bottom 40 percent, and
          basic elements of social well-being and shared prosperity?
         Does the SCD look sufficiently into sustainability issues (fiscal and debt, social, and
          environmental)?
         Are significant threats to social and political stability adequately analyzed?

C. Identification of priorities for achieving the twin goals

         Does the SCD identify limited areas that are on the critical path to achieving the goals?
         Are the priorities for poverty reduction and shared growth clearly spelled out in
          quantitative terms and are they realistic?
         Is the results chain needed to achieve the goals clearly specified and consistent with the
          objectives?
         Is there a discussion of possible trade-offs between short- and long-term goals?
         To what extent is governance (institutional arrangements and capacity, transparency,
          and accountability) addressed in the SCD?
         Does the SCD distinguish clearly between the most important priorities and other, less
          critical constraints?
         Does the SCD effectively address cross-cutting issues?

D. Process and one World Bank Group

         How generally did the processes go, including whether there were any issues from the
          relative timing of the SCD and the CPF?
         Was the corporate review process of adequate quality?
         Was the preparation of the SCD reflective of the one Bank Group objective, with inputs
          sought from IFC and MIGA?
         Were the SCD findings and priorities informed by stakeholder consultation?
         Were stakeholder comments presented in the report?
         Were those who participated in consultation informed as to how the Bank has dealt
          with their comments and suggestions?
         Were time constraints important for the quality of the report?

II.        COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK (CPF)

A. Alignment with country development priorities and the twin goals and sustainability

         Does the CPF present an assessment of the government’s program and make clear any
          divergence of views between the country and the Bank Group?
         Does it highlight any country poverty or prosperity goals and discuss how they align
          with the twin goals?



                                                 24
    Does the CPF provide a concise description of the country’s poverty and income
     distribution patterns and trends, including at least poverty trends using national and
     international poverty lines, inequality measures, and income/consumption growth of the
     bottom 40 percent of the population?
    Does the CPF present information on the causes of poverty, including the major
     obstacles to poverty reduction and the set of structural and social elements that are
     essential to poverty reduction?
    Is there a discussion of any progress in poverty reduction since the last strategy?
    Is there an analysis of the linkages between poverty reduction and the level and pattern
     of growth in the country?
    Is there an assessment of the country’s capacity to monitor poverty indicators?
    Are links to poverty, shared prosperity, and sustainability (fiscal, social, environmental)
     articulated well in the CPF results framework?

B. Country ownership, realism, and selectivity

To what extent:

    Were there consultations with stakeholders, and were those consultations reflected in
     broad commitment (particularly from the government) and in the design of the
     strategy?
    Is the Bank Group’s country program matched to country capacity and appropriately
     estimated government commitment?
    Are the program objectives consistent with the Bank Group’s comparative advantage?
    CPF objectives concentrate resources into critical areas where they will have the most
     development impact (intersection of country development goals, twin goals, and Bank
     Group comparative advantage)?


C. Quality of results framework and systematic risk assessment

    Does the CPF articulate in its results framework—measured with relevant indicators—
     the links of Bank Group activities to poverty, shared prosperity, and sustainability?
    Does the framework emphasize outcomes over outputs/inputs/processes?
    Are all outcomes measurable and measured (with a system set up for measuring them),
     including through indicators?
    Do indicators have quantified baselines and targets?
    Do the chosen indicators adequately measure final outcomes (say, quantity or quality)
     and have the proper scope (say, same geographic coverage as the final outcome)?
    Are the indicators time-bound and consistent with time-dimension of the CPF’s
     targeted outcomes?
    Are results chains from interventions to outcomes explained sufficiently, including any
     scaling-up of interventions expected to achieve the targeted outcomes? Are obstacles to
     be overcome, logical causality, assumptions, and risks highlighted?



                                            25
    Were the criteria for selecting the ongoing portfolio and the portfolio under preparation
     discussed explicitly in the CPF, and was the overall program contribution to CPF
     objectives explained?
    Is proposed analytic work relevant and consistent with CPF priorities and SCD
     findings?
    To what extent does the CPF consider major risks (domestic, international, and Bank-
     related) and options to manage the most serious ones?


D. One World Bank Group

    Is there evidence of appropriate collaboration and appropriate division of labor between
     the Bank, IFC, and MIGA in working toward CPF objectives?
    Is there evidence of smooth working of the Regional Coordination Mechanism, with
     joint implementation work (World Bank, IFC, MIGA) where relevant, and timely
     inclusion of IFC and MIGA in joint work?
    How meaningful was donor coordination in the preparation of the CPF?
    Are there program complementarities (World Bank, IFC, MIGA) in achieving common
     goals, and are those complementarities expressed in the results matrix?
    Is IFC working on poverty issues? Are IFC and MIGA interventions included in the
     results framework with appropriate, measurable indicators?
    Is there evidence of joint work World Bank, IFC, MIGA in specific interventions?




                                           26
Rating Scale for SCD/CPF Process Questionnaire
For internal evaluation purposes, the responses to the questions will be rated on a six-point scale
using the criteria in the table below. This rating system is a tool for the aggregation and reporting
of specific evaluation findings. The ratings on individual questions will then be aggregated to
arrive at a rating for each block of issues under the SCD process and the CPF process. The rating
for each block will be a simple average of the ratings for each question under the block, giving
equal weight for all the questions in the block; the possibility of using unequal weights may be
considered during the evaluation if warranted by special issues.

                         SCD/CPF Process Questionnaire Rating Scale
   Question/                        Criteria for the rating                             Numerical
  block rating                                                                           rating
    Highly      Exceptional attainment on the issue raised by the question or               6
  satisfactory  dimension. No shortcomings identified.
  Satisfactory  Good attainment on the issue raised or dimension. No major                   5
                shortcomings identified.
  Moderately    The issue or dimension was addressed but not                                 4
  satisfactory  comprehensively, or was addressed in a way not fully helpful
                for the development of the SCD or CPF. Some shortcomings
                identified.
  Moderately    The issue or dimension was addressed in a way that was not                   3
 unsatisfactory helpful for the SCD or CPF. Several shortcomings identified.
 Unsatisfactory The issue or dimension was addressed perfunctorily,                          2
                representing a detriment to the quality of the SCD and CPF.
                Many shortcomings identified.
    Highly      The issue or dimension was not addressed by the SCD or CPF.                  1
 unsatisfactory




                                                 27
Attachment 4: IEG Learning Notes on Selectivity; Bank-IFC Cooperation;
and Results Frameworks
SELECTIVITY

Introduction

1.       To operationalize the twin goals, the Bank Group has developed a more evidence-based and
selective country engagement model, the Country Partnership Framework (CPF). While the CPF is
sharpening the Bank Group’s focus on strategic selectivity in its country programs, the issue is
longstanding. For example, OPCS’s 1998 Country Assistance Strategies: Retrospective and Outlook
(CAS Retro I) devoted considerable attention to the issue of strategic selectivity, providing a
quantitative analysis of sectoral selectivity, defining strategic selectivity as a matter of qualitative
judgment based on three criteria, and recommending specific actions by OPCS, the Networks, and
country teams in order to strengthen strategic selectivity and focus in the CASs. The two subsequent
CAS Retrospectives (2000 and 2003) reported an improvement in the treatment of selectivity in
CASs. OPCS noted that although most CASs considered one or more selectivity dimensions outlined
in CAS Retro I, many did not fully distill their implications for the design of Bank Group programs
and that the selectivity improvement was mostly in discussing the rationale for choosing one
instrument over another. With the adoption of results-based country strategies, selectivity is viewed
as “a natural by-product of the careful construction of a results framework” (CAS Retro IV, 2005),
and the CASs are judged as having become “more selective and focused” and “broadly satisfactory
in prioritizing areas for Bank support” (CAS Retro V, 2009).

Key Findings

         The Bank Group is paying significant and increasing attention to selectivity. Many
          country strategies explicitly address selectivity, articulate specific criteria for exercising
          selectivity, and draw lessons from the past for improving selectivity.
         Selectivity has improved over time. The Bank Group’s country strategies have
          become more selective over time.
         Selectivity is positively correlated with country program outcomes based on
          empirical analysis from CASCR Reviews. In addition to country ownership and good
          results frameworks, selectivity is correlated with better country outcomes. Moreover,
          selectivity is more important in countries with higher levels of extreme poverty, which
          emphasizes the importance of selectivity in achieving the twin goals.
         Selectivity is likely to be contextual. There are no simple criteria to determine the size
          and composition of a program; that is, the number of objectives and number of
          activities cannot be predetermined. What matters is the fit between design and context.
         While selectivity is multidimensional and complex, evidence from CPEs and country
          strategies suggests that selectivity can be enhanced by paying attention to client
          country capacities, grounding all operations in solid analytical work, taking a
          long-term view, and sequencing interventions, properly factoring in design and
          implementation risks to results delivery, and using the Bank’s comparative
          advantage.




                                                  28
BANK-IFC COOPERATION AT THE COUNTRY STRATEGY LEVEL

Introduction

2.       The needs of Bank Group clients have been changing as the private sector increasingly
becomes the engine of growth, and government attention is shifting from public projects to
dealing with the growing private sector by regulating it, by establishing partnerships, or by
transferring certain economic activities to it. In this new landscape, the best way to optimize the
Bank Group’s development impact, promote its overarching goal of eliminating extreme poverty
and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner is to put the array of private sector
instruments to full use, bringing enhanced cooperation between the Bank and IFC at the country
level to the forefront. As such, the two are expected to work more closely together from
diagnosis to strategy formulation, solutions design, execution, evaluation, and learning. This
would help ensure that the private sector’s role in addressing the challenges of development is
fully embedded and the Bank Group’s assistance is integrated by capturing the benefits of
knowledge exchanges and joint operations across the Bank and IFC. Experience has shown that a
realistic and selective approach to Bank-IFC cooperation, based on appropriate resource
allocation and staff incentives, may yield significantly better outcomes. Thus, the challenges of
the new CPF process are to identify where and when cooperation is likely to improve efficiency
and development outcome; redefine job descriptions of various administrative units and reassign
existing staff resources; and provide staff incentives for joint work.

Key Findings

        Despite the increase in the number of “joint” country strategies, cooperation between the
         Bank and IFC has varied significantly across countries, with the majority of country
         strategies failing to include specific proposals to implement Bank Group cooperation.
        There are structural reasons for the low levels of cooperation at the country strategy
         level: IFC’s business is determined by the market demand for its products, which is
         inherently difficult to plan for; there are concerns about conflicts of interest; IFC’s
         strategist/economist resources are extremely limited; and staff incentives may need to be
         tailored to encourage cooperation.
        Selective Bank-IFC cooperation has the potential to improve the effectiveness and
         efficiency of Bank Group operations, and improve its development impact in client
         countries, while lack of cooperation can hinder or reduce potential benefits to clients, lead
         to duplication of activities, and ultimately raise operating costs.
        Truly joint country strategy teams have led to better coordination and helped define
         the respective roles of the two institutions. Professional relationships between the staff
         members of the Bank and IFC have facilitated knowledge exchange and readiness to work
         together. However, Bank-IFC cooperation has been ad hoc.
        Cooperation between the Bank and IFC is not always necessary or productive for
         every sector in a country. Elevating cooperation, which is an instrument, to the level of a
         goal on its own, may generate unnecessary processes, hence inefficiency. Benefits of
         cooperation depend on the sector and the stage of its development in a country. Since the
         cost of cooperation may sometimes outweigh the benefits, careful cost-benefit analysis of
         cooperation is warranted at the early stage of new Bank Group country strategy formation.


                                                 29
RESULTS FRAMEWORKS IN COUNTRY STRATEGIES

Introduction

3.       In 2005, the results framework was introduced in the CAS as a tool for improving the
quality of the strategy in borrowing member countries, maximizing the development
effectiveness of Bank Group assistance, and demonstrating measurable results of international
aid in fostering growth and reducing poverty. Since then, progress has been achieved in
developing a results framework in the Bank Group’s country strategies. Today, all country
strategies discussed at the Board have a results framework, usually in the form of a matrix in the
annex. The results-based approach has brought several benefits, including the focus on results,
better alignment between the Bank Group country engagement and national priorities, and
flexibility in instruments to accommodate programming for the increasingly diverse set of Bank
clients, including IDA, IBRD, and fragile countries. Despite this progress, IEG’s CPEs and
CASCR Reviews have highlighted a few pitfalls in the results frameworks. Common
deficiencies include a focus on outputs instead of outcomes, a weak link between designed
interventions and outcomes, and the absence of monitoring indicators to track outcomes. Several
recent IEG evaluations and reports have demonstrated that a weak CAS results framework is a
key determinant of unsatisfactory outcome performance at the country program level.

Key Findings

        As a management tool, a good results framework has two interlinked but distinct
         components that serve different purposes: a results chain that explains how the Bank
         Group program would achieve each objective and contribute to the country goals that the
         Bank Group chooses to support; and a results matrix that provides the metrics for
         assessing the achievement of the objectives.
        A strong results chain should be explicit about the underlying assumptions that the
         Bank Group is making with regard to the actions by other development partners and
         external factors. Clarity about the assumptions, and thus the associated risks, gives
         strength to a results chain. In selecting engagement areas and setting objectives,
         considerations should be given not just to the country needs and priorities, or diagnosis of
         potential solutions, which are clearly important, but also to the time needed to produce
         results, the resource constraints of all partners, and other factors that may affect the delivery
         of results.
        Bank Group teams should ensure that “the whole is more than the sum of the parts;”
         that individual sector and objective decisions are related to the overall shape of the
         program; that there is a dialogue with the country on policy and strategic direction; that the
         country context and its own objectives are reflected; that the capacity of the country and the
         Bank Group team are considered; and that proper selectivity and sequencing are applied.
         The role of other stakeholders—the government, development partners, civil society, the
         private sector, and beneficiaries—must also be factored in as their involvement and
         agreement are critical to the exercise and ultimately determine the success of the country
         assistance program.
        For a results framework to be an effective management tool, it should be current.
         All parts of the results framework should be subject to regular review and update.



                                                  30
 Attachment 5: Report to the Board from the Committee on Development Effectiveness
 Sub-Committee Report

                                     Meeting of September 14, 2015


        The Sub-Committee (SC) of the Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) considered
IEG’s approach paper on Systematic Country Diagnostic and Country Partnership Framework Process
Evaluation (CODE2015-0047).

         The Sub-Committee welcomed the approach paper on the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) Process Evaluation. They appreciated the real time assessment,
noting it will provide early signals to enable timely course corrections. Members acknowledged the
limitations of this early assessment and emphasized the importance of maintaining flexibility in the timing
to allow for a sufficient number of SCD and CPFs to be considered in the exercise to provide a reasonable
evidence base.

         They requested IEG to include in the evaluation the client perspective and how the WBG takes
government priorities into account. Members expressed interest in learning how priorities are determined
when there is a mismatch between the government’s interests and the most pressing constraints to achieving
the corporate goals, which could potentially affect ownership at implementation. Members cautioned about
drawing specific conclusions from this analysis. They noted that county and regional sensitivities should
be kept in mind and that conclusions should be linked to regional realities. Members emphasized the need
for an appropriate set of skills in the evaluation team, including staff who have an understanding of the
country realities. They appreciated IEG’s explanation that the team would include IFC and MIGA experts,
strong economists, and experts who have worked across a number of areas and countries; IEG added that
attention will be given to getting local country specific expertise, within the budget available.

         The Committee was pleased to learn that the cross-cutting dimension of sustainability will be a key
part of the evaluation and that the linkages between and the roles that regional teams, CCSAs and Global
Practices play in the development of SCDs and CPFs will be addressed. They asked IEG to identify
obstacles that prevent coordination within the WBG, and circumstances when the SCD/CPF required a
variation in the approach. Members encouraged IEG to categorize and draw lessons, if possible, of the
different approaches that have been taken.

         Acknowledging that SCDs priorities go beyond what the WBG can do, members encouraged IEG
to contact as many stakeholders as possible to verify that the diagnostics have been shared with client
countries, stakeholders and partners who could potentially carry out the activities that the WBG will not
undertake. They also asked IEG to assess whether SCDs have been translated into local languages and if a
dissemination strategy has been put in place to share these documents with a wider audience. Members
encouraged IEG to look at the quality of the consultations and the extent to which civil society has had the
opportunity to provide input. Members noted that the Approach Paper focuses on countries subject to SCD
and CPF and not on countries subject to Country Engagement Notes. IEG was asked to work with OPCS
to find a way to include these countries, as this would provide valuable information and knowledge.
