                                                                                                  100284




              Libya PIM and Institutional Building P154421




                          REGIONAL PIM WORKSHOP1



                      Tools to Guide and Drive
              Public Investment Management Reforms


                        Venue: Kempinski Hotel, Amman Jordan
                                  May 24-27,2015

                                     Participating Countries:

    Kuwait, Oman, Jordan, Egypt, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Libya, Kurdistan, Iraq

                                        Michael Schaeffer
                                          Wesal Ashur

                                              June 2015




1
 This regional workshop is the first of a series of Public Investment Management Technical Practice Unit
undertakings.
The contents of this report constitute technical advice and
recommendations given by the staff of World Bank to the
authorities of a member country in response to their request for
technical assistance. With the written authorization of the
recipient country’s authorities, this report (in whole or in part) or
summaries thereof may be disclosed to WB Executive Directors
and their staff, and to technical assistance providers and donors
outside the WB. Disclosure of this report (in whole or in part) or
summaries thereof to parties outside the WB other than technical
assistance providers and donors shall require the written
authorization of the recipient country’s authorities and the World
Bank.
                                                   Table of Contents

I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................5
                Mission Objectives.............................................................................................5
                Execution of Mission .........................................................................................7

II. Country Nominations ............................................................................................................7

III. Workshop Proceedings ........................................................................................................7
              Defining Sound Public Investment Management ..............................................7
              Framework for Sharing Country Experience .....................................................8
              Role of Strategic Planning .................................................................................8
              Role of Budget Process in Implementing Government Priorities ......................8
              Impact of Project Appraisal on Project Selection ..............................................9
              Impact of Private Financing on Project Selection Decisions .............................9
              Institutional Arrangements for Quality Assurance ..........................................10
              Project Implementation and Monitoring Arrangements ..................................10

IV. Lessons Learned and Next Steps .......................................................................................11
           APPENDIX A: Workshop Background Information Note .....................................................13
           APPENDIX B: Workshop Agenda .........................................................................................16
           APPENDIX C: List of Participants .........................................................................................20




                                                                                                                                 3
                    Abbreviations and Acronyms
DFID   Department for International Development
MoF    Ministry of Finance
MOP    Ministry of Planning
PEFA   Public Expenditure Financial Assessment
PFM    Public Financial Management
PIM    Public Investment Management
WB     World Bank




                                                  4
                                I. INTRODUCTION

1.      Regional MENA countries have been implementing public investment and
financial management (PIM and PFM) reforms over the past two decades, with
varying degrees of impact on the management of public expenditure. The
legislative and regulatory frameworks in some MENA countries have been
strengthened but their effective implementation has not yet been fully achieved.
Budget preparation and improved project preparation in MENA countries has been and
continues to be a major element of the reform agenda.

2.      Recent Public Investment (PIM) diagnostic work (notably PIM reviews in
Jordan, Oman, Kuwait and Libya) demonstrate that current reform approaches
have delivered relatively strong laws and central finance agencies but without
commensurate public investment management improvements in executing
agencies leading to enhanced delivery of public services. Public financial and
investment management reforms, in general, have been less successful in providing
solutions to challenges in a number of areas, including:

   a) Is the budget credible, realistic and implemented as intended?
   b) Is the budgetary and fiscal risk oversight comprehensive and is this information
      available to the public?
   c) Does the investment budget, and the underlying projects, reflect government
      policy?
   d) Is the budget implemented in a predictable and orderly manner and is the
      stewardship of public funds adequate?
   e) Are timely and accurate accounting records produced?; and
   f) Are systems for investment/project audit sound?

3.       It was critical therefore to review and debate the components of public
investment management reforms, the international standards underpinning
transparent and reliable investment project development and development budget
formulation, execution and reporting, and ascertain whether there are any new
initiatives.


4. The workshop was organized to provide a forum for selected MENA countries
to examine and debate the extent to which PFM reforms have assisted
governments in achieving sound management over their public investment
expenditures and the extent to which these are reflected in improved service
delivery. The workshop focused on four core themes as follows:


Theme 1: Effective Planning and Management of Public Infrastructure Projects

5. Strategic planning is an important first step in public investment, but in many
MENA countries the process is influenced by external requirements rather than

                                                                                    5
the internal needs of the government for high quality planning and management.
As a result, many strategic planning documents in MENA define policy goals in very
broad terms with little evidence that policy trade-offs have focused on a specific sector,
only a list of possible investment options rather than a well-defined set of priorities that
reflect the inter-dependencies between policy areas and projects.

Theme 2: Improving PIM/ PFM Practices: Tools for Improving PIM Budget
Credibility

6. Medium term budget plans are considered in some of the MENA countries
surveyed, but the quality varies significantly. The problem is that much of the
decision making about public investment, including the prioritization of projects and
the pace of implementation still occurs during the annual budget cycle. In UK for
example, the resource envelop for infrastructure investment and relative priorities are
defined over a longer period of time, and medium term budgeting is used for
facilitating efficient management of investment projects.

Theme 3: Role of Investment in Cost Benefit Analysis for Guiding Project
Selection

7. One of the most significant issues in MENA countries was the role of
investment in cost-benefit analysis for guiding project selection. Though cost
benefit analysis is a standard component of project appraisal in many countries the
quality of the analysis is not generally independently reviewed and the resulting
analysis is not necessarily a significant factor in project selection. Selection criteria
tend to give wide scope for political discretion and other non-economic factors.
Project appraisal processes in MENA tend to be more limited in scope, with less
attention to business case justification, project management arrangements, risk
mitigation, and procurement strategies than one would find in Europe or North
America. The more advanced systems are also characterized by institutional
arrangements that create checks and balances on quality at the front-end during the
implementation.

Theme 4: Strengthening Project Implementation and Monitoring Arrangements

8. Project implementation and monitoring arrangements could be strengthened
in MENA. For example, procurement arrangements could be used more effectively to
share the risks between the contractor and purchaser. Monitoring of project
implementation tends to be more focused on control for budget purposes and does not
necessarily communicate the right information for managerial purposes or to assure
value for money across the investment cycle. Internal audit is still not very well used
in MENA countries and therefore tends to focus on compliance rather than the
effectiveness of risk management systems and procedures. Ex-post reviews of projects
from a perspective of effectiveness and efficiency are generally not done within
MENA.




                                                                                          6
9.     The     workshop on Tools to Guide and Drive Public Investment
Management Reforms was hosted at the Kempiniski Hotel, Amman, Jordan during
the period May 24-27, 2015. The workshop was facilitated by: Messrs. Michael
Schaeffer (Senior Public Sector Specialist), Emmanuel Cuvillier (Senior Public Sector
Specialist), Wesal Ashur (Public Sector Specialist) and Salem Falah Almaroof (Public
Sector Specialist), Tetyana Komashko (WB-HQ) and Mirah Husseim (WB-Libya).
Mr. Majed M. El Baya (Lead Public Sector Specialist), Ms. Nazaneen Ismail Ali
(Senior Procurement Specialist), Mr. Aijaz Ahmad (Senior Private Sector Specialist
PPP), Mr. Ahmed Kouchouk (Senior Economist), Dr. Glenn Jenkins (Consultant), Mr.
Fernando Britos (Consultant), Mr. Eduardo Mimica (Consultant), and Walid Al-Najar
provided presentations.

                            II. COUNTRY NOMINATIONS

10.    Participants from 8 countries were represented including: Kuwait, Oman,
Jordan, Egypt, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Libya, Kurdistan, Iraq. A total of 74
persons (including speakers, bilateral donors and MENA country) attended the
workshop, of which 57 participants were country representatives. A detailed list of
country participants is provided in Appendix C.

                           III. WORKSHOP PROCEEDINGS

11.     As provided from above, the workshop was organized around four
primary themes, namely: 1) Effective Planning and Management of Public
Infrastructure Projects; 2) Improving PIM/ PFM Practices: Tools for Improving PIM
Budget Credibility; 3) Role of Investment in Cost Benefit Analysis for Guiding Project
Selection; and, 4) Strengthening Project Implementation and Monitoring
Arrangements. The workshop briefing note and agenda are provided in Appendix A
and B.



12.     The Regional PIM Workshop assisted in articulating that the goals of
public investment management (PIM) are not dissimilar to the goals of a sound
public finance system – aggregate fiscal discipline, allocative efficiency and
technical efficiency. The aggregate envelope for public investment should be
consistent with long-term macro-economic stability. The selection and funding of
individual projects should be consistent with the government’s policy priorities for the
sector and subsector. Further, projects should be implemented in such a manner that
they deliver the expected outputs/outcomes in a cost efficient manner.

13.    Despite commonalities with public financial management, in general, there
are some unique challenges that MENA countries must address in the context of
capital projects. Foremost, the multi-year nature of capital projects means that budget

                                                                                      7
resources and cost need to be planned and managed over multiple years. Specialized
skills are often needed to evaluate projects on the one hand, and then to manage their
implementation on the other Funding is often subject to greater volatility because of
revenue swings. Finally, the institutional responsibilities can often be more
fragmented than with recurrent spending (multiple ministries, independent agencies,
and quasi-public sector operations all play a role).

14.     Establishing a sound PIM system will require attention to each of the
different aspects of the project cycle. First, without a credible strategic framework,
policy priorities may be vague and the basis needed to make allocation decisions will
be weak. Secondly, project planning, appraisal, and selection are fundamental to a
sound PIM system; their effectiveness will be determined not only by the quality of
analytical tools but also by the institutional framework and incentives. Third,
implementation and monitoring arrangements play a large role in assuring technical
efficiency and that immediate outputs are achieved. Finally ex-post evaluation is an
often neglected but essential element to enabling the system to improve over time and
to create incentives for performance in the other project phases.



15.    The primary purposes for undertaking the Regional PIM workshop were
two-fold: 1) To identify some of the key issues and challenges being faced by MENA
in the management of public investment programs; and, 2) To identify good practice
examples (and persistent challenges) faced by MENA countries.



16.       The role and nature of strategic planning also differs substantially between
the invited MENA countries. Though strategic planning documents have proliferated
in MENA, few of these are linked to resource envelopes that provide a credible guide
to what is achievable. Policy goals are generally set out in such broad terms that there
is little evidence that policy trade-offs have been adequately addressed or the financial
implications considered. Like the broader national strategies, the sectoral strategic
planning processes in the participating MENA countries result in wish lists of policy
options rather than a well-defined set of priorities that reflect the interdependencies
between different policy areas and among individual projects within the same policy
area. Effective prioritization is sometimes undermined by ‘path dependency’, with
projects being based upon out-of-date plans and assumptions.



17.     Medium term budget planning is practiced in some of the participating
MENA countries, although the quality of that process appears to vary
significantly. Where the planning process is less directly linked to budget
implications (Oman, Kuwait), any notional medium term budget frameworks are at
best a modest bridge between the longer term strategy documents and the annual

                                                                                       8
budget funding levels. Multi-year rolling sectoral plans provide more details about the
intended interventions however, the actual sequencing and prioritization of projects
still does not occur until the annual budget process gets underway.



47.     The quality of project appraisal practices was difficult to assess accurately
during this regional PIM workshop. Very few MENA country participants engage
in systematic project appraisal and prioritization practices. For most of the invited
MENA participants, the results of any appraisal process do not necessarily determine
the decision about which projects will go forward and their individual country systems
appear to allow wide political discretion in selection of individual projects. Though
cost-benefit analysis is a component of project appraisal in some MENA countries, the
quality of the analysis is not independently reviewed and the resulting analysis is not a
significant factor in the project selection. While various projects could generate
positive economic benefits, it is rare to assess their relative value-for-money.
Moreover, many MENA country participant project appraisal processes appear to give
much less attention to business case justification, project management arrangements,
risk mitigation, and procurement strategies.



48.    Off-budget agencies and private financing possibilities in MENA permit
projects to circumvent the level of economic scrutiny required for budget
financed activities. Most MENA governments have used or explored off-budget
(debt/equity) financing and Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) as ways to expand
resources for infrastructure, but these carry important risks. Whilst a primary
motivation for the use of such measures is to avoid the budgetary processes for some
off-budget debt and PPP schemes, the expenditure may not need to appear in the
government fiscal accounts as part of the deficit calculations. Therefore, private
financing may appear to bring more resources into a government’s investment program
without showing a fiscal impact on the government’s account.

49.     Similar concerns about economic soundness can be raised about PPPs,
where projects are targeted for PPPs, not because of increased efficiency or
effectiveness that might be gained, but rather on the basis of bringing in
additional resources. Projects are sometimes targeted for PPPs without an adequate
economic justification for the project relative to other options. It is important to
understand that there is no such thing as a PPP in itself. Such projects should be
scrutinized with the same rigor as all other projects. PPP is one of a number of
procurement options and any PPP scheme should be the subject of specialist scrutiny
because of the often high risks associated with such schemes. Institutional
responsibility for PPPs may have been assigned in many of the participating MENA
countries, but the analytical expertise is still being developed.




                                                                                       9
50.    Project appraisal can include checks and balances to assure that sound
principles are being applied. A standard central Gateway process used in the UK
(which applies to all types of major investment projects) includes the following:

      Gateway 0:   Strategic Assessment;
      Gateway 1:   Business Justification;
      Gateway 2:   Delivery Strategy;
      Gateway 3:   Investment Decision;
      Gateway 4:   Readiness for Service;
      Gateway 5:   Operations Review and Benefits Realization

51.      These Gateways are designed as stages which have to be formally
approved before moving to the next stage. Typically the process entails a panel of
experts, otherwise unconnected with the project, working with the body responsible for
the investment to verify each stage approval. The significance of the Gateway process
is that it provides a means to balance the tension between project expediency and the
need to manage risks on an ongoing basis. The participating MENA countries agreed
that these steps should be introduced, but apparently none of the participating MENA
countries have a strong process in place for assuring investment quality.



52.    Although country procurement guidelines are followed, there was little
evidence in the discussions that participating countries were employing modern
procurement techniques for sharing greater risks between contractor and
purchaser. Countries contract out for design work, and then as tender documents are
prepared and land acquired, a separate contract is tendered for the construction. There
appear to be very few contracts using a ‘design and build’ model. Most contracts
include guarantees and penalties to ensure quality and on-time delivery. In some
cases, exchange rate fluctuation and inflation of key inputs appear to have led to
dispute arbitration between the agency and the contractor over who should bear the
consequences of the price changes.

53.     Accounting systems for the participating MENA countries do not appear
sufficiently aligned to provide information about the entire investment process,
but instead are focused on control for budget purposes. In general, accounting
appears to be against individual contracts concerned with a particular element of a
project (such as project design) and there does not appear to be an overall accounting
for the whole cost of the project including land acquisition, supervision, design and
other fees, and construction. Administrative costs of supervision also do not appear to
be included in many of the participating countries. Although the initial feasibility
study and cost-benefit analysis may include all of these, there are generally no systems
for capturing them through the country specific accounting systems. Consequently,


                                                                                     10
reporting on the degree of cost overruns may not fully capture the magnitude of
variance, especially relative to the cost in the feasibility study.

54.     In many of the participating countries, project monitoring is generally
limited to monthly reports on financial performance an physical progress against
specified contract. In many cases, a third party engineering supervisor provides
reports to a project committee that is responsible for notifying senior officials of any
major changes proposed to the project design or cost.

55.    Internal and external auditors appear to provide only basic financial
oversight over the implementing agencies and individual projects. Their role is
primarily to give an opinion on the effectiveness of the implementing agency’s internal
controls and compliance.

56.     Ex-post review of projects from a perspective of effectiveness and
efficiency are generally not done within the participating countries. In none of the
participating countries is there any attempt to review whether the project benefits were
achieved. As noted above, project performance is typically denoted only in terms of
technical standards of construction.

                      IV. LESSONS LEARNED AND NEXT STEPS

57.    The impact and relevance of the workshop will be measured over a longer
period in terms of the development and implementation of more effective country
public investment management plans. Immediate responses from participants
suggested that the knowledge gained from the workshop may influence some of their
thinking with respect to how PIM standards can be used in formulating their existing
plans. Challenges and lessons learned, include:

      Building sector capacity is an issue in all countries, and it is likely to continue
       to be a challenge. While contracting out to the private sector has become
       common, experiences in UK/EU/Chile demonstrated to officials that the public
       sector must retain a core capacity for it to manage effectively the private sector
       contractors for whom it works. In smaller MENA countries the capacity
       challenges are perhaps even more acute.

      Public investment management processes and practices are shaped in part by
       the broader governance and public sector management culture. There are
       differences among many of the workshop attendant countries. However, the
       cross cultivation of experiences can be useful for all countries despite
       differences in administrative and political traditional.

58.    In summary, some of the key features to consider from more advance
public investment management systems that were discussed during the workshop
include:


                                                                                       11
   Sector strategies that are closely linked to and consistent with budgetary
    commitments.

   Significant investment in cost-benefit analysis methodologies, supplemented by
    business case analysis and aggressive risk management strategies.

   Procedures to evaluate projects against value-for-money criteria both ex-ante
    and ex-post.

   Systematic procedures to involve external experts in the review of sector
    strategies and project business cases.

   Multi-year budget commitments to facilitate efficient management of project
    planning.

   Formal and informal checks and balances to assure that procedures are being
    complied with in terms of project appraisal and project management.

   Public procurement strategies designed to manage risks between the
    government and the contractor.

   Investment in staff training and the employment of specialist experts (where
    applicable).

   Effective audit and reporting processes that facilitate transparency and
    encourage feedback to improve the quality of the decision making and
    management process.




                                                                               12
             APPENDIX A: Workshop Background Information Note

            Regional Public Investment Management (PIM) Workshop

                 Concepts, Country Case Studies and Best Practice

                                   May 24 – 27, 2015

                                   Kempinski Hotel
                                   Amman, Jordan

    A. Background

        1.     The experience of many countries within the region is that public
    investment decisions are often seen to be wastefully managed, subject to
    misappropriation and a constant source of dismay and disappointment to
    citizens. For countries earning significant revenues from natural resource exports,
    but with weak institutional capacity to invest in assets for development, the risk of
    a resource jinx looms large in the minds of policy makers and development
    partners. Under these conditions, investing in the effort to establish effective
    systems for managing public investments is likely to yield substantial returns.

        2.      The lack of good Public Investment Management (PIM) in some
    countries leads to myriad forms of resource waste. There is a wide range of bad
    practices that are economically and socially costly – from governments whose
    project/budget delays keep them from spending their investment budgets during the
    fiscal year, to practices that divert public resources. Cost and time overruns on
    public projects are wide spread and highlight management challenges that are
    salient feature for developing countries but are also prevalent in developed
    countries.

        3.      Because many projects involve multiyear processes and significant
    planning, coordination, financing, procurement, and contract implementation
    challenges, it is not unusual for costs and completion dates to overrun even
    well planned estimates. Budget allocations may be diverted by new priorities, and
    contractors may run into unexpected technical challenges. If such overruns are
    significant, they may jeopardize the cost benefit calculus that justified the project.
    But good management can limit such overruns.

        4.    The World Bank is presenting a workshop on May 24-28, 2015 to
    review the basic concepts, and best practices for effective public investment
    management.

    B. Range of themes to be covered in the Workshop

The workshop will focus on a number of themes including, but not limited to:

   Building a System for Public Investment Management: This theme explores
    why PIM matters; the current evolution of ideas and challenges in public


                                                                                       13
    investment management; and, the drivers of inefficient public investment
    management.

   Unified Framework for PIM: A unified framework for PIM provides a simple
    unifying framework by defining the eight critical or must have features of the
    public investment cycle. It covers the typical investment project managed by the
    public sector and the project implemented through a partnership by the private
    sector in the form of PPP.

   Country Experiences of Public Investment Management: The workshop will
    also enable country presenters to provide regional country public investment
    management practices.

   Approaches to Better Project Appraisal: This theme will discuss appraisal as a
    key and critical step in the project cycle. Effective appraisal can support
    appropriate choices of outputs and designs; reduce the risk of excessive
    construction and operations costs; and thereby prevent failure to complete or
    efficiently operate projects.

   Public Investment Under-uncertainty: This theme addresses the particular
    upstream challenges of public investment projects associated with the economic,
    climatic or other elements.

   Public Investment Management for PPPs: explores the key challenges of
    managing infrastructure projects undertaken through PPPs.

    C. Organization of the Workshop

        5.     The workshop will include expert presentations, country
    presentations and group discussions. Country teams are asked to prepare prior to
    the workshop, a presentation(s) on issues that affect their public investment
    management performance. Country presentations will be followed by expert
    commentary from panelists on relevant experiences and lessons learnt elsewhere in
    the world and suggestions for moving forwards.

    D. Targeted Participants

        6.    The workshop is intended for mid-to-senior level officials from
    Ministry of Finance, Budget Departments, Ministry of Planning, and, officials of
    independent public audit offices. Five to six participants will be invited to attend.

All nominations and enquires should be sent to the Primary Workshop
Coordinators

Tetyana Komashko TKomashko@worldbank.org
Michael Schaeffer MSchaeffer@worldbank.org
Wesal Ashur Washur@worldbank.org


                                                                                      14
                  World Bank Governance Practice Unit
                     Public Investment Management
          Registration Form to be submitted for each participant

Mr. Miss Mrs. (Circle One)
First name:
Middle name:
Last Name:
Title:
Agency:

Postal Address:

Country:

Office Telephone Number:
Mobile Number :
Fax Number:

E-mail Address:

                                                                        (Please Tick)
Experience with PIM reforms?                          Yes         No
In what capacity?

Do you require a visa for Jordan?
If so, is there a Jordan Embassy in your country?                 Yes            No
Arrival Date/Time:
Departure Date/Time:
CONFERENCE VENUE: Kempinski Hotel Amman, Jordan


                  Please fax or email this form by May 15, 2015




                                                                            15
                                 APPENDIX B: Workshop Agenda
                                Public Investment Management (PIM)
                                        and Project Appraisal
                          Concepts, Country-Case Studies, and Best Practice

                                             Kempinski Hotel
                                             Amman, Jordan

                                              May 24-27, 2015
                                                PROGRAM
Day 1 Sunday
        Time                                        Session                                      Resource person
Sunday
May 24, 2015
9:00 – 9:10 am     Welcome Address and Introduction of Participants                            Hisham Waly -
                                                                                               Practice Manager
                                                                                               (WB)

9:10 – 9:30 am     Opening Remarks                                                             Jordan Govt Official
                                                                                               (TBD)

9:30 – 10:00 am    Building a System for Public Investment Management                          Michael Schaeffer
                   This session discusses why PIM matters? Provides insights into the          (WB)
                   evolution of ideas; challenges of today; and, drivers of inefficient
                   public investment management.

10:00 – 10:30 am   COFFEE BREAK

10:30 – 11:30 am   Session 2: Unified Framework for Public Investment                          Emmanuel Cuvillier
                   Management: Defines “Must-Have Features for an Efficient PIM                (WB)
                   System, Diagnostic Evaluations for Public Investment Efficiency and
                   Effectiveness.

11:30 - 12:45 pm   Session 3: Capital Budget Planning: Provides guidance with                  Michael Schaeffer
                   respect to capital budgeting and its relation to the operating budget;      (WB) /
                   capital budget cycle; problems in capital budgeting (ex. bundling of
                   project design and project construction decisions, unrealistic budget       Edgardo Mimica
                   estimates: fragmented budget process; inconsistent budget decisions;        (WB-Consultant)
                   etc. and major components of a model capital budget). This session
                   will also discuss strategic planning, links to strategies and priorities,
                   KPIs)

                   Question and Answer (Q&A)
12:45 – 2:00 pm    LUNCH
2:00 – 3:00 pm     Session 4: The Project Cycle: From the Idea to the Delivery of              Dr. Jenkins
                   the Project How do you bring the project life cycle into life with          (WB-Consultant)
                   respect to procedures, documents, legal framework, integrated bank

                                                                                                    16
                   of projects (IBP)? What kind of organizational structure do you need?
                   Training?

3.00 – 3.30 pm     COFFEE BREAK

3:30 – 5:00 pm     Session 5: Brief Country Presentations (20 Minutes)                       Libya / Jordan
                                                                                             Ministry of Finance /
                   The Practice of Development Investment Spending                           Iraq Ministry of
                                                                                             Planning / Egypt
7:00 – 9:00 pm     Meet and Greet Evening
Day 2 Monday
May 25, 2015
9:00 – 10:30 am    Session 6: Approaches to Better Project Appraisal: This session           Dr. Jenkins
                   discusses the importance of project appraisal, methodological aspects     (WB-Consultant)
                   of project appraisal, institutional arrangements for project appraisal,
                   challenges in project appraisal (i.e., discounted cash flow
                   methodology and selecting the discount rate; cost benefit analysis
                   (CBA), selecting a discount rate; budget decisions based on pre-
                   determined ceilings, etc.).

10.30 – 11:00 am   COFFEE BREAK

11:00 – 12:00 am   Session 7: The Need for Uniform Investment Project’s                      Fernando Britos
                   Guidelines: Guidelines provide a uniform path for investment              (WB-Consultant)
                   decisions in term of optimal delivery of public goods and services.
                   It is crucial to use standardized tools to conduct project appraisals.
                   This module will discuss the nature of those standardized tools.

12:00 – 1:00 pm    LUNCH

2:00 - 3:15 PM     Session 8: Oman and KRG: The Process of Long Term                         Oman Ministry of
                   Development Planning                                                      Planning (TBD)
                                                                                             Kurdistan Ministry of
                   Q&A                                                                       Planning (TBD)

3:15 – 3:30 pm     COFFEE BREAK

3:30 - 5:30 pm     Session 9 : Case Study of an Integrated Project Appraisal                 Dr. Jenkins
                                                                                             (WB-Consultant)
Day 3
May 26, 2015
Tuesday
9:00 – 10.15 am    Session 10a: Public Private Partnerships: This session will               Aijaz Ahmad World
                   discuss:                                                                  Bank (WB / PPP)
                       1. The Link between PPP pipeline generation and PIM
                       2. The upstream multi-criteria evaluation of projects to judge
                            suitability of projects as potential PPPs

10.15 – 10:30 am   COFFEE BREAK


                                                                                                   17
10:30 – 11:30 pm     Session 10b: Continued Public Private Partnerships                       Aijaz Ahmad World
                         3. How the PIM and PPP could be linked in terms of the PPP           Bank (WB / PPP)
                             Law
                         4. To show that once PPPs are handed over to the PPP Unit,
                             there are several ‘loop-backs’ into the PIM/budgeting process
                             along a typical PPP PLC


11:30 -12:30 PM      Session 11: MENA Country Example (Kuwait / Kingdom of                    Government Officials
                     Saudi Arabia): Investment Planning and Prioritization Under              Kuwait/Saudi Arabia
                     Conditions of Uncertainty                                                TBD


12-30 - 1:30 pm      LUNCH

  1:30 – 2:30 pm     Session 12: Budget Financing Strategies and Capital                     Dr. Jenkins
                     Financing Instruments: The session will look at the                     (WB-Consultant)
                     overall financing of the budget (both recurrent and capital
                     and will provide advice as to financing strategies; should
                     the government borrow for capital expenditure or pay as
                     you go?; what are the borrowing / fiscal rules (such as
                     UK’s Gold Rule, Sweden’s 2% surplus, etc.; and financing
                     implications of public private partnerships.

  2:30 – 3: 45 PM    Session 13: Q&A and Group Exercise on Project                           Dr. Jenkins
                     Analysis and Prioritization: Break out session(s)                       (WB-Consultant)
                     And Discussions

  3:45 – 4:00         Coffee Break

  3:30 – 5:00 pm     Session 14: Capital Project Execution: Discusses scope
                     of project, project cost escalation, project schedule, project          Edgardo Mimica
                     timing and project risk. Stakeholder analysis are key in                (WB-Consultant)
                     providing fluid project execution.

                     Q&A

  Day 4
  May 27, 2015
  Wednesday
  9:00 – 10.00 am    Session 15: Public Investment Under Uncertainty:                        Ahmed Kouchouk
                     Understanding the phenomenon of risk and uncertainty;                   (WB)
                     moral hazard risk and, public investment management
                     under uncertainty.

  10.00 – 10:15 am   COFFEE BREAK

  10:15 – 11:15 pm   Session 16: Procurement & Contracts under PPP: This              Nazaneen Ismail Ali
                     session includes the role of Procurement and contracts in        Senior Procurement
                     variety of PPP types, including Management Contracts,            Specialist (WB)
                     Lease, Concessions, BOT, etc.

                                                                                                   18
                   Q&A Session

11:15 – 12:30 pm   Session 17: Public Procurement cycle and contract            Nazaneen Ismail Ali
                   management: In this session the basics of Public             Senior Procurement
                   Procurement, including principals, requirements,             Specialist (WB)
                   challenges, and expectations from planning to
                   implementation and Contract management will be
                   discussed.

                   Q&A Session

12-30 - 1:30 pm    LUNCH

1:30 – 2:30 PM     Session 18: Project Monitoring and Evaluation: In this       Wesal Ashur
                   session the basics of M&E, key concepts, and aims and        Public Sector Specialist
                   objectives of M&E in the project cycle. Discussion will      (Dr. Jenkins / Edgardo
                   include what is the nature of a project monitoring system,   Mimica)
                   M&E reporting (Monthly, Quarterly, or annual); and           (WB)
                   provide some insight into impact evaluation (i.e., how to
                   differentiate M&E from Audit or Inspection).

                   Q&A

      2:30 PM      Concluding Remarks                                           Jordan Govt.
                                                                                Official (TBD)




                                                                                                 19
                                    APPENDIX C: List of Participants
            Name                          Ministry                     Email
1   Libya   Sana Said Issa El-Lishani     Director - Public Project    sanalishani@hotmail.com
                                          Authority

2   Libya   Mohamed S. Abudena            Ministry of Housing          mohd_libya@yahoo.com


3   Libya   Abdulatif AlTounsi            Ministry of Planning         tonsizaw@hotmail.com


4   Libya   Abdalla A. Estuti             Ministry of Planning         abdalla.estuti@gmail.com


5   Libya   Hmidan N. Ejernazi            Audit Bureau                 International Cooperation Office
                                                                       email: libyansai1@gmail.com

6   Libya   Asma Ben Shatewi              Ministry of Planning         asma886mah@yahoo.com


7   Libya   Hasan Sofia                   Ministry of Planning




                                                                                                          20
             Name                         Ministry               Email
8    Libya   Khairi Abdelhamid            Ministry of Planning


9    Libya   Ahmed Ashubi                 Ministry of Planning   mbc1985ce@gmail.com


10   Libya   Essam Eblaao                 Ministry of Planning


11   Libya   Abdelgader Saad Abdelgader   Ministry of Housing    werfa_gader@yahoo.co.uk
             Werfalli

12   Oman    Hamida Al-Hashmi             Director - Finance     hamida.hah@hotmail.com
                                                                 hhalhashmi@mof.gov.om

13   Oman    Mohamed Al- Barashdi         Ministry of Finance    albrashdi2020@hotmail.com
                                                                 mabrashdi@mof.gov.om

14   Oman    Talal Al-Saadi               SCP                    kalal@scp.gov.om
                                                                 tdas15@gmail.com

15   Oman    Salim Al-Battashi            SCP                    sbattashi@scp.gov.om




                                                                                             21
                    Name                       Ministry                     Email
16   Oman           Khalid Alghailani          SCP                          Kghailani@scp.gov.om


17   Saudi Arabia   Nassir Mohammad Al-Qasbi   Saudi Fund For Development   nkasabi@sfd.gov.sa


18   Egypt          Sobhy Iman                                              iman.rames@yahoo.com


19   Egypt          Mohamed El-Sheshetawi      Ministry of Finance          dhamdy@mof.gov.eg
                                                                            mod_aly2010@yahoo.com

20   Egypt          Ahmed Mahmoud Abdel        Ministry of Finance          AhmedAbdelrazek25@yahoo.com
                    Razek

21   Egypt          Amal Zakaria               Ministry of Planning         Mooli14@hotmail.com


22   Egypt          Mostafa Ghaly              Ministry of Planning         mmghaly@mop.gov.eg


23   Egypt          Mohamed Hammam             Ministry of International    mehammam@gmail.com
                                               Cooperation




                                                                                                          22
                    Name                     Ministry               Email
24   Iraq/KRG       Ardawan Hameed Ahmed     Ministry of Planning   zheenalmukhtar215@gmail.com
                                                                    ardawan.hamed@mop.krg.org

25   Iraq/KRG       Bashdar Rasool Ibrahim   Ministry of Planning   bashdar.rasool@yahoo.com
                                                                    zheenalmukhtar215@gmail.com

26   Iraq/KRG       Omeed Obaid Rashad       Ministry of Planning   omeed.jabbari@mop.krg.org
                                                                    zheenalmukhtar215@gmail.com

27   Iraq/KRG       Zagros Fattah Mohammed   Ministry of Planning   zagros.fatah@krg.org
                                                                    zheenalmukhtar215@gmail.com

28   Iraq/KRG       Karzan O. Majeed         Ministry of Planning   Karzan373@yahoo.com


29   Iraq/Baghdad   MAHDI HASAN ALI          Ministry of Planning   mahdi.h_pl@yahoo.com
                                                                    CC: mmassayed@yahoo.com

30   Iraq/Baghdad   ALAULDEEN                Ministry of Planning   alauldeen_pl@yahoo.com
                    MOHAMMAD ALI

31   Iraq/Baghdad   BASHAR HATEM THABIT      Ministry of Planning   basharthabit@gmail.com
                                                                    CC: mmassayed@yahoo.com




                                                                                                  23
                    Name                     Ministry                         Email
32   Iraq/Baghdad   Muhammed Muhsin Sayed    Ministry of Planning             mmassayed@yahoo.com


33   Iraq/Baghdad   FALAH MAHMOOD            Ministry of Planning             falah_mahmood@yahoo.com
                    SHEHAB                                                    CC: mmassayed@yahoo.com

34   Kuwait         Fahid Ibrahem Alderbas   Ministry of Finance              q888@hotmail.com
                                                                              iabdulkarim@mof.gov.kw

35   Kuwait         Mr. Meshal Mandeel Al    Ministry of Finance              mashal1422@hotmail.com
                    Qhass

36   Kuwait         Mr. Saleh A. Al Sarawi   Ministry of Finance              Ssarawi@mof.gov.kw
                                                                              CC:"Ishaq Abdulkarim"
                                                                              iabdulkarim@mof.gov.kw
73   Jordan         Wael Anwar Ababneh       Ministry of Energy and Mineral   consultant@memr.gov.jo
                                             Resources

73   Jordan         Nancy Fahed RIMAWI       Ministry of Energy and Mineral   drenewable@memr.gov.jo
                                             Resources

73   Jordan         Ziad Jebril SABRA        Ministry of Energy and Mineral   drenewable@memr.gov.jo
                                             Resources




                                                                                                        24
              Name                      Ministry                    Email
04   Jordan   Mohammad Ibrahim Al       Ministry of Water           mohammad_aldwairi@mwi.gov.jo
              Dwairi

01   Jordan   Ayman Tawfig Haddadin     Ministry of Water           ayman_haddadin@mwi.gov.jo


02   Jordan   Riyad Amin Okour          MOH                         akourr53@yahoo.com


07   Jordan   Lamia Saleh Al-Zou’bi     Ministry of Planning &      lamia.z@mop.gov.jo
                                        International Cooperation

00   Jordan   Mohammed Al-Assaf         Ministry of Planning &      Mohammad.Al-Assaf@mop.gov.jo
                                        International Cooperation

04   Jordan   Hassan Nizar AlRafie      Ministry of Finance         hasan.r@mof.gov.jo


04   Jordan   Osama Abdullah Sulieman   Ministry of Finance         osama.s@mof.gov.jo


03   Jordan   Raghad Fayez Shkhanbeh    Ministry of Planning &      raghad.sh@mop.gov.jo
                                        International Cooperation




                                                                                                   25
              Name                        Ministry                    Email
03   Jordan   Mohammad Mohi Al-Deen       General Budget Department   mohammad.alawneh@GBD.GOV.JO
              Alawneh

03   Jordan   Mohammed Khair Qourashi     General Budget Department   Mohammad.Alqurashi@GBD.GOV.JO


44   Jordan   Mohammad Yousef AL-         General Budget Department   Mohammad.Oqaily@GBD.GOV.JO
              Oqaily

41   Jordan   Tayseer Sameih Al.-Khaldi   General Budget Department   Tayseer.Khalide@GBD.GOV.JO


42   Jordan   Sireen Yashruti Hikmat      Ministry of Finance         sireen.hikmat@mof.gov.jo


47   Jordan   Bashar Mohammad Al-         USAID JORDAN FISCAL         basharkj@gmail.com
              Btoosh                      REFORM

40   Jordan   Fadia Salim Hamdan          Ministry of Transport       fhamdan@mot.gov.jo


44   Jordan   Essam Mohammad Shaheen      Ministry of Transport       eshaheen@mot.gov.jo




                                                                                                    26
              Name                        Ministry                      Email
44   Jordan   Mohammad Suleiman Alsanie Ministry of Finance             mohammad.alsanie@gmail.com


43   Jordan   Salam Ababneh               Ministry of Water             salam_ababneh@mwi.gov.jo


43   Jordan   Mr. Matheiu Goodstein       EU Attache                    Mathieu.Goodstein@eeas.europa.eu


43   Jordan   Mrs Tarja El Idrissi        EU /Head of Trade, Economic   Laudi.HANANIA@eeas.europa.eu
                                          Affairs and Private Sector    Anastasios.FRANGOS@eeas.europa.eu
                                          Development




                                                                                                           27
