                                                                         100287
                                        1




                                   LIBYA

Managing Public Investment After the Revolution:
    Background, Activities, Results and Proposals

                                 June 30, 2014



                            MNSED, World Bank


                     For official World Bank use only




This report has been prepared by a World Bank team of consultants composed of
Salvatore Schiavo-Campo, Wesal Ashur, Michael Schaeffer and Daniel Tommasi.
Ashur and Schaeffer were primarily responsible for the diagnostic of the public
investment management system, Tommasi for the assessment of project procedures
and action plan, and Schiavo-Campo for the legacy projects and the overall report.
                                             2




                                         Contents


                                                                            Page



A. Background

      1. The general context                                                3
      2. PIM assessments prior to FY2014                                    5

B. Technical assistance activities in PIM during FY2014

      1. The drill-down diagnostic                                          7
      2. The legacy projects/contracts                                      9
      3. Public investment procedures and processes                        14

C. Proposed program for FY2015-17

      1. The priority areas                                                19
      2. Proposed action plan                                              21
      3. Financing the PIM TA program                                      23


ANNEXES

      1.   April 2012 outline of TA possibilities                          24
      2.   Proposal for SPF grant in FY2014                                33
      3.   The detailed PIM diagnostic                                     35
      4.   Proposed approach for handling the legacy projects/contracts   48
      5.   PIM procedures and processes: Issues and recommendations       56
                                                 3



                                              Libya

      Programming and Managing Public Investment After the Revolution:
         Background, Activities, Results and Proposals for FY2015-17


1.       This report is intended to provide in one single document the background, principal
recent and current World Bank activities and the proposed program of technical assistance to
the Government in the area of public investment programming and management in post-
revolution Libya. Aside from the convenience – both for the Bank and other international
partners -- of a synthesis of all major assessments and advice provided by the Bank in this central
area of public sector management, this report shows the substantial continuity of diagnosis and
assistance from the immediate aftermath of the Revolution through mid-2014. The first section
recounts the early activities and, against that background, the second section summarizes the
activities conducted and initial results achieved during FY2014. The concluding section lists the
preliminary agreements with the Government on how to build on those initial results with
complementary activities and deepening of a number of initiatives, specifically during FY2015
and with general indications for the subsequent years. The text of the report is limited to a
summary of key issues and recommendations, with full details provided in the several annexes.



                                       A.      Background


2.     The general context

3.      Libya has never in its history possessed the basic requirements of good governance and
efficient management of the public sector. Following a colonial period that left behind none of
the institutions needed for government responsiveness and effectiveness, the country became
independent 62 years ago under a semi-feudal monarchy. The monarchy was replaced 45 years
ago by an authoritarian and repressive regime dependent on personal whim and characterized by
organizational upheaval as tactic of control, waste on a gigantic scale and bizarre ruling practices
– with tribal “playoff/payoff” as the only coherent governing theme. Consequently, the
reciprocal trust that holds a national society together and enables the cooperation essential for a
functioning governance and public management apparatus has never developed in Libya. The
vacuum was filled by a complex configuration of extended family, tribal, regional and localized
loyalties.
                                                 4


4.       Removal of the dictator and dismantling of his regime through the Revolution of 2011
could not in and of itself lead to good governance. There is little experience in Libya of peaceful
dispute resolution and compromise, and no culture of efficiency or habits of accountability. As
one official stated to the Bank team: “It used to be that one man spoke and everyone had to
listen; now everyone speaks and no one listens”.

5.      The political uncertainty and security difficulties in Libya are a grave problem, outside
the control of the Bank, but constructive assistance is possible. First, these difficulties are not
necessarily a major constraint to providing advice and support to develop the basic capacity to
perform the core functions of government, with some accountability, transparency, and
minimally adequate functioning of the rule of law. Moreover, systemic improvements that are
initiated in the immediate future are likely to come on stream at a time when political stability is
hopefully restored -- thus preventing a dangerous hiatus at that time, which might in itself cause
a resurgence of conflict and instability. Finally, such improvements can themselves potentially
help produce stability, especially by strengthening intra-government coordination and enabling
the provision of “quick wins” in social services and the resumption of public investment on a
new and efficient basis.

2.     Public investment management assessments prior to FY2014

3.      Immediately after the fall of the Qaddafi regime, the World Bank compiled a macro-
oriented brief on public expenditure, which emphasized among other things the need to assess
public investment management processes. 1 Shortly thereafter, the World Bank assessed the
public financial management (PFM) system, in cooperation with the IMF. Two joint Bank-Fund
missions took place in January and March 2012, to take stock of the strengths and weaknesses of
the PFM systems, mechanisms and procedures, and recommend accordingly. 2

4.      A first broad diagnosis of the state of the public investment management (PIM) system
was conducted by the World Bank in April 2012 shortly after the joint PFM missions with the
IMF. The Bank mission concluded that the PIM system was in a state of severe disrepair, and
identified a number of broad technical assistance possibilities to strengthen the programming and
management of public investment -- commensurate with the administrative capacity realities of
Libya and the lessons of experience in the sequencing of reforms. 3 These recommendations
were consistent with the joint Bank-IMF PFM assessment, especially concerning the need of

1
  Public Expenditure Policies, prepared by Ibrahim Al-Ghelaiqah and Jorge Thompson Araujo, Oct 2011.
2
  See Libya: Public Financial Management Reform Priorities in the New Environment, World Bank and
International Monetary Fund. Washington, DC. March 2012.
3
  See Jack Diamond, Sequencing Public Financial Management Reforms. IMF. 2013.
                                                 5


cooperation between the ministries of finance and planning and the priority of an inventory and
review of uncompleted investment projects. The Interim Government requested World Bank
technical assistance and the Bank agreed to do so, while emphasizing that several of the requisite
tasks could be equally well performed by other external partners, directly or in cooperation with
the Bank.

5.     The April 2012 mission recommendations are shown in Annex 1. In brief summary, the
main findings were as follows:

      The organizational arrangements for public investment are confused, opaque and
       inefficient.

      Under the previous regime, organizational changes affecting the public finance and
       planning functions, as well as the main line ministries, were frequent, arbitrary, and
       typically motivated by considerations of political and personal control.

      There are no consistent and uniform guidelines of project preparation and appraisal in
       Libya.

      There are procedures and rules for project execution and management in Libya, but they
       are not uniform nor are they consistently applied.

      There is no programming of public investment at all nor, consequently, minimally
       adequate integration in the budget process.

6.      Accordingly, the broad recommendations were that:

      Short-term technical assistance is critical to a rationalization and major simplification of
       the organizational arrangements for public investment, grounded on good international
       practice but systematically adapted to the realities and circumstances of the country.

      Two major opportunities exist for technical assistance to improve public investment
       project preparation and selection: (i) assistance to help formulate sector strategies or
       improve those sector strategies which have been formulated (strategies with should guide
       project selection); and (ii) assistance to prepare uniform guidelines and rules for the
       preparation and appraisal of public investment projects.
                                                6


    Inadequate project management can be remedied through a rationalization and
     modernization of existing procedures for project execution and management, provided
     that adequate enforcement is assured at the same time.

    On public investment programming, the essential first step is to assemble a
     comprehensive investment project database.

    At a later stage, advice can be provided on how to introduce a rolling medium-term PIP
     process (simple and rudimentary at first), and for a better integration of capital with
     recurrent expenditure budgeting.

7.       Owing to the subsequent political instability in Libya, these recommendations (as well as
opportunities for technical assistance and capacity development in other fields) could not be
followed through by the Government. Based on the broad program sketched out in April 2012,
the dialogue on public investment management was resumed in September 2013, giving rise to
the first active phase of Bank technical assistance on PIM. This assistance was delivered within
FY2014 with financing by an SPF Transitional Grant (see Annex 2 for details), and had three
major components:

    Diagnose the PIM system – expanding on the initial broad assessment of April 2012 by
     using the World Bank “drill-down” indicator set

    Review the inventory of “legacy projects” launched before the Revolution and not
     completed as of end-2013.

    Develop guidelines on the standards, methods and procedures involved in preparing and
     appraising investment projects, for public investment programming, and for better
     budgetary integration of capital with current expenditures.

8.     The next section of this report describes the activities conducted in FY2014 under these
three components and their preliminary results, in addition to certain other related activities
requested by the Government (e.g., Bank comments on draft terms-of-reference for the review
and updating of major investment projects). The final section C. outlines the initial agreement
with the Government of Libya on the advisory activities to be conducted by the World Bank in
FY2015 and indications for the subsequent two years.
                                                    7




                  B.     Technical Assistance Activities in PIM During FY 2014


    9.    Three Bank missions took place in 2014, respectively in January, March and early June.
    In addition, the two resident experts (Michael Schaeffer and Wesal Ashur) gave continuous
    support and advice to the Government, among other things in the areas covered by the PIM
    technical assistance program. 4

1.        The Drill-Down Diagnostic of Public Investment Management in Libya

10.     The diagnosis of the public investment management system against the World Bank drill-
down indicator set was conducted during December 2013-March 2014, following the framework
developed by the World Bank 5 and based on a review of relevant documents, semi-structured
interviews of government officials and written responses by the MoP to a questionnaire.

11.     The assessment is negative, with ratings ranging from D, indicating non-existent
element of the PIM system, to a highest of C-, which still indicates severely substandard
performance. This is not surprising, in light of the decades of haphazard economic management
and failure to build adequate institutions. Table 1 below provides a summary of the ratings in the
core PIM categories. Annex 3 presents the full diagnostic, which compares the desirable features
of a well-functioning PIM system with the current status of the PIM in Libya, including the table
that rates 28 separate indicators.




4
  A third resident expert, Ahmed Sawalem, was recruited in April 2014, primarily to support the Bank
assistance to the Prime Minister’s office but also with responsibilities in the areas of planning and PIM.
5
  Rajaram, A., T. Minh Le, J. Brumby and N. Biletska (2010), “A Diagnostic Framework for Assessing
Public Investment Management”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5397, Washington
D.C.
                                               8




                                         Table 1.
            Libya: Summary of Ratings of Public Investment Management Stages




                          Stage                                  Rating

1. Guidance and preliminary screening                              C-

2. Formal project appraisal                                       D+

3. Independent review of appraisal                                D+

4. Project selection and budgeting                                 C-

5. Project implementation                                          C-


6. Adjustment for changes in project circumstances                 C-


7. Facility operation                                              C-

8. Ex post evaluation                                              D
                                                   9

2.      The legacy projects/contracts

12.     Under the previous regime, hundreds of investment projects were launched
before February 15, 2011. The Bank mission of April 2012 emphasized the importance
of reviewing the overhang of these pre-revolution “legacy” projects. At the request of
the Government of Libya, the World Bank has provided advice on all aspects of the
scope, conduct, criteria and timing of the review, beginning with formulation of a
proposal for the approach, parameters, modalities and timing of the exercise. This
proposal was submitted for the consideration of the Libyan government in December
2013 and endorsed in its general lines subsequently.

13.     The legacy projects had been designed and launched under completely different
economic and political circumstances. Further, the initial cost estimates have been
largely superseded by events, and works and assets are likely to have suffered
deterioration. The presumption should therefore be that these projects should be
discontinued unless expressly demonstrated to the contrary. 6

14.     Budgetary resources should therefore be concentrated on selected projects with
the highest potential for early, successful, and impactful completion. Moreover, the very
low post-revolution investment execution rate of only about 30% demonstrates the
limits to actual investment spending in 2014 and the medium term. Substantial waste
and inefficiency would result from distributing limited execution capacity across a large
number of projects, some in difficult areas. The consequence would be not only that
low priority projects would receive some funding but, more damaging, that potentially
valuable projects would not achieve their objectives owing to inadequate execution and
dispersal of policy attention.

15.      The burden of proof in the review of projects should rest on whether to complete
a particular project rather than on whether to exclude it from public funding. This
“zero-based” review is a one-time exercise, and would be carried out concurrently with
the initial phase of a longer-term process to build the procedures, systems and
institutions for programming, evaluation, funding and monitoring of investments.

Scope of the review

16.    The first stage of the review focuses on legacy projects in physical infrastructure
– and primarily transport and telecom, water supply and sanitation, urban development

6
  For different reasons, a similar approach was adopted in Guinea in 2011, to deal with the
corrupt and opaque contracting that had taken place in the extractive resource sector during the
interregnum between the earlier military regime and the two years of state capture by a small
military clique before the restoration of democracy.
                                               10

and housing – which together account for the bulk of the amount contracted. (At a later
stage, the review could include the remaining legacy public investment projects,
following similar procedures with appropriate modifications based on the experience
with the first stage.)
Potential impact of the review

17.       When completed, the review is expected to produce the following major results:

         mitigate the risk of wasting resources on inappropriate or obsolete projects and
          the risk of corruption;

         produce a positive impact on government credibility, predictability and
          accountability, through its transparent and credible handling of the overhang of
          legacy projects;

         quantify the aggregate financial implications for the remainder of 2014 and for
          the budgets of 2016 and 2016;

         establish the basis for an efficient and sustainable resumption of public
          investment expenditure, in part through the creation of a comprehensive
          investment project database to be regularly updated and maintained; and

         open up opportunities for constructive and mutually beneficial interaction with
          subnational government entities and non-government groups, through
          cooperative and win-win arrangements for investment project execution.

18.     The experience gained through the review would also be useful to the staff of the
Ministry of Planning (MoP), the Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the other concerned
ministries as a workbench for the formulation and implementation of new norms and
procedures for project appraisal and management, for investment planning and
execution, and for modalities for improved inter-ministerial cooperation within the
Government of Libya.

The size of the problem

19.     About 16,000 contracts signed by the Government before the Revolution were
still open as of end-2013, as re-estimated by the National Audit Bureau. The total face
value of these “legacy contracts” is about LYD154 billion (almost $100 billion
equivalent), with fewer than 300 contracts accounting for three-quarters of the total
value, and the overwhelming majority – 11,775, about 73% -- averaging less than
LYD500,000. (See Table 2 for details.) At 1,379, international contracts accounted for
8.6% of number of contracts but 73% of total value. The average value of international
contracts, at LYD80 million, was 27 times higher than the LYD2.9 million average
value of local contracts. Clearly, the approach to international contract must be different
from that applied to local contracts.

20.    A large proportion of contracts, 45%, were on a sole source basis. It is not
possible to cross-reference the information to estimate the incidence of sole-source
contracting in contracts of different amounts. Given the large percentage of sole-source
                                               11

contracts, they must necessarily have been concentrated among the small contracts of a
value lower than LYD500,000, but, reportedly, many very large contracts were sole-
sourced as well.

21.     Finally, the average age of the legacy contracts may be estimated at between 5-7
years. Without a detailed analysis, a precise estimate of the average age and age
distribution of these legacy contracts is not possible. It is known, however, that the most
recent of these contracts were signed in late 2010; the majority were contracted during
2007-2009; and a substantial number are 10 years old or more.


                                         Table 2.
                 Libya: Legacy Contracts Based on Contracts and Value
                                (as of January 15, 2014)

                                    Number of Percent Total face value            Average value
                                     Contracts        (LYD million)               (LYD million)
 Contracts above LYD50 m.               1,871            146,200                      78.1
 Contracts between LYD 0.5-50m.         2,380               4,200                       1.8
 Contracts under LYD 0.5 m.            11,775               3,257                       0.3
 Totals                                16,026            153,657                       80.2
Source: Ministry of Planning, National Audit Bureau.


20.     More than two thirds of contracts of a value greater than LYD50 million) are estimated
to be for housing, electricity and renewable energy, and utilities, with the Ministry of Housing
accounting for the largest single share more than one third. (See Table 3.)


                                           Table 3.
                         Sectoral distribution of “megacontracts”
                 (Contracts of a value larger than LYD50 million; estimated)

                   Sectors                                          Percent
 Housing                                                              35
 Electricity and Renewable Energy                                     22
 Utilities                                                            14
 Railways                                                              9
 Higher Education                                                      7
 Airports                                                              5
 Sports and Youth                                                      2
 Roads and Bridges                                                     1
 Others                                                                3
Source: Ministry of Planning


21.    The situation is currently being aggravated even further as certain line ministries have
been signing new contracts – in the absence of any decisions on what to do about the old
contracts, nor based on any consistent plan or policy, and without clearance or approval by the
Ministries of Planning or of Finance. At present, there is no functioning system to prevent the
                                               12

signing of such contracts without higher clearance. Putting in place such a system would be
important and very urgent.
22.    It is financially impossible to complete all of the legacy projects. As re-estimated by
the National Audit Bureau, doing so would entail a total expenditure of almost US$200 billion
equivalent) if one includes an estimate of the additional costs from the intervening price
increases and those required to remedy the deterioration in the works constructed due to
neglect, damage and destruction during the past three years. This sum compares with a 2014
government budget of about $30 billion equivalent, of which only about $8 billion for
development spending). Even assuming that, on average, the legacy expenditure could be
spread over a period of four years, it would amount to more than six times the intended
development spending and absorb more than the entire government budget.

23.     It is also economically undesirable to attempt to do so, and only a few selected
priority projects should be restarted and completed. The projects under which the legacy
contracts were signed had been launched by the previous regime under completely different
economic and political circumstances. Many of the largest ones had been selected to meet
specific personal, patronage or internal security objectives of the old regime; only a few
projects had been designed and appraised in a manner to meet the minimum requirements of
good practice; several are no longer considered valid, owing to the major changes in priorities
in the different regions; and in any event the very limited implementation capacity and the
security difficulties in certain areas mean that an attempt to restart a large number of projects
would likely result only in inefficient execution of most of them.

24.     The two major issues are therefore: (i) which few key priority projects should be
restarted for early completion; and (ii) what to do about the outstanding contractual claims
and other charges related to the vast majority of projects that will be delayed or scrapped
altogether.

Selection of priority projects

25.     Concerning the selection of priority projects, a proposal submitted by the World Bank
before the January mission was found broadly acceptable by the Government. The full
proposal is at Annex 4. While not necessarily following all details, the validity of the criteria
proposed and of the basic elements of the proposal was reconfirmed in June, and mainly, to
reiterate:

    demanding proof of why certain projects/contracts should be completed, and not proof
     of why they should be shelved;

    focusing expenditure on a few projects of major economic and social priority, and in a
     favorable execution environment;

    placing projects/contracts in priority groups rather than attempting to rank them
     individually; and
                                                       13

     not starting new projects or signing large contracts until the review of the major legacy
      contracts is completed (with very few individual exceptions to be individually
      approved by the Ministry of Planning and/or the Ministry of Finance). 7

25.     It is important to stress the urgency of this review and avoid analysis paralysis, as the
objective is not only to halt the hemorrhage of public money on wasteful or useless activities
but also to provide the space and conditions for restarting public investment on a new and
more efficient basis. 8

Dealing with the “contractual overhang”

26.    Concerning the second issue, substantial charges continue to be incurred by the
Government, in connection with the issue of letters of credit and various guarantees on pre-
2011 contracts (about LYD90 million annually in LC fees alone). Various considerations have
been advanced by the Government as pertinent to this issue:

     a revolution resulting in total regime change ranks at the top of recognized legal
      grounds to recur to the force majeure clause included or inherent in any contractual
      agreement;

     there have been major material changes in circumstances (such as intervening input
      price changes and probable deterioration of works);

     some contracts concluded before February 2011 were not signed by proper authority;

     some contracts were vitiated by corrupt or illegal practices of different sorts;

     the extreme administrative instability under the old regime, with ministries created and
      dissolved only to be created again, generated confusion and grave dilution of
      accountability, affecting among other things the contracting process; and,

     the continuing charges under old contracts rarely correspond to the provision of
      services of current worth to the government or the economy.

26.     The financial bleeding be stopped as soon as possible, but the complex and delicate
financial issues and legal obligations must be addressed carefully, with specialized technical
advice, and preferably in amicable cooperation with the parties concerned. 9 A review in
detail of each of the almost 15,000 contracts would be very costly and extremely time-
consuming, and would thus allow the hemorrhage to continue. The Bank therefore


7
  Beyond the availability of funding, the operationalization of this general approach must rest on a variety of
political, regional, social, security factors – which the Ministry of Planning is best equipped to consider.
8
  A high-level Committee chaired by the Minister of Housing and including the Ministers of Planning, Finance,
Transportation, and Health was established by a decree of 30 December 2013, to review the entire situation in
consultation with the sectors concerned, propose a separate budget for the priority projects, and coordinate with
the appropriate authorities to make the necessary arrangements for financial settlements to ensure that no claims
will raised against the state. The Committee was instructed to report to the Cabinet by January 31, 2014. The
Committee never met.
9
  The Bank may consider providing technical advice on the process and criteria, of the Government should
request, but cannot be involved in individual decisions or contractual matters.
                                               14

recommended, and the Government accepted, a more expedient and efficient approach, along
the following lines:

      Contracts related to the priority projects to be continued or restarted would be
       reviewed by an independent firm and revalidated, canceled or renegotiated as
       warranted by the results of the review. Pending the conclusions of these reviews, an
       interim and time-bound understanding with the contractors concerned would be
       reached -- thus permitting the works under the project to be restarted as a matter of
       urgency and to be completed as soon as technically and financially possible.

      The execution of contracts under all other projects would be placed in suspense, 10
       along with all related fees, charges and claims, pending satisfactory documentation of
       their validity and regularity, to be presented by the contractor(s) concerned within a
       specified period of time. It should be stressed that this would not constitute
       cancellation of the contracts, but merely placing their execution in temporary
       abeyance pending a review of the documentation and information to be provided by
       the contractors. If such documentation is provided, a final mutually agreed settlement
       would be reached. Absent such documentation, at the end of the period the contract
       would be canceled and all guarantees, liabilities and claims under the contract would
       be null and void. The process should be contracted out to recognized international
       firm(s), with general oversight by the National Audit Bureau.

3.      Public investment procedures and processes

Public investment: A post-conflict perspective

27.      Investment priorities must be determined somewhat differently in the immediate
aftermath of conflict, as in Libya, than in a stable situation where most projects should be
appraised and selected based on their consistency with sector strategy and economic
criteria. Investment decisions in Libya, as in any post-conflict situation, ought to also be
consistent with the need to support or at least not undermine the emerging political settlement.
Investment is the category of expenditure where both the risks and the opportunities for
supporting a durable political settlement are especially high. 11 Moreover, the profile of public




investment will depend, among other things, on the evolution of the political process, and the
types of projects that are launched will change as political and security consolidation

10
   The Government may consider to exempt contracts to small and medium Libyan firms, for example
by continuing payments under contracts of a face value lower than LYD one million.
11
   On this and related issues, see Rebuilding Core Government Functions in the Immediate
Aftermath of Conflict: Key Issues and Priorities, United Nations and World Bank, forthcoming in
2014. (Final draft available on request from PRMPS.)
                                                15

proceeds. In Libya, this is especially relevant to the selection of the few large projects that are
to be restarted and completed out of the thousands of legacy projects.

28.      This reality does not at all imply a free-for-all abandonment of investment rules and
criteria, but does require making distinctions between projects that must be identified and
executed under special modalities suitable to their political/social objectives; other projects
tailored to humanitarian or damage-control goals; and the majority of projects that must meet
the standard rules of economic appraisal, readiness for implementation, monitoring, execution
and evaluation.

29.     However, is it essential to stress that legitimate political, emergency and security goals
in Libya can be achieved in an efficient manner. Just because the goals of a project may not
be strictly economic is not an excuse for failing to identify the activities, or project variants,
that meet those goals most effectively and are conducive to economic recovery and
development. At the same time, it is important to sound a strong warning about the risk of
“white elephant” projects -- very costly, ideological “prestige” projects with large future
expenditure requirements and few demonstrable economic benefits. There are several
examples of such projects in pre-revolution Libya. Because once such a project is
conceived the pressures from particularistic interests make it very difficult to stop it, it is
important to set up “early warning“ technical and political mechanisms, and these
mechanisms must be built into the project appraisal and selection procedures.

Moving to more efficient public investment: Project procedures and budgeting

30.     The political dimension notwithstanding, the lack of appropriate guidelines, project
appraisal and selection procedures, and lack of integration with the overall budget adversely
impact the efficiency of development expenditure in Libya. The absence of an overarching strategic
framework creates an environment where there is no systematic linkage of projects to national
visions. As such, projects are implemented without guidance of achieving clear national and sector
goals – regardless of whether these goals are strictly economic or also social and political.

31.    Most importantly, a formal process for project preparation should be introduced, including
screening of project proposals (normally originating from the line ministries and to be reviewed by
the Ministry of Planning), to ensure that the proposed projects are consistent with the strategic goals
of government, and meet the budget classification rules for inclusion as investment rather than
recurrent expenditure. Among other advantages, this first-level screening would ensure that
resources are not wasted in detailed appraisal of projects that do not merit inclusion in the budget.


32.   A key problem specific to Libya is that, when deciding on investment expenditures, the
Government currently deals with individual contracts, not with projects. A contract is an
agreement to provide inputs that contribute to create physical assets but does not usually


cover all inputs and activities required for producing an identifiable output. A project is a set
of interrelated activities -- usually covered by contracts -- which aims at producing an
identifiable output that will contribute to delivering a public service. These activities should
be considered together and be accepted or rejected as a set. Failing to do so is highly likely to
                                                 16

result in incomplete, partial or disconnected projects, and thus in wasting government moneys
without achieving the purpose of expenditure. (For instance, a housing project involves
building the structures, ensuring connections to water and sewage, providing for adequate
access, etc. These activities may be implemented through various contracts, but they are inter-
dependent and are all required to make the project actually provide usable housing.)
Therefore, Government decisions to halt, complete, or extend legacy contracts (as discussed
in the next section) must be placed within the analysis of the project to which they relate.

33.     All large projects should be selected on the basis of national priorities and objectives,
and should not be appraised in a vacuum. Because investment projects should aim at
implementing government policies, they must be consistent with the overall government goals
and sector programs. A program is a set of projects aimed at a common policy objective (e.g.,
a program covering several airports within the country). Ideally, a good public investment
programming process should ensure that policies drive programs, programs in turn drive
projects, and that the best projects to meet the objective have been selected. Only then should
the contracting process be designed and launched. The right sequencing of decisions and
design of linkages between the program-project preparation process and the execution of
projects are essential.

34.    It is important to place investment programming within a multi-year perspective.
While capital expenditures should always be authorized through the annual budget, most
investment projects are multiannual and have a forward fiscal impact. The sustainability of
the overall investment program should be assessed, by reviewing the annual forward costs of
investment projects. The aim is to develop a rolling public investment program, both to
provide the framework for prioritizing projects and to ensure the consistency of the program
with the macroeconomic prospects and constraints.

35.    The above aim and many other difficult, capacity-intensive and long-gestation
measures are needed to achieve a well-functioning investment programming system in Libya.
Two initial measures can be taken in the immediate future, however:

      Move away from a "contract mentality" to a "program and project" mentality, by
       regrouping past contracts into sets of contracts coherent with the underlying projects
       to which they relate (and cancel contracts or add new ones as needed. The MoP has
       already begun a process of contracts review in this direction.

      Begin improving the budgeting of investment expenditure, by: (i) requesting a
       statement of how the project fits the sector objectives; (ii) ensuring that all new project
       proposals from line ministries include an estimate of total cost and the annual
       expenditures, and budget the annual slice of the total cost. 12


The project cycle


12
  This requirement is already included in the new MoP circular on development expenditure
proposals, but has not been generally complied with. Its enforcement, with strong support from the
Cabinet, is essential in order to begin moving toward an orderly and efficient investment programming
and management system in Libya.
                                               17

36.     The project cycle includes several steps, from project identification to project
implementation, including among others the preparation of feasibility studies and decisions to
launch the project. At key steps of the project cycle, a project should be screened, notably to
assess whether it fits the national and sector strategies, whether it is the most cost-effective
option to meet its objectives and whether its future costs are sustainable. Line ministries
should be responsible for preparing projects, but the feasibility studies of large projects should
be submitted to an independent review and a pre-approval procedure conducted by the
ministry of Planning (MoP).

Recommendations

37.    The main recommendations are elaborated in detail in Annex 5 and summarized
below:

    To support the project preparation process and decision making standard project
     profile forms should be completed for each project (or group of “small” projects).
     Such project profile forms should provide key data on the project, including among
     others project objectives, project costs and project implementation arrangements.
     These data should be registered in a project data base.

    Decisions to fund projects and to launch new projects should be taken within the
     budget preparation cycle. To ensure effective prioritization of projects, the
     development budget preparation process should be streamlined in the following
     directions.

    Effective feedback from budget execution to budget preparation is required to take
     into account the lessons from actual project implementation when preparing the next
     budget.

    Strategic statements should be prepared and project narratives should explain how the
     project fit the sector strategy.

    Projects should comply with the medium-term macro-economic prospects. When
     preparing the budget, one should assess whether the forward costs of completing the
     projects are sustainable. (At a later stage, the future recurrent costs should also be
     considered).

    To encourage prioritization within line ministries, budget preparation should be
     framed by expenditure ceilings given to ministries. These ceilings should be prepared
     in conformity with financial constraints and with government policy objectives.

    Recurrent and investment budget preparation should be better coordinated. All
     chapters of the budget should be reviewed together during preparation to ensure that
     the economic composition of the budget within each sector is coherent. Initial step
     could consist of (i) issuing a common budget circular for both the recurrent and the
     development budgets; and (ii) reviewing line ministries’ budget requests for the
                                                18

         recurrent and the development budget together during the joint MoF-MoP-line
         ministries budgetary conferences.

38.     Also priority is to establish a robust project execution monitoring system, to manage
the execution of the investment budget and provide the next budget with feedback from
project execution. Progress in preparing an investment budget would be difficult without
reliable information on implementation. Setting up such a monitoring system will require a
study to identify actions and procedures to ensure the reliability and timeliness of the reported
data.

39.      The project monitoring system should produce:

       Monthly reports on payments.

       Biannual reports on legal commitments (i.e., new contracts), including multi-year
        commitments, which should be available three weeks after the end of each reporting
        period.

       Biannual reporting of the physical implementation of large projects.


40.      Finally, two other issues are important:

       Training is needed in most PIM areas. In every sectors priority should be given to
        sector planning, socio-economic analysis of projects, and basic PFM procedures. Such
        training should involve staff of the planning department of the line ministries and staff
        of the Ministry of Planning. A training plan should be prepared.

       Finally, responsibilities in PIM in Libya are both fragmented and duplicated.
        Streamlined organizational arrangements should be defined and implemented. In
        general, the objective is to place the investment coordination function under the MoP,
        as single entity, while project preparation, appraisal and implementation should be
        entirely under the responsibility of the line ministries concerned.
                                              19


                       C.     Proposed program for FY2015-17


41.      Public investment management, as a central component of public sector management,
is part and parcel of the broad governance agenda – and guided by the four governance pillars
of accountability, transparency, rule compliance and participation. The Bank should continue
to provide advice to the Government, through the Ministry of Planning, in all major aspects of
public investment programming and management, to move toward a sound, accountable and
sustainable set of procedures and systems, fully integrated into the overall budget process.

42.     A workshop on PIM and related issues was held in Tunis in June 2014 between the
Bank team and a Libyan delegation headed by Dr Al-Tounsi, Deputy Minister of Planning,
and including the Director of Treasury, the Vice-Chair of the Audit Bureau, and several high
technical officials of the audit bureau, ministries of planning and finance, and ministry of
housing. The objectives were to (i) assess the status of current Bank support initiatives in the
PIM area and on that basis to (ii) define priorities and opportunities for Bank technical advice
to the Government in FY2015 and beyond.

1.      The priority areas

43.    The Libyan delegation requested Bank technical advice/support in the following areas
of public investment programming and management, most of which are continuation or
deepening of activities carried out in FY2014:

      Continued Bank support for the handling of the legacy projects/contracts. The central
       concern of the authorities remains the handling of the legacy contracts, now re-
       estimated by the Audit Bureau to number even more than the 15,000 initially
       estimated, and for a higher total amount of almost $100 billion. The Libyan
       delegation again endorsed the approach proposed earlier by the Bank for
       reconstructing from these contracts the corresponding projects; selecting the few
       projects to be restarted and completed; disposing of the remainder; and handling the
       associated liabilities – without, of course, the Bank taking any direct role in the
       selection of individual priority projects or the disposition of specific contractual
       liabilities.

      Continued Bank advice on the draft TORs and procedures for review of the largest
       contracts, along the lines of the review of the contracts for the airports program, on
       which the Bank team commented in March 2014 – again, without taking any role in
       the selection of consultants or the performance of the reviews.
                                          20


 Draft a manual for the preparation, appraisal, implementation, financial and physical
  reporting, monitoring and evaluation of investment projects, consistent with good
  international practice but adapted to the special circumstances of Libya. The Bank
  team has already developed in April/May the action plan for this task, which was
  presented at the June workshop in Tunis. This task would include preparation of a
  plan for the rollout of the implementation of this manual, to begin in late FY2015 and
  be completed thereafter.

 Hold a workshop on basic PIM concepts and on preparation of the investment budget,
  with participation by the relevant officials of all line ministries and timed to help in
  the response to the development budget circular. The law calls for the circular to be
  issued in June, but in the recent past it has had to be reissued at a later time owing to
  lack of response. The workshop could therefore be timed to coincide with the reissue
  of the circular, and held in the context of a PIM mission to Tripoli in late September --
  circumstances permitting.

 Advice on how to minimize waste and misallocation of the large investment budget
  devolved to municipalities -- in the broader context of fiscal decentralization. This is a
  new and major challenge, especially in light of the disastrous experience with a similar
  large financial devolution in 2007-08. If the request is accepted, it will require
  mobilizing a combination of PIM and local government expertise.

 Advice on improving the planning law. This is also a new request, which the Bank is
  well placed to meet directly, at fairly low cost.

 Prepare an action plan for implementing the above. This action plan is proposed in
  the next and concluding section of the report. The plan is subdivided between short-
  term actions to be implemented in the remainder of 2014 and in 2015 and other actions
  which require more time for effective implementation and would be initiated during
  FY2015 for completion by or about mid-2017.)
                                                   21

2.      Proposed action plan for strengthening PIM

44.     Short-term actions (to be implemented by June 2015)

                          ACTIVITIES                                RESPONSIBILITY

 Guidelines on public investment project programming
 Prepare guidelines on investment project preparation, to         MoP
 cover among others the following elements:
    - Definition of projects, programs
    - Guidance for brief strategic statements
    - Basic requirements for appraising projects, examples
         of these requirements for some sectors
    - Definition of procedure for pre-approving projects
    - Standard project profile
    - More detailed requirements for Chapter 3 budget
         requests, which should include, among other
         requirements, annual forward costs projections

 Other
 Define in a legal text a new budget preparation calendar         MoF-MoP
 Issue a common budget circular for both recurrent and            MoF-MoP
 development expenditure
 Prepare an action plan for a reliable and timely financial and   MoP
 physical monitoring
 Prepare an action plan for targeted training                     MoP

45.     Other actions

                        ACTIVITIES                         RESPONSIBILITY     PERIOD

 Project preparation and screening
 For investment programming, budgeting and                 MoP, line          2014-
 monitoring, deal with projects and their components       ministries         2015
 instead of dealing with individual contracts
 Prepare for each sector brief strategic statements        Line ministries    2014-
                                                           plan established   2017
                                                           by MoP
 Define and improve progressively sector by sector         Line ministries    2015-
 requirements for appraising projects                      and MoP in         2017
                                                           coordination
 Set up project pre-approval procedure for large           Legal text to be   2015
 projects                                                  drafted by the
                                                           MoP.
 Define standard project profile                           MoP                2014-
                                                                              2015
 Set up a central project data base                        MoP                2015-
                                                                              2016
 Roll over line ministries the project data base           Line ministries-   From
                                                           MoP                2018
                                                   22



Investment project selection and budgeting
Define legally a new budget preparation calendar         MoP and MoF   2015
Issue a common budget circular for both recurrent        MoF-MoP       2015
and development expenditure
Define improved requirements for chapter 3 budget        MoP           2015
requests, which should include, among other
requirements, annual forward costs projections
Prepare and notify development expenditure ceilings      MoP           2015
for each ministry
Conduct for each ministry joint recurrent and            MoF-MoP       2015
development budgets budgetary conference
Include in the budget documents an investment annex      MoP           2015
that will show for each project (or group of “small”
projects) the total costs and the annual forward costs

Investment projects monitoring
Prepare an action plan for a reliable and timely         MoP             2014-
financial and physical monitoring                                        2015
Implement the monitoring action plan                     MoP-line        2015-
                                                         ministries      2016
Training
Prepare an action plan for training                      MoP             2015
Implement the training action plan                       MoP             From
                                                                         2016
Guidelines on investment programming
Prepare guidelines on public investment programming      MoP             2014-
(see above)                                                              2015
                                              23

3.     Financing the PIM technical assistance program

46.     In conclusion, the proposed activities relate to a coherent program, separately from the
question of the sources of financing. Indeed, it is hoped that other development partners will
be interested in either contributing to the financing required for this program and/or
participating directly in cooperative manner with the World Bank. These possibilities are not
defined here and are to be addressed in other ways and venues by Bank management and the
Government of Libya. In light of Libya’s income level, however, it is generally expected that
beyond FY2015 World Bank advisory services will be rendered on a reimbursable basis.
                                               24


                                           Annex 1

             April 2012 Outline of PIM Technical Assistance Possibilities


1.      The findings and recommendations below are consistent with the joint IMF-
World Bank assessment of public financial management in Libya during the January
2012 mission—and particularly the recommendations on cooperation between the
ministries of finance and planning, the inventory and review of uncompleted investment
projects, and the strengthening of a public investment management capacity. While the
World Bank can consider providing such technical assistance (if the Government so
requests), certain of the tasks listed below could be equally well performed by other
external partners. This note is intended to provide a sufficient basis for the elaboration of
detailed terms-of-reference for each of these tasks.

A.    The institutional and organizational framework for public investment in
Libya

2.      The present organizational arrangements are confused, opaque and inefficient.
In every country, certain key planning functions (listed in Annex A) must be exercised at
the center of government, to provide guidance, oversight and assistance to the ministries
responsible for originating and executing public investment projects, and to assure that
public investment as a whole is consistent with development strategy; integrated with the
budget process; and fully financed at the appropriate terms. Such functions can be
exercised through a variety of arrangements, because the important issue is one of
coordination of processes and inter-entity cooperation rather than the choice of a specific
organizational architecture. But whatever the organizational choice, the arrangements
must assure both a clear division of labor among the government entities concerned and
provisions for coordination and cooperation among them. In Libya, the post-
Revolutionary government has decided to exercise these functions through a ministry of
planning. Having done so, it is necessary to ask whether the current organizational
arrangements provide the clarity, accountability and transparency necessary for the
efficient exercise of the planning functions. The answer is no.

3.      Under the previous regime, organizational changes were frequent, arbitrary,
and typically motivated by considerations of political and personal control. In
particular, the Ministry of Planning (MoP) was merged in 2008 into the Ministry of
Finance (MoF) but, violating the principle of clear accountability, the responsibility for
preparing and appraising investment projects was subsequently assigned to a separate
Public Projects Authority (PPA), along with the staff formerly assigned to the MoP.
After the Revolution, the government decision to reestablish the Ministry of Planning
logically implies that the diverse organizations involved in planning and public
investment under the previous regime should be either abolished or again subsumed
under the new MoP, in a manner and timetable to be decided. Instead, the PPA has
                                                25

remained separate from the MoP and temporarily been placed under the Ministry of
Housing and Infrastructure (MoHI), which is also entrusted with the responsibility to
execute most large investment projects--creating multiple functional overlaps as well as a
weakness of capacity in the MoP. (Other organizations are also involved in one or
another aspect of public investment preparation and implementation.)

4.       Short-term technical assistance is critical to take stock of the current situation
and recommend concerning a full rationalization and major simplification of the
organizational arrangements for public investment. The aim of such rationalization is
to avoid both overlaps and gaps of responsibility, and permit the efficient reallocation of
existing staff and capacity. (It is not anticipated that such a review would lead to either
an increase or a reduction in employment, except for the possibility of targeted and time-
limited external expertise to assist in the transition to a more efficient organizational
structure.) Owing to the abundant international experience, such assistance can be
provided quickly and could only take a few weeks of time by an experienced
consultant. The task is both important and urgent, because clarity of responsibilities and
efficient organizational structures are a prerequisite for improving public investment
efficiency in the short term and a strengthening of capacity in the long term.

B.     Preparing public investment projects

5.      There are no consistent and uniform guidelines of project preparation and
appraisal in Libya. Although a sound public investment program (PIP) is more than an
assembly of good projects -- as discussed later -- good projects are the foundation of a
good public investment program. For a project to deserve inclusion into the PIP, and
thus to be financed through the budget, it (i) must be consistent with the relevant sector
strategy and (ii) should be prepared and appraised in accordance with established
methodologies to assure that it has a satisfactory rate of return in national economic
terms.

6.     Concerning the first point, the new government has communicated on March 29 its
Strategic Plan of Vision-Progress-Needs, which reiterates the Ten Transitional Priorities
set on 26 November 2011 and includes strategic goals for the main sectors. Several of
the sector strategies, however, need greater specificity in order to provide clear guidance
for investment decisions. Concerning the second point, cost-benefit analysis should be
carried out when both the benefits and the costs of the proposed project can be
quantified; in cases when some of the benefits cannot be quantified, cost-effectiveness
criteria should be applied; in all cases, it is necessary to ascertain that the particular
design variant chosen is the best of the available alternatives.13 In the past, some projects


13
  A 2010 evaluation by the World Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group has concluded that a major
reason for the diminished development impact of Bank-supported projects in recent years has been the
decrease in application of cost-benefit analysis and other appropriate methodologies
                                               26

were prepared and appraised carefully; others superficially; and many large projects were
launched without any meaningful preparation at all.

7.    Accordingly, there are two major opportunities for technical assistance to
improve the quality at entry of public investment projects:

      Assistance to help formulate sector strategies or improve those sector strategies
       which have been formulated. This assistance could take an initial three person-
       months, with much of the time invested in dialogue with the ministries and
       agencies directly concerned and with the ministries of planning, finance and
       economy.

      Assistance to prepare uniform guidelines and rules for the preparation and
       appraisal of public investment projects, based on accepted methodologies and
       international experience, and suitable to the circumstances and characteristics of
       Libya. The output of this technical assistance would be a comprehensive manual
       for project preparation and appraisal, the requirements of which would have to be
       met before any large project could be considered for inclusion in the PIP. In
       addition to the application of economic appraisal methodologies, the operational
       manual would specify the practical and capacity conditions to be fulfilled before
       an otherwise good project can be considered “mature” and fully ready for
       implementation, and thus qualify for inclusion in the annual budget. (This last
       component could be handled through a separate targeted TA, as noted later.) The
       task could take one person-year, including time for dissemination. The task will
       be facilitated by the existence of similar project manuals in other countries;
       however, much of the time must be invested in dialogue and discussion with the
       main concerned ministries in Libya, to assure that the practices to be
       recommended are suitable to their circumstances and requirements.

C.      Executing and managing public investment projects

8.      There exist procedures and rules for project execution and management in
Libya, but they are not uniform nor consistently applied. What is important for the
efficiency of public investment is not a high ex ante economic rate of return, but a high
ex post rate of return after the project is completed. The best-prepared project adds little
to the country’s development if it is badly executed. The two major failures of execution
of otherwise good investment projects emerge from (i) inadequate funding on a timely
basis and (ii) bad project management. The first failure can be addressed by good
budgeting processes, especially by adequate aggregate funding of the capital budget
complemented by a realistic cash plan, and requires the gradual improvement of
government budget preparation and execution in general.

9.    Inadequate project management can be remedied through a rationalization
and modernization of existing procedures for project execution and
                                               27

management. Unlike the case of project preparation, where no uniform procedures exist,
in the case of project execution the existing procedures do provide a platform for
improvement. Moreover, the MoHI is currently conducting its own review of project
management regulations and practices. The technical assistance would strengthen the
ongoing process of review by: taking stock of the existing procedures; assess their
effectiveness in light of capacity realities; identify inconsistencies and current relevance
for the different sectors; evaluate their consistency with procurement standards and
regulations; and recommend appropriate modernization. As in the case of project
preparation, the output of this technical assistance would be a project execution and
management manual, applicable to all major projects but with adaptation to the
requirements of each sector. This TA will also take about a year, and can be carried out
concurrently with that on project preparation. (It should be conducted separately,
however, among other things because the consultants' profiles are different.)

D.     Ex post evaluation

10.     At a later stage, after project preparation and execution procedures have been
prepared and implemented for a sufficient number of large projects, it will become
relevant and important to put in place a system and a methodology for the ex post
evaluation of the economic and social impact of projects and the achievement of their
original objectives. Evaluation is an instrument for continuous improvement, with the
lessons of actual experience used to progressively improve the quality at entry and the
execution of future projects. As an initial step, short technical assistance of about two
person-months should be provided to discuss and formulate the basic criteria of such an
evaluation system and methodology – both in general and as specifically applicable to the
different economic and social sectors.

E.     Strengthening the line ministries

11.      Pending the organizational rationalization to be achieved following the first TA
activity suggested under section A., the PPA will continue to be responsible for preparing
large projects and the MoH for executing them. This is understandable in the short term,
in light of the limited capacity of some of the line ministries. It is normal practice,
however, for the line ministries to be responsible for executing their own projects and, in
due course, the responsibility for executing and managing a specific project ought to rest
with the line ministry concerned. In Libya, this will take a long time, sustained efforts
and high-level policy support and attention. Starting sometime in 2013, a major TA
initiative covering at least the next three years should take place to help the PPA
(presumably moved back under the MoP) to devise and begin implementing a program to
strengthen the project preparation and appraisal capacity of the line ministries (in
conformity with the project preparation manual mentioned above, which will in the
meantime have been completed.) In conjunction and in parallel, the MoH should be
required to systematically involve the line ministry concerned in the execution of large
                                               28

projects, as a way to strengthen their role in execution and monitoring and to eventually
allow a shift of responsibility to the proper government entity.

12. The Government should evaluate the performance of the MoP and the MoH partly
on the basis of their effectiveness in strengthening the capacity of the line ministries, as
assessed through feedback from the line ministries themselves. A short and targeted TA
task of about one-person month can be envisaged to discuss and formulate ways in which
such feedback can be obtained, in reliable and timely fashion.

F.     Public investment programming

13.      The “first-generation” Public Investment Programs (PIPs) of the 1980s were devoid
of both rigor and ownership and were mainly a shopping list to attract aid and investment. By
contrast, technical assistance to Libya should be aimed at introducing a rigorous “second-
generation” PIP process, which can raise efficiency and promote growth and diversification
by bringing investment allocation in line with national policies and sector priorities, embody
externalities and regional considerations, and be tightly linked to the annual budget process.
If conducted with appropriate participation, the process of PIP preparation can also be important
for capacity development—not only in the narrow sense of skills training but also in the more
important sense of introducing throughout the government a cost-benefit attitude and a measure
of social accountability. These are complex tasks requiring a variety of difficult changes over a
sustained period of time, and substantial TA will be needed.

14.     The essential first step is technical assistance to help assemble a comprehensive
investment project database, building on the review of uncompleted investment projects
and formulating procedures and requirements for the regular updating and maintenance
of the database, using the simplest information technology suitable for this purpose.
(Excel spreadsheets could be sufficient during the initial phase.) The TA for setting up
the investment database will take a minimum of 18 person-months (including the initial
assistance for the review of the investment overhang itself), and should begin if possible
by mid-2012.

15.     Concurrently, a 12 person-month TA can help formulate an initial rudimentary
rolling medium-term PIP process, which could be put in place by mid-2013.

16.       Concerning the review of uncompleted investment projects, technical assistance
can help, but in the context of clear accountabilities within the government. Currently,
there is a diffusion of responsibility of the various committees involved with the choice
of which projects to complete as priority. The interministerial committee has the clear
authority to decide, but one single entity should be designated to conduct all the technical
work and advise the interministerial committee accordingly—and be accountable for its
work. This entity must have the authority, among other things, to enforce the
transmission of information from the line ministries and from the contractor companies.
                                                 29

(The separate review of the legality and legitimacy of the various and diverse pre-war
contracts can be conducted concurrently, and subject to very different criteria.)

17.      Also, as security and other circumstances permit, targeted TA would be needed
to help open channels of systematic public feedback on investment needs and project
implementation—in substantive and statistically reliable ways rather than in the rhetoric
of the previous regime.

18.    Thereafter, formulation of rigorous and substantive public investment
programming will take at least six person-years of technical assistance over the two-year
period 2014-15 and could begin to operate in time for the 2016 budget year. The TA
should aim to build processes and capacity to fulfill the following main requirements of a
rigorous and sustainable PIP:

      A “rolling” 3/4-year PIP, the first year of which corresponds in effect to the
       capital portion of the annual government budget.
      No project should be included in any year of the PIP unless its national economic
       profitability has been demonstrated through sound economic appraisal methods.
      No project should be included in the first year of the PIP unless its financing is
       certain.
      Strong protections against the birth of “white elephant” projects. Once an
       inefficient project of very large size is on the drawing board, the bureaucratic
       dynamics from both the government side and the contractors side make it very
       difficult to stop the project. For these types of projects, political gatekeeping
       through the direct involvement of the Council of Ministers must be built in before
       launching major feasibility studies.
      An agile procurement process is needed to enable managerial efficiency in project
       implementation while minimizing the opportunities for corruption.
      Financial and physical monitoring of project implementation (respectively, by the
       MoF and MoP) should be frequent and reliable.
      A realistic procedure and sufficient capacity for reliable estimation of the total
       cost of investment projects and their recurrent costs after completion is necessary
       to improve the integration of capital and current expenditure over time.

G.      Integrating the investment program with the annual budget process

19.      In general, a lasting improvement in the efficiency of public expenditure will
require an integration of investment and current expenditure, which will, in turn, depend
on (i) a concurrent improvement in the overall process of budget preparation and
execution, 14 and (ii) close cooperation between the ministries of planning and finance.


14
   Competence and responsibility for assisting the progressive improvement of budget preparation is
shared by the IMF and the World Bank. In budget execution, the IMF has primary responsibility for
assisting in treasury, debt and cash management (normally through its Middle East Technical
                                                 30

(The latter is expected to result, in part, from implementing the recommendations from
the technical assistance suggested in section A.) In Libya, improving PFM as a whole
entails many other challenges as well, including a strengthening of budgeting capacity
throughout the ministries and agencies of government. In the medium and long term,
PFM improvements will thus also require improvements in the human and organizational
dimensions of public management and particularly in personnel management and training
and in information systems. From this vast reform agenda, the following two useful
technical assistance opportunities may be singled out for the short term.

20.       In most countries, the capital budget includes an element of current expenditure.
In some cases, the reasons are legitimate—e.g., the labor costs of an investment project
should not be included into the current wage bill of a ministry—because such labor costs
are expected to cease when the project is completed and because several government
agencies may be involved in one large investment project. In other cases, however,
reclassification is done to hide or justify some current expenditure by shifting it into a
“development” category. Also, a hybrid investment budget creates opportunities for
ministries to include “projects” in the investment budget only in order to obtain additional
resources for current expenditure. In Libya, there is evidence that the current expenditure
component of Chapter III is greater than would be appropriate, albeit probably not as
large as in some other countries (e.g., one third of total “capital” expenditure in
Bangladesh). Understating current expenditure and overstating investment expenditure
distorts fiscal analysis and the measurement of investment efficiency.

21.    Technical assistance would be helpful to identify the current expenditures
inappropriately included in Chapter III and reclassify them in the other budget
chapters. The reclassification exercise would cause a transitional inconvenience, and
would be costly as well as controversial. Moreover, the procedures of preparation of the
current budget should be improved before attempting to move current expenditures from
the hybrid capital budget into the current budget. For these reasons, the reclassification
exercise in Libya should not begin until 2013. What is urgent is to enact measures to
prevent new migration of current expenditure and a further expansion of the current
expenditure component of Chapter III.

22.     It would also be important to assure that funds for a new investment project are
included in the capital budget only when the entire project is “mature”, i.e., fully ready
for launch--with all required approvals in place, financing assured, and implementation
modalities defined. The cost of delaying the launch of a good investment project is in
general lower than the cost of rushing its implementation. While this objective cannot be
achieved until project preparation has improved substantially and in a sustainable way,
the formulation of a “maturity rule” can take place within 2012, and targeted technical


Assistance Center – METAC), and the Bank in financial controls and audit, which is the subject of the
separate paper of the April mission.
                                               31

assistance could help. 15 (Such assistance should be coordinated with that for the project
preparation and appraisal manual.)




15
  Appropriate expertise could come from neighboring Tunisia, which has had such a rule for many
years (although not always applied).
                                                                  32

 SUMMARY OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR PLANNING, PUBLIC INVESTMENT AND COORDINATION

        AREA                   OBJECTIVE               MAIN DELIVERABLE                     TA INPUT                     TIMING
                                                                                         (Labor time only)

A. Organizational           Simplify/rationalize the      Recommendations for                 Four weeks               July-Sep. 2012
arrangements for            structure for coherence     consolidation of agencies
planning and investment        and accountability        and reallocation of staff

B. Project preparation      1.Strengthen the           Revised set of strategies for            12 weeks               July-Dec. 2012
and appraisal               strategies for the main    the main sectors, with
                            sectors                    greater specificity.

                            2. Improve quality at      Project Preparation and
                            entry of projects          Appraisal Manual                        12 months             Oct 2012-Dec 2013

C. Project execution and   Achieve the ex ante rate    Project Execution and                   12 months             Oct 2012-Dec 2013
management                 of return, by sound         Management Manual
                           project management,
                           timely funding, and close
                           supervision

D. Ex post evaluation      Learn from experience to    Outline of simple system               Two months                   2013
                           improve efficiency          and evaluation methods

E.Strengthening the line   Improve line ministry       Formulate capacity-building             18 months                 2013-2016
ministries                 capacity to prepare and     program and begin
                           execute projects            implementation.

                                                       Devise and pre-test a                  Four weeks                 Late 2012
                                                       mechanism for feedback by
                                                       ministries on the role of
                                                       PPA and MoH in helping
                                                       build capacity.

F. Public investment       Raise overall investment    1. Assemble and maintain                18 months            June 2012-Dec 2013
programming                efficiency, improve PFM     full project database,
                           and promote growth          building on review of
                                                       uncompleted pre-Feb 2011
                                                       projects
                                                                                                                         Early 2013
                                                       2. Establish mechanism of                8 weeks
                                                       systematic public feedback
                                                       on project needs and
                                                       execution
                                                                                        12 months initially         Late 2012-2013
                                                       3. “Rolling” 3-year public
                                                       investment programming           Much larger subsequent        2014-early 2016
                                                       process, integrated with the     involvement, amount to
                                                       budget and reflecting good       be determined but
                                                       practices.                       probably at least 6 years

G. Budgetary integration   Improve efficiency of       1. Reclassify current                  Four weeks                 Early 2013
                           public expenditure by       expenditures incorrectly
                           better integration of       included in investment
                           capital-current budgets     budget

                                                       2. Define rule and                     Four weeks            Late 2012-early 2013
                                                       procedures to assure project
                                                       readiness for
                                                       implementation

H. Coordination of         Prevent gaps and            Disseminate lessons of                  Six months           June 2012-Dec 2013
technical assistance       duplication of free-        experience; assist recruit and
                           standing TA, and            train key staff and define
                           minimize transaction        operational modalities of D-
                           costs in design and         TAC in MoP
                           delivery.
                                               33


                                          Annex 2

               Proposal for SPF Grant to Finance PIM Advisory Activities


1. This proposal for “SPF Transitional Grant Financing” seeks to develop a forum for
Government of Libya to examine that extent to which various PIM reforms could be
developed to achieve sound public investment system practices and the extent to which
these are reflected in improved service delivery. The Libya PIM approach will follow the
following core strategic phases:


          Review Existing Project Inventory: The Government of Libya (GOL) has an
           existing stockpile of investment projects. Under this phase, projects will be
           reviewed and mapped against basic project selection criteria. A basic assessment
           of project realism relative to resource availability would be used to prioritize the
           project investment backlog.


          Diagnosis of Public Investment Management System against the World Bank
           Drill-down Indicator Set: A primary diagnostic gap analysis of the actual system
           relative to a basic (functioning) system will be provided so as to identify structural
           aspects of the public investment decision and management process(es) that may be
           weak and in need of attention. A good diagnostic would allow reforms to focus on
           scarce managerial and technical resources where they may yield the greatest
           impact (Please see Attachment A).

          Development of “Public Investment Operational Guidelines”: The objective is
           to guide government officials and institutions on the basic standards, methods
           (tools of analysis) and procedures involved in programming and evaluating public
           investments. Specific objectives can be stated as follows: a) to serve as a
           common point of reference for the coordination of all public investments (using
           transparent procedures); b) To elaborate on the laid-out provisions for inclusion of
           public investment projects/programmes in the development budget at central (at
           subnational government) levels; c) To enhance the capacity of government
           officials in the knowledge application of proper technical methods (tools) of
           economic and financial analyses for public investments; and, d) to provide
           guidance on the links between public investment and the Public Private
           Partnerships. This theme will also develop a plan for operationalizing the public
           investment management operational procedures.

   A. Targeted participants


2. The targeted participants include mid-to-senior level officials from Ministry of
Planning, Ministry of Finance, Project Planning Authority and Line Ministries. First,
technical assistance platform serves as a guide to the public sector managers responsible for
making public sector investment decisions. This group includes not only project analysts and
decision makers within the ministries of planning and finance, but also those employed in the
                                                      34

line ministries, and government departments and agencies that are involved with the
formulation, evaluation and implementation of projects.


    B. Execution of Mission


3. The modality for providing the assistance and the proposed budget is shown below.


        Improving Public Investment Management in Libya: Activities and Budget



           Nature                            Description                      Estimated Budget
 Phase I
 Review Existing Project    Under this phase, projects will be reviewed
 Inventory                  and mapped against basic project selection
                            criteria.
 Diagnosis of Public        A primary diagnostic gap analysis of the
 Investment                 actual system relative to a basic (functioning)
 Management System          system will be provided so as to identify
 against the World Bank     structural aspects of the public investment
 Drill-down Indicator Set   decision and management process(es) that
                            may be weak and in need of attention.

 Development of Public      The objective is to guide government officials
 Investment Operational     and institutions on the basic standards,
 Guidelines                 methods (tools of analysis) and procedures
                            involved in programming and evaluating
                            public investments.
                                                                Subtotal          $310,952
 Phase II: Workshop             A. Basics of Project Management                    $40,000
 Training
                                B.   Fundamentals of Project Appraisal            $40,000
                                                                Subtotal          $80,000
                                                                35


                                                          Annex 3
                                                   The PIM Diagnostic



     1    Analysis of Core (Eight (8)) PIM Features in Libya: Overview
     Stage of Public              Indicators and Dimensions                                  Findings                     Rating
       Investment

1.   Strategic           Published development strategy or vision                No sectoral strategic-plans and no       C-
     Guidance and        statement which has unambiguous authority.               cost of sector strategies (if they
     Preliminary                                                                  exist).
     Screening           Centralized approval by planning or finance             General budget planning is of low
                         ministry (or delegated) for developing                   quality.
                         proposals/explicit ministry level justification         No costing of sector strategies.
                         with strategy.                                          MoP is only at the very initial stage
                                                                                  of development of a PIP.
                         Clarity of project objectives in terms of outputs
                         and outcomes.

                         Consideration of alternative approaches to
                         objectives.

2.   Formal Project      Publicized and transparent guidance, backed by      Project appraisal without an established      D+
     Appraisal           effective training and deployment of staff for      (or maintained) formal process.
                         project design and appraisal (including
                         stakeholder consultation in project design).        MoP has issued multiple guidelines for
                                                                             budget preparation and project selection.
                         Application of guidance in project appraisal.
                                                                             Absence of a dedicated set of uniform,
                                                                             centrally publicized, consistent, and
                                                                             transparent guidance for MDAs to carry
                                                                             out ex ante evaluation of financial,
                                                                             economic and social costs/benefits of
                                                                             proposed projects.

3.   Independent         Independent checks to ensure objectivity and        While appraisal completely delegated to       D+
     Review of           quality of appraisals.                              MDAs, the independent review function
     Appraisal                                                               remains missing, compromising the
                         Disciplined completion of project appraisals        integrity of the project appraisal and
                         prior to budget.                                    exposing appraisal process to the risk of
                                                                             optimism bias.
                         Identifying and maintaining an inventory of
                         appraised projects ranked by priority for
                         budgetary consideration.

                         Clarity of roles between projects which are
                         minor and may be dealt with at the
                         departmental level, and those requiring
                         additional appraisal.

4.   Project Budgeting   Transparent criteria for selecting projects with    Absence of a consistent approach to           C-
     and Selection       reference to policy objectives at ministerial       project selection and budgeting.
                         level.
                                                                             Project proposals often selected on an ad-
                         Well-structured budget preparation process          hoc basis with the budget directorate
                         with scope to integrate investment and              accepting projects which may not
                         recurrent implications of projects.                 necessarily be priority projects.

                         Effective gate-keeping to ensure that only          MoP concerns about the persistent
                         appraised and approved projects are selected        problem that MDAs do not adequately
                         for budget financing.                               budget for infrastructure investments
                                                                             while embarking on projects for which
                                                                36

     Stage of Public               Indicators and Dimensions                                  Findings                   Rating
       Investment

                          Ensuring adequate financing for selected           there is no provision in their budget.
                          projects, including recurrent needs on
                          completion.

5.   Project              Published      guidelines       for      project   Absence of central guidelines for project         C-
     Implementation       implementation; Cost-effective implementation      implementation and for cost control.
                          through procurement and contracting. Timely        MDAs often fail to prepare and submit to
                          implementation in line with guidelines. Timely     the MoP detailed implementation and
                          implementation reports on major projects.          procurement plans, simply because such
                          Effective budgeting for selected projects.         documents are not considered as
                                                                             mandatory for budget allocation. MDAs
                                                                             focus on annual cost control only. The
                                                                             Public Procurement Act establishes
                                                                             competitive tendering as the preferred
                                                                             procurement method but fails to curb the
                                                                             continued problems with project delays
                                                                             and cost overrun.

6.   Project              Active monitoring.                                     While a formal system for internal      C-
     Adjustment                                                                   and external oversight exists, the
                                                                                  timeliness and quality of internal
                                                                                  audit reports are uneven across
                                                                                  agencies.
                                                                                 The National Audit Bureau lacks
                                                                                  resources to conduct performance
                                                                                  audit, and project commencement
                                                                                  and mid-term construction audits are
                                                                                  not conducted.
                                                                                 MDAs not required updating project
                                                                                  documents during construction.
                                                                                  Project adjustment is left to the
                                                                                  discretion of MDAs within their
                                                                                  available budgeting.

7.   Facility Operation   Asset registry.                                    Financial regulations require MDAs to             C-
                                                                             have an inventory of public assets
                          Facility Operation.                                acquired and maintained. This legal
                                                                             provision is not being complied with
                                                                             systematically and consistently.

8.   Project              Formal institutional arrangements for ex post      Government financed capital spending is           D
     Evaluation           evaluation of projects/programs with feedback      not subject to formal ex-post evaluation.
                          into future project designs.




     2    PIM Performance Indicator Set with Links to PEFA

                           Area/ Indicator                       Relation to Public Expenditure
                                                                  and Financial Accountability
                                                                             (PEFA)
     PIM 1        Aggregate capital expenditure out-            PEFA PI-1 Indicator adapted to capital
                  turn compared to the original budget          spending
                                                 37


                   Area/ Indicator                Relation to Public Expenditure
                                                   and Financial Accountability
                                                              (PEFA)
PIM 2    Composition of capital expenditure      PEFA PI-2 Indicator adapted to capital
         out-turn compared to the original       spending
         budget
PIM 3    Aggregate revenue out-turn              PEFA PI-3 Indicator adapted to
         compared to the original budget         include donor budget support (if any)
PIM 4    Stock and monitoring of capital         PEFA PI-4 Indicator adapted to capital
         expenditure arrears                     spending
PIM 5    Classification of the budget            PEFA PI-5 adapted by addition of
                                                 project classification
PIM 6    Comprehensiveness of the                PEFA PI-6 changed to focus on capital
         information included in budget          spending
         documentation
PIM 7    Extent of unreported capital            PEFA PI-7 adapted to focus on capital
         spending                                spending
PIM 8    PIM related intergovernmental fiscal    PEFA PI-8 adapted to focus on capital
         relations                               spending
PIM 9    Management of fiscal risks from         Adaptation of PEFA PI-9
         capital spending (outside) central
         government
PIM 10   Public access to key information on     PEFA PI-10 adapted to focus on capital
         capital spending                        spending
PIM 11   Investment guidance, project            Not in PEFA
         development, and preliminary
         screening
PIM 12   Formal project appraisal                Not in PEFA
PIM 13   Independent review of appraisal         Not in PEFA
PIM 14   Orderliness and participation in the    Same as PEFA PI-11
         annual budget process
PIM 15   Multi-year perspective in fiscal        Adopted from PEFA PI-12
         policy management
PIM 16   Project selection and budgeting         Not in PEFA


PIM 17   Project Implementation                  Not in PEFA
PIM 18   Predictability in the Availability of   Same as PEFA PI-6
         Funds for Commitment of
         Expenditures
PIM 19   Value for Money in Procurement          Same as PEFA PI-19
PIM 20   Effectiveness of Internal Controls      PEFA PI-20 focused on capital
         and Internal Audit of Capital Project   spending
         Expenditure
PIM 21   Project Adjustment                      Not in PEFA
PIM 22   Facility Operation                      Not in PEFA
PIM 23   Basic Completion Review and             Not in PEFA
                                                   38


                   Area/ Indicator                  Relation to Public Expenditure
                                                     and Financial Accountability
                                                                (PEFA)
          Evaluation
PIM 24    Quality and timeliness of in-year        PEFA 24 focused on capital spending
          budget reports
PIM 25    Quality and timeliness of annual         PEFA 25 focused on capital spending
          financial statements
PIM 26    Quality and timeliness of in-year        PEFA 26 focused on capital spending
          budget reports
PIM 27    Quality and timeliness of annual         PEFA 27 focused on capital spending
          financial statements
PIM 28    Legislative scrutiny of external audit   PEFA 28 focused on capital spending
          reports on capital spending
PIM D-1   Financial information provided by        Same as PEFA D-2, for capital
          donors                                   spending
PIM D-1   Proportion of aid managed by use of      PEFA D-3 focused on capital spending
          national procedures
                                                 39


3   Libya PIM Indicators Ratings
                Indicator                Score                        Explanation
              (Dimension)
                                      A. PFM Out-Turns: Credibility of the Budget
PIM 1   Aggregate capital                         Under execution of capital expenditures remains a
        expenditure out-turn                      significant problem. Multi-year budgeting could
        compared to the original                  improve the situation considerably.
        budget
        1.1Capital expenditure out-        D      The budget execution rate for capital expenditure as
        turn compared to original                 a percent of budgeted for 2013 is estimated at 26%.
        budget                                    Actual spending versus budgeted was less than 50%
                                                  in 2012. Since actual capital expenditures deviated
                                                  from the planned once by more than 25% - this leads
                                                  to a core rating of D for the sub-dimension.
        1.1 Donor project                  N/a
        expenditure out turn
        compared to original
        estimates
PIM 2   Composition of capital             D      Virtually all spending units (except in the Oil and
        expenditure out-turn                      Electricity sectors) had capital expenditures
        compared to the original                  execution deviating from planned by more than 25%.
        budget
PIM 3   Aggregate revenue out-
        turn compared to the
        original budget
        3.1 Revenue out-turn               C-     Until 2013, MOF routinely underestimated oil
        compared to original                      revenues but overestimated tax revenues, resulting in
        budget                                    consistent over performance in total revenues.
                                                  However, due to disruption of oil production in 2013,
                                                  total government revenues are projected to come in
                                                  below forecast. Government of Libya overestimated
                                                  oil revenues by 9.9%, 85.7%, and 4.1%, in 2010,
                                                  2011, 2012, respectively. In 2013, oil revenues were
                                                  underestimated by 8.3%.
        3.2 Quarterly donor               N/A
        projects disbursements as
        compared to plan
PIM 4   Stock and monitoring of
        capital expenditure arrears
        4.1 Stock of capital               D      The accumulated stock of contractual obligations on
        expenditures payment                      existing projects amounts to approximately LYD 140
        arrears as a share in total               billion, or 725 percent of the development budget for
        capital expenditures                      2013.
        4.2 Availability and               D      The State Fiscal Law and related regulations
        comprehensiveness of the                  stipulate overlapping controls by financial controllers
        information on payment                    and internal auditors at various stages of the
        arrears (including time                   expenditure chain. There is a lack of a clear
        profile)                                  definition of the commitment state. As a result,
                                                  commitment control function does not exist.
               B. Key Cross-Cutting Issues: Comprehensiveness and Transparency
                                                40


                Indicator               Score                        Explanation
              (Dimension)
PIM 5   Classification of the budget     D+
        5.1 Classification system        D+     At present, Libya uses primarily economic, location
        used for budget                         and organization classification. The classification is
        formulation, execution and              not GFS2001/M compliant. As part of the transition,
        reporting of the central                the classification structure was modernized for 2014
        government’s budget                     to include GFS 2001 compliant economic, location,
                                                organization, and fund segments. Classifications of
                                                functions of government (COFOG) may be
                                                introduced in late 2014 or 2015.
        5.2 Definition of a project      D      At present, Libya defines contracts as projects.
                                                There is no project/program classification in the
                                                budget structure. The proposed 2014 budget
                                                structure will define 8 digits for sector, project, etc.
PIM 6   Comprehensiveness of the         D+     The annual budget law provides that information on
        information included in                 development (“project”) spending be included in the
        budget documentation                    budget submission. Detailed information on
                                                investment (development) spending is lacking. The
                                                nature, rational and fiscal quasi-fiscal operations is
                                                not included into the budget document. PPPs are not
                                                covered under the annual budget law.
PIM 7   Extent of unreported             D
        capital spending
        7.1 Percentage of                D      Stated owned enterprises are major omissions in
        unreported capital                      capital spending.
        spending (by source) in
        total capital spending
        (excluding and donor
        funded projects)
        7.2 Income/expenditure           N/a
        information on donor
        funded projects which are
        included in fiscal reports
PIM 8   PIM related                      D
        intergovernmental fiscal
        relations
        8.1 Policy coherence for         D      Strategic planning has not been instituted at the
        PIM across levels of                    central government level. At present, Vision 2030 –
        government                              the national policy framework is just getting started
                                                but has little traction. Vision 2030 is organized along
                                                three pillars. There is no short- medium- term
                                                forecast of social and economic development. There
                                                is no clear hierarchy of strategic documents and
                                                insufficient coordination that would ensure
                                                consistency of Public Investment Management across
                                                levels of government.
        8.2 Transparency and             D      The allocation of capital transfers is regulated by
        objectivity in the horizontal           procedures (guidance) established by the Cabinet.
        allocation of capital                   The system of capital allocation is subject to
        transfers                               considerable discretion and vulnerabilities.
        8.3 Timeliness of reliable       D-     According to the Law on Local Government, the
        budget information to                   Government should ensure the provision of all
                                                 41


                   Indicator             Score                       Explanation
                  (Dimension)
           subnational governments               budget information necessary for detailed budget
                                                 process to subnational government following
                                                 approval of the national budget. By law the national
                                                 budget should be passed by December. However,
                                                 over the past two years, the national budget was only
                                                 passed by March.
           8.4 Extent of consolidation    D-     All local budget capital spending information should
           of fiscal data for general            be collected and consolidated as part of the budget
           government according to               execution reporting. However, this is not done on a
           sector strategies                     regular basis.
PIM 9      Management of fiscal risks
           from capital spending
           (outside) central
           government
           9.1 The extent of central      D      There does not appear to be an effective monitoring
           government monitoring of              of government guaranteed investment spending
           State Owned Enterprises               projects. It is estimated that LYD90 of letters of
           that are recipients of on-            credits were issued. These are monitored by the
           lending and/or government             central bank. Further, the amount of government
           guaranteed lending.                   guarantees itself are not readily verified. Inadequate
                                                 oversight of SOE activity by the National Bureau of
                                                 Audit.
           9.2 The extent of central      N/A    Subnational governments are prohibited from
           government monitoring of              borrowing
           subnational governments
           (SNGs) that are recipients
           of on-lending and/or
           government guaranteed
           lending
PIM 10     Public access to key           C-     Availability of some information through published
           information on capital                budget documents. Some information is available on
           spending                              the Ministry of Planning Website.
                  C. Budget Cycle
C(i) Policy Based Budgeting
PIM 11     Investment guidance,           D
           project development, and
           preliminary screening
           11.1 Strategic Guidance        D      Some ministries appear to have sector like strategies.
                                                 However, these are inadequate and do not provide
                                                 adequate guidance for project prioritization. A
                                                 constant complaint is that priorities are constantly
                                                 changing.
           11.2 Project Profiles          D      Basic project profiles are prepared but these are
                                                 inconsistent in scope and quality.
           11. 3 Preliminary screening    D+     These should be carried out by the responsible line
                                                 ministry (or agency). There is little or no evidence
                                                 that any projects are screened out for reason other
                                                 than incorrect paperwork.
PIM 12     Formal project appraisal       D+
                                                42


                 Indicator              Score                       Explanation
               (Dimension)
         12.1 Clarity of roles in the    C      Despite the fact that there appears to be a reasonable
         planning process                       understanding of the roles that each institution plays,
                                                the roles of each institution are not well-coordinated.
         12.2 Definition of steps in     D+     There is inadequate central guidance on the basic
         project development                    steps that might be expected in a well-function public
                                                investment management system. A systemic flaw.
         12.3 Technical Guidance         D+     Uniform technical appraisal guidelines do not exist
                                                but there are formal procedures related to the
                                                physical nature of a proposal. Proposals are input
                                                based and administrative in nature.
         12.4 Extent of project          D      Projects that are over a threshold of LYD 100 million
         appraisal                              are required to have more detailed project appraisal
                                                analysis. The capacity to appraise this projects is
                                                inadequate (quality of appraisal is poor).
         12.5 Quality of project         D      Key elements of appraisal are mission. Particular
         appraisal                              weaknesses are objective setting, option appraisal,
                                                and benefit assessment.
         12.6 Proportionality of         D      Detailed project appraisals are arbitrary. Two
         appraisal                              similar projects in the same sector may be subject to
                                                two different standards of appraisal. Currently,
                                                there are plans to widen the scope and apply more
                                                uniform standards to the appraisal process
                                                (regardless of size or significance).
PIM 13   Independent review of           D+     Anecdotal evidence suggests that less than 10% of
         appraisal                              capital spending that might be considered public
                                                investment projects are subject to some form of
                                                independent review of appraisal. In most cases, there
                                                is no review.
PIM 14   Orderliness and                 C-
         participation in the annual
         budget process
         14.1 Existence of and           C-     The budget calendar is established in the Budget
         adherence to fixed project             Law. However, projects can be proposed/modified at
         planning and budget                    any time of the year. There is little independent
         calendar                               review of projects. Capital budget ceilings are
                                                established only after a budget circular has been
                                                submitted, and only presented by the Cabinet of
                                                Ministers. One wonders what is the importance of
                                                capital budget ceilings when capital expenditure
                                                levels are extremely low.
         14.2 Guidance on                C-     Procedural and administrative guidance exists but it
         preparation of capital                 is not economically substantive in nature nor is it
         spending proposals                     specifically addressed to capital spending in specific.
         14.3 Time for central           D+     Resources for analyzing project proposals are highly
         agency analysis and advice             inadequate. Most project proposals are not analyzed
                                                at all. Those that are subject to analysis are put
                                                under external pressure to approve them.
         14.4 Timeliness of budget       D      For the past two years the budget has been submitted
         approval by the legislature            to the GNC (Parliament) late. There is inadequate
                                                time to approve and understand the budget by GNC.
                                                43


                 Indicator             Score                         Explanation
               (Dimension)
PIM 15   Multi-year perspective in       D
         fiscal policy management
         15.1 Multi-year forecasts       D       Ministry of planning introduced a 2-year budget for
         and functional allocations              investment spending. However, this can in no
                                                 manner be considered a medium-term budget
                                                 framework. A Medium Term Budget Framework
                                                 (MTBF) training is being introduced by the World
                                                 Bank. There is no functional classification of budget
                                                 spending. As such, there is no appropriate allocation
                                                 of budget spending by function.
         15.2 Existence of costed        D       There appear to be only outlines of sector strategies.
         sector strategies                       In what may be viewed as “sector strategies’ these
                                                 are estimated on the basis of individual projects.
                                                 They often lack substantiated capital estimates and
                                                 rarely, if ever, include a consideration of the
                                                 associated recurrent costs.
         15.3 Multi-year project         C-      There is no database of proposed and approved
         databases                               projects. The Ministry of Planning has procured a
                                                 provider to develop a ‘bespoke’ project database
                                                 system.
         15.4 Quality of Public                  Not applicable
         Investment Program (PIP)
         Where relevant
PIM 16   Project selection and           C-
         budgeting

         16.1 Transparent criteria       D       Criteria are not made clear for the selection of
         for project selection                   projects in the budget. This makes it easier for
                                                 politically motivated projects to enter the system
                                                 without analysis or scrutiny.
         16.2 On-going projects          D       There have been significant problems in this area.
         received sufficient funding

         16.3 Multi-year budget          C-      Multi-year contracting is permitted (and, was
         authority                               common). But the risk of non-availability of budget
                                                 funding in subsequent years remains a possibility.
                                                 There have been a vast number of instances where
                                                 this has been a problem.
         16.4 Capital and current        C-      It remains rare for capital projects to have their
         spending fully integrated               associated recurrent costs incorporated into budgets,
                                                 except in cases where capital is used to renovate
                                                 existing assets and the operational costs is already
                                                 being borne. Many greenfield projects still do not
                                                 take account of operational recurrent expenses in the
                                                 project planning process putting at risk the
                                                 availability of budgetary funds.
                       C (ii) Predictability and Control in Budget Execution
PIM 17   Project Implementation          C-
         17.1 Guidelines on project      C-      There appears not to be any centrally based support
         implementation                          of advice on the methodology on project
                                                 management. There does not appear to be a culture
                                               44


                 Indicator             Score                       Explanation
               (Dimension)
                                               of project management practices.
         17.2 Clear accountability      C-     Implementation does not appear to be a planned
         and implementation plans              activity with few project management practices or
                                               disciplines in place.
         17.3 Total project cost        D+     There appears to be no capacity to track total project
         management system                     cost over time against the approved budget.
                                               Definition of investment project does not exist, so it
                                               becomes difficult to track.
         17.4 Formal handover on        C+     Handover is a relatively formal process involving the
         completion                            commissioning of some checks that include fit for
                                               purpose, and technical compliance tests.
PIM 18   Predictability in the          C-
         Availability of Funds for
         Commitment of
         Expenditures
         18.1 Extent to which cash      D      What is described as cash flows is monitored through
         flows are monitored                   MOF. However, there is no system of commitment
                                               control.
         18.2 Reliability and           D      There are no cash flow plans tied to procurement
         horizon of periodic in-year           plans. There is an inadequate system of commitment
         information to MDAs on                controls.
         ceilings for expenditure
         commitment
         18.3 Frequency and             C-     Budget virement rules/laws are relatively strict.
         transparency of in-year
         adjustments to budget
         allocations which are
         decided above the level of
         management in MDAs
PIM 19   Value for Money in             C-
         Procurement
         19.1 Transparency              C      The prime law is the Public Procurement Law with
         comprehensiveness and                 regulations being through government resolutions
         competition in the legal              and guidance.
         and regulatory framework
         19.2 Use of Competitive        C-     Concerns remain about the clarity of the rules that
         procurement methods                   allows for single tender procedures. Over 45% of
                                               procurement contracts are single source.
         19.3 Participation rates
         19.4 Public access to          C      There is not government wide procurement plan.
         complete reliable and                 But Government entities publish bidding
         timely procurement                    opportunities along with award decisions.
         information
         19.5 Existence of an           C-     There is little evidence of an effective procurement
         independent administrative            complaints mechanism.
         procurement complaints
         mechanism
PIM 20   Effectiveness of Internal      C-
         Controls and Internal
                                               45


                 Indicator             Score                       Explanation
               (Dimension)
         Audit of Capital Project
         Expenditure
         20.1 Expenditure               C-     There is a need to strengthen expenditure controls by
         commitment controls                   revising financial regulations to enforce commitment
                                               controls and eliminate other redundant controls,
                                               tightening rules governing carryovers, and the use of
                                               contingency reserves. Commitment for multi-year
                                               projects cannot be made.
         20.2 Compliance with rules     C      Compliance with current administrative rules is
         for processing and                    believed to be high.
         recording transactions
         20.3 Coverage and quality      C      Internal audit and financial controllers’ roles
         of the internal audit                 overlap. But, internal audit plays a proactive role.
         function
         20.4 Extent of management      __     Not applicable
         response to internal audit
         findings
PIM 21   Project Adjustment             C-
         21.1Project progress           C-     Financial progress reporting and monitoring is
         reports and monitoring                adequate, but physical monitoring against financial
                                               outlays is poor.
         21.2 Virement between          C-     Virement is possible between different projects in the
         projects                              same program can be authorized if MOF (or
                                               Cabinet) approves.
         21.3 Nature of project         D      Many projects are regularly adjusted during
         adjustments                           implementation. Adjustments can be of a significant
                                               nature and many could have been prevented through
                                               better preparation work or have been identified
                                               earlier in the process through adequate scrutiny.
         21.4 Explanation of                   No scoring mechanism methodology
         Variances
         21.5 Funding in tranches              No scoring mechanism methodology
         linked to phases
         21.6 Mechanism to trigger      D      There is no known mechanism that would trigger a
         review of project                     review of whether a difficult project should be
         justification                         continued to be supported.
PIM 22   Facility Operation             C-
         22.1 Asset registers           C-     There is a state property register. However the
                                               adequacy of the information inputted on to the
                                               register is to be determined.
         22.2 Assets fit for purpose    C-     There are a number of examples of newly handed
                                               over assets that required further expenditure in
                                               order for them to be fit for purpose.
         22.3 Sufficient operation      C      Generally sufficient funding is available to operate
         funding                               new assets in the near-term. Budget funds to do so
                                               are allocated annually.
         22.4 Sufficient maintenance    D      Funding for the maintenance of new assets in the
                                               near term should be minimal. There is some
                                                    46


                      Indicator           Score                        Explanation
                  (Dimension)
            funding                                 evidence that maintenance expenditures are
                                                    underfunded.
            22.5 Monitoring of service     D+       This does not appear to be routine.
            deliver
C (iii) Accounting, Recording, and Reporting
PIM 23      Basic Completion Review
            and Evaluation
            23.1 Policy and guidance           D    There is no policy guidance regarding post project
            on post-project review                  reviews. Furthermore, there appears to be no
                                                    institutional understand of the potential value of
                                                    doing such reviews. Since there is no current basis
                                                    for setting project objectives based on performance
                                                    indicators, it would not be meaningful to attempt to
                                                    assess the value of a project ex-post.
            23.2 Completion of basic           C    Some projects are subject to a form of basic post
            post-project reviews                    project review, but this relates only to a physical
                                                    input element of the project, rather than subsequent
                                                    performance capacity to meet its objectives.
            23.3 Completion of Impact          D    There is no impact or investment evaluation.
            Evaluations
PIM 24      Quality and timeliness of          C-   In-year budget reports cover general government as
            in-year budget reports                  a whole and are prepared according to
                                                    administrative and economic budget classification
                                                    However, they cannot be easily compared to the
                                                    approved budget. Reports covering expenditures
                                                    and revenues are prepared regularly. Reports on
                                                    guarantees and obligations are not prepared on a
                                                    regular basis.
PIM 25      Quality and timeliness of          C-   The annual consolidated financial statements cover
            annual financial statements             central government revenues, expenditures, financial
                                                    assets and liabilities. The government’s financial
                                                    statements omit the consolidation of the state-owned
                                                    enterprises where the government holds the majority
                                                    and controlling share. The government, by law, is
                                                    expected to prepare its annual financial statements
                                                    within six months after the end of the fiscal year.
                                                    However, budgets for 2007-2012 have not been
                                                    audited and finalized.
C(iv) External Scrutiny and Audit
PIM 26      Scope, nature and follow-          C-   The National Bureau of Audit is formally
            up of external audit                    subordinated to the Parliament (GNC). Its remit is
                                                    to control expenditure from the state budget. The
                                                    main focus of the National Bureau of Audit continues
                                                    to be on expost compliance control of expenditure.
                                                    Any formal response to audit findings and
                                                    recommendations comes primarily from the audit
                                                    government bodies and the Cabinet.
PIM 27      Legislative scrutiny of            C    The legislature’s review covers fiscal policies and
            capital spending in the                 aggregates for the coming year as well as budget
            annual budget law                       estimates of expenditure and revenues. The
                                                    Parliament (GNC) approves the development budget.
                                               47


                  Indicator            Score                      Explanation
                (Dimension)
                                               Over the past two years the budget was submitted to
                                               the Parliament late (for approval) as such there was
                                               inadequate time for legislative scrutiny.
PIM 28    Legislative scrutiny of       C-     The review of audit reports should be conducted
          external audit reports on            within six (6) months of the submission. Although
          capital spending                     not all reports are reviewed in sufficient detail.
                                               There is currently no system in place to track the
                                               receipt and handling of audit reports. In-depth
                                               hearings are not being conducted.
                D. Donor Practices
PIM D-1   Financial information                Not Applicable
          provided by donors
PIM D-2   Proportion of aid that is            Not Applicable
          managed by use of national
          procedures
                                                      48


                                                  Annex 4
                          Proposed Approach for Handling the Legacy Projects



Criteria for the review


1.       Given the large number of legacy projects and the uncertainties concerning costs and
eventual benefits, it would not be realistic to use cost-benefit analysis as the basis for
deciding on the appropriate disposition of each project. 16 A blunter but more practical
criterion is needed.

2.       A good such criterion would be the degree of physical completion of each project. For
major projects, this can be inferred from the invoices (assuming reasonable contractors’
integrity). However, the criterion of physical completion cannot be used across the board,
owing to the fluid security situation in certain areas, and the corruption risks inherent in a
discretionary process of ascertaining the state of works and assets. Consequently, a more
generally usable criterion for selecting projects to be restarted is necessary.

3.      In contrast to physical data, financial information is available across the board and
more likely to be reliable. It is essential to emphasize at the outset that the fact that large
financial resources have been spent on a particular project is not in itself a reason to justify
spending more to complete the project – particularly as the Government priorities and
motivations are drastically different from those of the old regime. However, prior
expenditures can be taken as a very rough initial proxy for the rate of physical completion.

4.      Consequently, the realities on the ground suggest using as a major criterion for
selecting projects to be completed the expenditure already made on them, but combined
with a newly-estimated cost of project completion (based on physical inspection when
feasible), and subject to specified qualitative conditions.17 In part because of their very large
number, the projects should not be ranked individually but should be placed in four broad
categories, each with different priority for funding, as described below. The criteria proposed
below for placing the projects in the four categories are not rigidly prescriptive, but should be
used as the primary and first guide for the review, and exceptions should be made only in
individual cases and for demonstrable overriding reasons.




Category I: Projects suitable for early and rapid completion and full funding



  16
     When norms and procedures for investment choices and programming will have been introduced and
  institutionalized, it will then be appropriate to begin to rank new proposed projects in accordance with
  the financial returns they generate and with estimates of their economic and social impact.
  17
     A similar approach was adopted in the Indian state of Orissa, and the percentage of prior
  expenditure was used as one among other metrics in certain other cases, e.g., Ukraine.
                                                 49

5.      This category includes projects to be restarted and completed as soon as practicable,
with only minor modifications as may be strictly necessary and with the full budgetary funding
required for their efficient completion. The following criteria are recommended for placing
projects under category I:

     (i) More than 80% of the original cost had been spent prior to March 1, 2011, and the
     currently-estimated completion costs are no greater than 33% of the original cost; or

     (ii) Early restart and completion of the project is highly likely to produce large and rapid
     economic or non-economic benefits (as judged by general criteria such as number of
     beneficiaries, urgent reconstruction needs, or stability and geographic considerations).


     Provided that the project:

     (a) Is important to fulfill a major priority of the Government; and

     (b) Addresses important and specific objectives, viz. employment generation,
     connectivity, basic public services, and other objectives; and

     (c) Circumstances on the ground are conducive to the project being completed efficiently
     -- either directly by or under the effective oversight of the central Government of Libya.


      Category II - Projects suitable for resumed initial implementation

6.     This category includes projects which may be restarted but with the lowest
funding level consistent with technical and procurement requirements, subject to
future decisions on their full completion, in the context of an improved public
investment programming process.

7.      The following criteria are envisaged for placing projects under category II:


     (i)    More than 50% of the original cost had been spent prior to March 1, 2011, and

     (ii)   the currently-estimated completion cost is lower than 50% of the original cost;


     Provided that the project:

     (a)    Is consistent with the major priorities of the Government;

     (b)    Addresses specific objectives, viz. employment generation, connectivity, basic
     services, and other objectives (economic or otherwise); and


     (c)     Circumstances on the ground are conducive to the project being completed
     efficiently -- either by or under the oversight of the central Government of Libya.
                                                    50

8.     Within this category projects would be ranked on the basis of years of age, with
older projects receiving higher priority for funding – except that projects approved
before 2005 will, as a rule, be placed in category III below.


        Category III – Projects probably requiring major re-design and/or re-phasing

9.      This category should include large projects with an original cost greater than $...
million and with a likely potential to contribute to development, and which also meet the
following criteria:

       (i)   less that 50% of the original cost had been spent prior to March 1, 2011 and the
             estimated completion costs are greater than 50% of the original cost; or

       (ii) The project was approved before 2005; or


       (iii) The project duplicates one or more other large projects in substantial ways.

10.     Projects under Category III should not receive any budget funds except as necessary to
finance a new feasibility study, with probable major design changes and cost estimates --
provided that it is determined that the project warrants such a study and that there is no
evidence of major collusion or corruption in the award of contracts. Failing such
determination, the project would be placed in Category IV below.


        Category IV - Projects to be discontinued or shelved indefinitely



11.      All legacy projects not explicitly included in Categories I, II, or III should be included in
Category IV. Decisions on whether the project is to be scrapped permanently or shelved would
be made after the completion of the review. It should be noted that “mothballing” a project
entails certain costs to prevent further deterioration of the works and protection of the assets,
and is subject to corruption risks. Projects to be shelved rather than scrapped should therefore
be only those with good potential for future positive impact. They would be listed in an annex
to the comprehensive investment project database that is to be formulated as part of the
overall investment programming and management system for the future.

12.     Decisions on the appropriate disposition of the usable assets and works of projects to
be closed would be made separately in consultation with the local communities concerned. 18


Implementation arrangements

  18
     In many transition economies of Eastern Europe and the former USSR, the incomplete
  physical works of thousands of investment projects were simply left to rust and deteriorate,
  with local communities or individual groups cannibalizing the usable materials and
  equipment. Although many otherwise potentially valuable projects were lost and assets
  were misappropriated, this crude approach was inevitable in light of the breakup of the
  central command structures.
                                                51



13.      The MoP would lead the process, in close cooperation with the MoF and
with the individual sector ministries concerned, as well as in appropriate consultation
of the subnational government units where the projects are located. As may be required
by circumstances on the ground, effective project execution and completion would
require especially close consultation with municipal governments and, if necessary, with
selected non-government actors as well.

14.    Full publicity should be given to the process, criteria and modalities of the
review. However, the strictest confidentiality of consideration and decision on
individual projects will be critical to insulate the review from particularistic pressures,
and individuals violating such confidentiality should be appropriately sanctioned.


15.    Verification of the previous expenditures would be performed by the MoF in
cooperation with the MoP and the line ministries concerned, on a random sample
basis. The MoP in cooperation with the line ministries should provide to the MoF the
new estimates for the costs of completing projects in Category I and their time-phasing.


16.     For the largest and most important projects the MoP should first review the
available documentation (contract, invoices, etc.), and then carry out a quick spot
inspection of the current state of the physical assets and works – on its own initiative,
timing and authority and with suitable external assistance if necessary. The project
would be removed from Categories I and II if so warranted by the inspection.

17.     The results of the review would be submitted as a package for consideration
and formal approval of the Council of Ministers and the Prime Minister, with the
proviso that the total number of projects included in Categories I and II may be reduced
but not increased. Accordingly, while projects may be moved to a lower category
without the need for offsetting action, the raising of any project to Categories I or II will
require the downgrading of another project to Categories II or III, respectively.


18.     The aggregate expenditures required for implementation of Category I and II
projects in the remainder of 2014 and the budgets for the following years should be
consistent with the overall fiscal stance and adjusted as needed for affordability in the
medium term.


19.     The government should not allocate budgetary funding to any new
investment project until the financial implications of the entire review have been
assessed and the Category I projects are successfully re-started -- except for
demonstrable and specific security, economic, or social objectives that are both
important and urgent. The MoP would carefully document the conduct and results of
the review. If the above approach is found acceptable, other necessary modalities of the
review would be defined during the January 2014 mission (see timetable below.)

Timetable

20.    The review should take place in two phases.
                                                  52



       Phases of the review

21.     First phase. The first phase of the review would be launched by proposals from
each line ministry concerned, of which of the legacy projects under its competence
should be included in Category I -- for consideration and possible approval by the
Ministry of Planning. The first phase should be completed before mid-March 2014 in
order that (i) the expenditure implications of resuming the implementation of the
Category I projects can be incorporated in the second half of the budget for 2014 and in
the preparation of the budget for 2015 and (ii) the lessons of the first phase can be
reflected in the conduct of the second phase.

22.    The results of the first phase would be reviewed, and the second phase would be
launched, provided that the required documentation of the phase 1 results is received in
a timely manner.

23.    Second phase. The second phase of the review would start with line ministries
proposals, of which of the projects under their respective competence should be
included in Category II, and which projects should be included in Category III when
new feasibility studies are justified and feasible. (All projects not expressly included
during the second phase in Categories II or III would be automatically placed in
Category IV.) The financial implication of the “reduced-level” restart of the
implementation of projects included in Category II and the funding for the feasibility
studies of projects retained in Category III would also be incorporated in a budget
amendment for the last quarter of 2014 and in the preparation of the budget for 2015.

24.    The MoP and the World Bank team would be in regular communication between
missions, via email and video-conferencing, as necessary to provide timely advice and
contributions to the review process. 19


The next stage


       Expanding the review

25.     After June 2014, a next stage of review could include the remaining legacy
public investment projects, based on the results of the 2014 review and following similar
procedures, with appropriate modifications. 20

       Project management


 19
    As noted, decisions on which among the Category IV projects are to be temporarily retained in
 the database and which are to be scrapped would be taken at a subsequent time. The appropriate
 handling of any remaining personnel in both types of projects would be decided by the end of the
 review.
 20
   It is likely, but should not be prejudged, that the vast majority of these remaining legacy projects
 would be placed in Category IV.
                                                        53

      26.     Aside from the formulation of the new norms, procedures and systems for public
      investment programming, monitoring and execution, it is important to improve the line
      ministries’ capacity to manage individual investment projects in their portfolio. A
      separate review of the process of physical completion of selected major legacy projects
      in Category I could provide a basis for recommendations for long-term improvements of
      project management, including appropriate training.


             Government asset inventory

      27.     It would be important to initiate during the late March mission discussions for a
      separate but related partial inventory, led jointly by the Ministries of Finance and
      Planning, of existing government assets. The process would not call for a full asset
      registry, but only for an identification of the major assets that are valuable and either
      idle and/or at risk, with a view to protecting them, appropriately budgeting their
      maintenance, improving their utilization, or – in some cases -- devolving them to local
      government or to non-government organizations. Depending on the scope and
      modalities of such review, a pilot phase could be completed by December 2014 and the
      full inventory possibly by mid-2015. Appropriate technical assistance would be
      considered, by the World Bank or other donors, if the Government so requests.

                                               __________

ategories           Category I:             Category II:      Category III:       Category IV:
                 Projects Suitable            Projects          Projects            Projects to
                   for early and            suitable for        Probably                be
                 rapid completion         resumed initial
                                                               requiring          discontinued
                  and full funding        implementatio
                                                                 major              or shelved
                                                 n
                                                                redesign           indefinitely
                                                               and/or re-
                                                                phasing

Criteria        1.   More than            1.   More than      1. Less than        1. All legacy
                     80% of the                50% of the     50% of the          projects not
                     original cost             original       original cost       explicitly
                     had been                  cost had       had been            included in
                     spent prior to            been spent     spent prior to      Categories I,
                     March 1, 2011             prior to the   March 1,            II, or III should
                     AND Current               March 1,       2011 AND            be included in
                     estimated                 2011; AND      the estimated       Category IV.
                     completion                the            costs are
                     costs are not             currently      greater than
                     greater than              estimated      50% of the
                     33% of the                completion     original costs;
                     original cost             cost is
                                               lower than          OR,
                                               50% of the
                                               original
                                               cost.
                                                   54

ategories       Category I:            Category II:       Category III:    Category IV:
             Projects Suitable           Projects           Projects         Projects to
               for early and           suitable for         Probably             be
             rapid completion        resumed initial
                                                           requiring       discontinued
              and full funding       implementatio
                                                             major           or shelved
                                            n
                                                            redesign        indefinitely
                                                           and/or re-
                                                            phasing

             2.   Or early                                2) The Project   2.
                  restart and                             was approved     Determinatio
                  completion of                           before 2005;     n / decisions
                  the project is                                           on whether
                  highly likely to                                         the project
                  produce large                                            should be
                                                               OR,
                  and rapid                                                scrapped /
                  economic or                                              shelved
                  non-economic                                             permanently
                  benefits.                                                would be
                                                                           made after a
                                                                           detailed
                                                                           review.

             3.                                           3) The
                                                          project
                                                          duplicates
                                                          one or more
                                                          other larger
                                                          projects in
                                                          substantial
                                                          ways.

Condition    a)   Is important       a)   Is              a) Projects
   s              to fulfill a            consistent      under
                  major priority          with the        category III
 (Provide         of the                  major           should not
 that the         Government;             priorities of   receive any
Project(s)                                the             budget funds
Meet the                                  Governmen       except as
following:                                t;              necessary to
                                                          finance a new
                                                          feasibility
                                                          study, with
                                                          probable
                                                          major design
                                                          changes and
                                                          costs
                                                          estimates.
                                                          Failing such
                                             55

ategories      Category I:        Category II:     Category III:    Category IV:
            Projects Suitable       Projects         Projects         Projects to
              for early and       suitable for       Probably             be
            rapid completion    resumed initial
                                                    requiring       discontinued
             and full funding   implementatio
                                                      major           or shelved
                                       n
                                                     redesign        indefinitely
                                                    and/or re-
                                                     phasing

                                                   determinatio
                                                   n the project
                                                   would qualify
                                                   as a Category
                                                   IV project
                                                   (discontinue).

            b) Addresses        b) Addresses
               important and    specific
               specific         objectives, viz.
               objectives,      employment
               viz.             generation,
               employment       connectivity,
               generation,      basic services,
               connectivity,    and other
               basic public     objectives
               services, and    (economic or
               other            otherwise); and,
               objectives;
               and,
            c) Circumstance     c)
               s on the         Circumstances
               ground are       on the ground
               conducive to     are conducive
               the project      to the project
               being            being
               completed        completed
               efficiently      efficiently
               (either          (either by or
               directly by or   under the
               under the        oversight of the
               effective        Central
               oversight of     Government of
               the Central      Libya)
               Government
               of Libya).
                                                     56


                                                 Annex 5


              PIM Procedures and Systems in Libya: Issues and Recommendations


          This annex includes the following sections:

          General issues. The first section recalls some basic concepts in PIM, notably it discusses the
           concepts of project and program. It underlines the need of moving from the current contract
           approach to a project and policy-based approach.


          Project preparation and screening. The second section presents the project cycle It
           underlines the need of project screening to ensure that projects fit the government strategy
           in the more cost-effective way. It discusses the distribution of responsibilities in project
           screening.

          Preparation of the development budget. The third section focuses on the key steps and
           procedures for budgeting development expenditures. It makes suggestions for strengthening
           the coordination between the preparation of the recurrent and development components of
           the budget.


          Physical and financial investment project monitoring. The fourth section identifies the
           minimum requirements for monitoring the implementation of investment projects. It makes
           recommendations for establishing a monitoring system.

          Training. The fifth section presents suggestions to develop a training program.

          Organizational issues. The last section discusses briefly some organizational issues.


1. General issues

3.1       What is an investment project?

3.1.1 The composite economic nature of chapter 3

The development budget (Chapter 3 of the central government budget) includes both capital
and recurrent expenditures, such as for example scholarships. A modernization of the budget
classification is desirable to identify more accurately the investment part of the budget. In the
immediate a mapping table between the articles of chapter 3 and the IMF government finance
statistics (GFS) manual economic classification of expenses and non-financial assets should
be implemented. Tentatively, this exercise has been partly conducted in table 3. Such a
mapping table will allow the capital expenditures to be more accurately estimated.
                                                            57

                                             Table 3
                Mapping chapter 3 classification into GFS economic classification
                             Chapter 3                                     GFS Economic Classification
 Section item
       1       New Asset Purchases
             1 Vehicle Purchases                                 31121   Transport equipment
             2 Furniture Purchases                               31122   Other machinery and equipment
             3 Buildings Purchases                               31112   Nonresidential buildings
             4 IT Purchases                                      31122   Other machinery and equipment
             5 Medical Equipment Purchases                       31122   Other machinery and equipment
             6 Ambulance Vehical Purchases                       31121   Transport equipment
             7 Motorcycle Purchases                              31121   Transport equipment
             8 Television Devicess Purchases                     31122   Other machinery and equipment
             8 Wireless Devices Purchases                        31122   Other machinery and equipment
            10 Firefighter Trucks                                31122   Other machinery and equipment
            11 Agriculture Equipment Purchase                    31122   Other machinery and equipment
       2       Educational Books
             1 Primary Education Books                           22      Use of goods and services
             2 Higher Education Books                            22      Use of goods and services
             3 Teaching Means                                    22      Use of goods and services
       3       Scholarships
             1 Local Scholarships                                2821    Miscellaneous other expense (current)
             2 Foreign Scholarships (Scholarships Abroad)        2821    Miscellaneous other expense (current)




Beyond these analytical issues, clarifying the notion of investment project is important for
most aspects of budget management and control. Thus, most recommendations made in the
present report concern investment projects, not current expenditure items such as educational
books and scholarships. An investment project consists mainly of capital expenditures A
capital expenditure is incurred when money is spent to buy fixed assets with a useful life
extending beyond the fiscal year.

3.1.2 Projects versus contracts

    28. When programming investment expenditures, the Government of Libya often deals
with individual contracts, not with projects. A contract is an agreement to provide inputs that
contribute to create outputs but does not usually cover all inputs and activities required for
producing an identifiable output. An investment project is a set of interrelated activities --
usually covered by contracts -- which aims at producing an identifiable output (generally an
asset) that will contribute to delivering a public service. These activities should be considered
together and be accepted or rejected as a set. Failing to do so is highly likely to result in
incomplete, partial or disconnected projects, and thus in wasting government moneys without
achieving the purpose of expenditure. (For instance, a housing project involves building the
structures, ensuring connections to water and sewage, providing for adequate access, etc.
These activities may be implemented through various contracts, but they are inter-dependent
and are all required to make the project actually provide usable housing.)
                                                 58

    29. Therefore, investment programming and budgeting decisions should be based on the
analysis of projects. I will be important to move away from a "contract mentality" to a
"program and project" mentality.

    30. The MoP has already begun to work in this direction. A preliminary work consisting
of grouping contracts into projects is being undertaken by the technical department of the
ministry of Planning. However, the current reviews of ongoing projects deal mainly with the
contracts. This is explained by the need to review the existing legal commitments.
Nevertheless, as noted by the World Bank in the note “The Airport Modernization Program”
of the 4th April 2014 such reviews would be improved if the emphasis of the reviews is shifted
from the individual contracts to the projects and the programs that group projects with similar
objectives.


   3.2         Policies, programs and projects

   31. All projects should be budgeted on the basis of national priorities and objectives, and
should not be appraised in a vacuum. Because investment projects should aim at
implementing government policies, they must be consistent with the overall government goals
and sector policies.


   32. Projects that meet the same set of objectives are generally grouped into a program (e.g., a
       program covering several airports within the country). Often that kind of program
       corresponds to a sector or subsector (e.g. housing program) or a part of a subsector
       (e.g. secondary airports program).


   33. Once the policy priorities established investment programming and budgeting consists
       of: (i) balancing requirements for investment expenditure against those for current
       expenditure and between programs; and (ii) within investment programs, making
       choices among projects. Thus, ideally, a good public investment programming process
       should ensure that policies drive programs, programs in turn drive projects, and that
       the best projects to meet the objective have been selected.


   34. Choices related to the allocation of resources between programs are strongly related to
       strategies. The expected outcome is the best balance between programs. Within a
       program, the project selection should give what projects are selected and what projects
       are not selected.

   35. Programming and budgeting investment requires the interplay of the following
       procedures:

      project preparation/appraisal, the cycle of the preparation of projects includes identification,
       analysis, appraisal;
                                                59



       programming/selection, for incorporating project in the budget.


    36. These two processes are interdependent. At different stages of the project cycle
        choices between projects must be made (when launching studies on identified projects,
        when appraising studies, and when making the final decision go/no go). Nevertheless,
        these processes should not be confused. Sound investment programs require good
        project, but programming and selecting projects must be set in a broader framework
        than the sole analysis of individual projects. The sequencing of decision-making and
        an appropriate design of linkages between the project preparation process and the
        programming process are essential.


    37. Project analysis helps to make project selection, but it cannot be relied upon to achieve
        the optimal balance of objectives. Besides the quality of individual projects other
        criteria are needed when scrutinizing an investment budget e.g. Are balances between
        sectors and subsectors consistent with the Government strategy? Is the investment
        program appropriate to the economic and social environment? Is the investment
        program compatible with the macro-economic framework? etc.

3.3 The need for a multi-year perspective

It is important to place investment programming within a multi-year perspective. While
capital expenditures payments should always be authorized through the annual budget, most
investment projects are multiannual and have a forward fiscal impact. The sustainability of
the overall investment program should be assessed, notably by reviewing the annual forward
costs of investment projects. Projects that generate non-sustainable forward costs, either for
completing them or for operating them after completion should not be included in the budget.



4   Project preparation, appraisal and screening
    38. This section discusses the processes for sound project preparation and screening.


4.1 The starting point: strategic guidance


    39. Strategic guidance for public investment programming is currently lacking. Such
        guidance would be necessary to ensure that the new projects fit the government
        development policy. Full-fledged sectoral strategies include among other elements the
        definition of sectoral policy objectives in accordance with the national development
        policy, identification of the needs of the population beneficiary, identification and
        specific objectives of main programs to be undertaken, costs estimates and
        performance indicators for those programs, responsibilities in implementing the
        strategy.
                                                 60



  40. In an initial step, strategic guidance could focus on defining the sector policy
      objectives, identifying the main investment programs or group of actions that will be
      implemented, and analyzing the size and the needs of the population beneficiary from
      those programs.


4.2 The project cycle


  41. A typical project passes through successive stages, from the initial analysis of
      objectives and needs to project completion. Although each project has its own
      characteristics, projects usually have a common life cycle, called “the project cycle.” A
      standard project cycle includes the following phases:

     Project identification

         -   Identification of potential projects, formulation of project proposals.

         -    “Preliminary” screening of project proposals to ensure that they fit the sector
             strategy.

         (At this stage, a decision must be made on whether or not to allocate budgeted funds to the pre
         -feasibility studies.)

     Project preparation

          Pre-feasibility studies and preliminary selection of the projects.

         (At this stage, a decision must be made on whether or not to allocate budgeted funds to the -
         feasibility studies.)

          Feasibility studies and detailed formulation of the projects.

          Technical appraisal of the projects

    Project selection and budgeting

          Investment decisions.

         (At this stage, a decision must be made on whether or not to include the projects in the
         budget.)


    Project implementation, monitoring and evaluation

          Implementation of the projects (appointment of the project teams, project planning
                                                 61

           regularly updated, and project monitoring and accounting).

           Evaluation during project implementation, and evaluation ex post of the performance
            and results of the project.




4.3 Project preparation


  42. If a project proposal is deemed fitting the sector strategy, the preparation of the project
      can be engaged. Project preparation includes both the technical design of the project,
      the review of the project with regard to national and sectoral strategies and the
      analysis of its socio-economic benefits. Libya has some experience in the technical
      design of projects, but lack of experience in policy analysis and socio-economic
      analysis of projects. Some projects are considered without estimating first the needs or
      the size of the population beneficiary.

  43. Project analysis is important to ensure that the best options have been defined for
      achieving project objectives, notably by evaluating different variants and alternatives.
      Costs and benefits should be fully identified, whether they are tangible or intangible.
      Externalities (negative as pollution or positive as flood protection) should be
      reviewed. Tangible costs and benefits should be quantified, intangible should be
      assessed in qualitative terms.

  44. Therefore, sound project preparation requires analyses and assessments in the
      following areas:
   Conformity of the project with sector and government strategies (an assessment
    should be carried out as soon as the project is identified).

   A cost-benefit or cost effectiveness analysis, if appropriate (see comments below). The
    acquisition or construction of new facilities should be systematically compared with the
    cost of rehabilitating existing facilities.

   The forward fiscal impact of the project. Incremental recurrent costs, including forecasts
    of staff recruitment, should be estimated. For some programs or agencies (e.g. road
    construction), assessing the recurrent costs requires making forecasts of both the
    capital and the recurrent budget, in order to take into account acquisitions of
    equipment needed for periodic maintenance.

   The policy on setting user charges or fees, when the project is aimed at delivering goods
    or services to the public.

   The environmental impact, when relevant.

   The poverty impact, when relevant (e.g. for certain projects in the social sector).
                                                62

 Organizational arrangements for implementing and running the project.

45. Within a program or a subsector, investment projects must be balanced against
    recurrent spending. A new construction project should be systematically compared to the
    cost of rehabilitating existing facilities. The optimal composition of a program can also
    depend on the sector policy (for example, balancing a school construction project
    against a program for buying schoolbooks is essentially a matter of education policy).

46. It is generally distinguished two steps in project preparation the pre-feasibility study
    and the feasibility study. The prefeasibility study helps in identifying the different
    alternatives and assessing the project before launching the detailed analyses of the
    project included in the feasibility study. Box 1 compares the key components of pre-
    feasibility and feasibility studies.

47. Formal economic analysis methods can be used in several sectors. For example, in the
    production and infrastructure sectors, cost-benefit analysis should be systematically
    undertaken for every project of a significant size. In other sectors, least cost or cost-
    effectiveness analyses of projects are generally desirable, but their degree of
    sophistication will depend on the size of the project. For smaller projects, simple ratios
    can be used to assess the cost-effectiveness of a project (for example, the costs of a classroom
    per student).

48. However developing sophisticated formal economic analysis methods requires
    adequate skills. Training in this area will be needed. The introduction of CBA and
    other formal methods for appraising investment projects should be progressive.

49. In the immediate, it should be always ensured that the basic requirements for good
    project preparation are met. These basic requirements are required to submit the
    project to the basic screening criteria presented in box 2. They include:

   Identification of project objectives and their relationship with the sectoral strategy;

   project costs estimates, including recurrent costs after project completion;

   analysis of alternatives options;

   analysis of project costs sustainability;

   identification of arrangements for managing the project during the project implementation
    and after completion;

   arrangements for financial and physical reporting.

50. Defining the implementation arrangements is a crucial component of project
    preparation. Project design should include the organizational arrangements to manage
    the project and define procedures and methods to monitor its implementation.
                                              63



   51. Requirements for appraising the projects should depend from both the sector and the
       size of the projects. Progressively, sector by sector, a list of requirements and criteria
       for screening the projects should be defined by the MoP and the relevant line ministry,
       in close coordination. Table 4 presents some examples of possible requirements and
       criteria.


   52. Line ministries, which are responsible for preparing their budget, should also be
       responsible for preparing and screening projects. They should select their projects
       within any overall spending limit set by the government. However, as recommended
       below, projects of a significant size need also to be reviewed by the ministry of
       planning.

                                        Box 1
                          Key Components of Feasibility Analysis




Source: A. Rajaran, T. Minh Le, N. Biletskan, J.Brumby. A Diagnostic Framework for
Assessing Public Investment Management. World Bank. 2010.




4.4 Screening projects

4.4.1 The screening exercise


   53. Screening involves eliminating poor projects from the portfolio of projects being
       considered for inclusion in the sectoral budgets. Line ministries should verify that the
       projects prepared by their subordinate agencies are compatible with the sector strategy,
       correspond to the most cost-effective means of reaching the program objectives and
                                              64

    that, where applicable, the results of cost-benefit (or cost effectiveness) analyses are
    acceptable. They should also verify that the projects are in conformity with the broad
    policy goals of the ministry (e.g. the sectoral strategic plan and the business plans of
    public enterprises).

54. When screening projects the elimination exercise should be based on various "yes/no"
    criteria (if the answer to one criterion is "no" the project should be eliminated). Box 2
    presents some basic screening criteria.

                                                 Box 2

                                       Basic screening criteria

        Are the needs for the project justified?

        Are project’s objectives clearly specified?

        Is the project consistent with the national and sectoral strategies?

        Are the project costs, including the annual recurrent costs after completion; fully and
         accurately estimated?

        Are the projects benefits assessed quantitatively or at least qualitatively?

        Have alternatives options to meet the project objectives be identified and
         comparatively examined?
         - Is the project deemed to be the most cost-effective variant? Why?
         - Are the recurrent costs compatible with recurrent budget forecasts?
         - Is there any alternative solution to the project by rehabilitating existing facilities?

           Is the project sustainable? (this depends on different factors, including maintenance,
            financial capacities of agencies, cost-recovery issues, tariff issues, satisfaction of
            beneficiaries, etc...).;




55. This screening criteria list should be progressively extended in the following
    directions:

   Sector specific criteria should be set up sector by sector (see some examples in table 4
    below);

   Some basic ratios should be developed to roughly assess the cost-effectiveness or the
    sustainability of the project (e.g. unit cost per beneficiary and recurrent costs compared to
    the ministry budget).
                                                65

   56. Requirements in term of formal socio-economic studies should be progressively
       defined (e.g. requiring cost-benefit analyses in the sectors where these analyses are
       relevant).


4.4.2 Responsibilities in screening projects and pre-approval procedure


   57. Projects should be screened in different steps of the project cycle. A preliminary
       screening made by line ministry will check whether a project proposal fits the sector
       strategy.

   58. Before being launched, all new projects should be screened by the planning
       department of the relevant line ministry. For “small” project, this screening will be
       based on a short check-list. For large project this screening should be done in two
       steps: (i) after the pre-feasibility study, but before the decision of launching feasibility
       studies and preparing the detailed design of the projects; (ii) on the basis of the
       feasibility study, before deciding to include the project in the budget request for
       chapter 3 submitted to the MoP. Line ministries will have to set up appropriate
       arrangements for carrying out this project screening activity.

   59. Before being included in the budget, projects of above a certain size should be
       submitted to: (i) an independent (from the line ministry sponsoring the project) review
       commissioned and supervised by the ministry of Planning and; (ii) a pre-approval
       procedure. The threshold (e.g. total costs of the project more than US$ 5 millions)
       above which this review and pre-approval procedure is compulsory should to be
       defined in governmental regulations. The ministry of Planning should be made
       responsible for pre-approving the projects.

   60. This pre-approval procedure is a pre-selection procedure. Such a pre-approval does not
       authorize launching the project. Projects to be launched are selected through the
       budget process. Only pre-approved projects above the threshold defined in the
       regulations could be included in line ministries’ requests for chapter 3, but only
       projects included in the budget can be launched.
                                                 66


4.5 Project profile forms and project database

  61. Data on projects should be summarized in standard project profile forms. Completing
      such forms will help in verifying whether all required data are available to assess the
      project.

  62. The project profile form should include the following elements:

           a brief description of the project;

           references to the program to which the project is attached, indication of their
            function, according to the international standard (the COFOG);

           a costs table which will include: (i) total costs; (ii) actual costs before the current year;
            (iii) projected costs for the current year; (iv) annual costs projected for budget out-
            years.

           the location of the project;

           a description of its objectives, showing how they fit the sector strategic
            objectives;

           the expected dates for starting and ending the project;

           studies carried out and their date of completion;

           when applicable, the economic internal rate of return of the project (EIRR) and
            its financial internal rate of return (FIRR);

           a projection of the recurrent costs related to the project, if any;

           indications of the cost recovery policy for projects that aim at providing goods
            or services;

           contact details for the agency responsible for the implementation of the project;

           indicators for the physical monitoring of the project (output indicators), for
            projects for which simple indicators may be set up;

           when relevant outcome indicators, that is the expected effect of the project on
            the economic or social environment. However often outcome indicators at more
            relevant at the program level than at the level of individual projects.

  63. For project studies a study profile form should be prepared. Such a form will include
      the following elements:
                                                   67



          a brief description of the project that is to be studied;

          a description of the objectives of the project to be studied;

          references to the program to which the project is attached, references of the sector and
           subsector;

          the total costs of the study;

          an approximate estimate of the total costs of the project;

          the location of the studied project;

          the expected dates for starting and ending the study;

          contact details for the agency responsible for the study and;


   64. Project, program, sector/function should be coded to allow data to be automatically
       processed.

   65. A project data base would be under preparation within the MoP. All identified projects
       will be registered in that database. Data concerning a project will be updated and
       completed as the project progress in the project cycle. It will be important to ensure
       that the project database will include all required key data and to define the procedure
       to update it regularly.

   66. In a longer term, each line ministry should have its own data base, with common
       standards in order to ensure adequate centralization of data by the MoP. However, in
       the immediate, it is more cost-effective to start setting up a central data base
       maintained by the MoP, then to implement progressively that data base within line
       ministries.

   67. Preparing and updating at least every year a project profile form should be
       compulsory. Line ministries should transmit to the MoP a project profile form for each
       project or group of “small” included in their budget request for the development
       budget.

                                            Box 1
                                Example of project profile form

PROJECT PROFILE                                   Project code:

Name of the Project:
                                                  68



Ministry: Code          Name

Sector/function:        Code               Name


Programme: Code                 Name

Starting year:                          Year of completion:

Type (ongoing/new):

Brief description and main components:




Coherence with overall Government policy and sector strategy:




Project objectives:




Target beneficiaries:




Project organization




Cost recovery policy if any describe briefly


Has a cost-benefit analysis been done (Yes/No)

If Yes Economic internal rate of return:

Project annual costs
                                                69



Unit: 000 LYD
                   2011   2012 2013    2014      2015   2016     2017     Beyond   Total
                          Actual       Budget              Projections
 Project costs
 Additional recurrent costs after completion                     Personnel
                                                                 Other current


Physical monitoring indicators

                          Before   2014         2915      2016           2017      Total
                          2013                                                     Project
                          actual
 Indicator 1: ……
 Indicator 2: ……
 ……



Spending Agency
Name
Address
Contact person within spending agency:
Name                                 Function
Phone                                e-mail:
                                                                                70

                                                                             Table 4

                                                         Examples of requirements to assess project

SECTOR AND        ECONOMIC ANALYSIS                                 ASSESSMENTS OF FISCAL IMPACT AND         OTHER ASSESSMENTS             SELECTING PROJECTS WITHIN
SUBSECTOR                                                           COST RECOVERY POLICY                                                   A PROGRAM:
                                                                                                                                           BASIC CRITERIA

Water

Water supply      Assessment of supply deficit in the supply area   Estimate of incremental recurrent        If actions affect the poor,   Indication of seriousness of
                                                                    costs                                    assessment of the impact      supply deficits in the supply
(Bulk water and   Assessment of the impact of the project on                                                 of the project on the         area in m3/person/year
distribution)     supply deficit                                    Medium-term projections of the           poverty groups
                                                                    budget.                                                                +

                                                                                                                                           Cost-effectiveness criterion
                  Cost-effectiveness analysis                                                                                              of cost/m3
                                                                    Compliance with any current
                                                                    government cost recovery                                               Information on ancillary
                                                                    requirement                                                            benefits and adverse
                                                                                                                                           factors.

Industry

Electricity       Cost-benefit analysis or cost-effectiveness       Impact on tariff and the budget of the                                 Selection within an Energy
                  analysis including:                               electricity company                                                    Program
                  Study of variants and alternative energy          In principle tariffs should cover full
                  sources                                           costs after project implementation
                                                                                                                                           EIRR or cost-effectiveness
                  Sensitivity analysis of the impact of varying                                                                            criteria.
                  the critical parameters be studied (world
                  prices, tariff etc..)
                                                                         71


Transport

Road        Cost benefit analysis.                          Assessment of incremental recurrent                             Selection and phasing within
                                                            costs.                                                          the road master plan
            Study of variants.
                                                                                                                            +

                                                                                                                            EIRR

Airport     Cost benefit and financial analysis             Assessment of the impact on the        Environmental Impact     EIRR and FIRR
                                                            budget of the Airport authority        Assessment
            Study of variants.

Port        Cost benefit and financial analysis             Assessment of the impact on the                                 EIRR
                                                            budget of the Port authority
            Study of variants.



Health      Study of variants, including rehabilitation     Estimate of incremental recurrent      Impact on the poor and   Cost-effectiveness analysis
            solution. Cost effectiveness analysis.          costs                                  other social effects     (if possible for large
                                                                                                                            projects)
                                                            Recurrent costs should be compatible
                                                            with medium term forecasts of the
            Appropriate indicators should be used in        government budget
            assessing needs (e.g. for hospitals, beds per                                                                   multicriteria analysis
            1000 population in area served)                                                                                 (notably, ratios existing
                                                                                                                            facilities / beneficiaries,
                                                                                                                            conditions of existing
                                                                                                                            facilities).



Education   Study of variants, including rehabilitation     Estimate of incremental recurrent      Impact on the poor and   Cost-effectiveness analysis
                                                                                                   other social effects
                                                        72

solution                                   costs                                  (if possible large projects)

The least cost solution should be chosen   Recurrent costs should be compatible
                                           with medium term forecasts of the
Appropriate indicators should be used in   government budget                      Multicriteria analysis
assessing needs.                                                                  (notably, ratios existing
                                                                                  facilities / beneficiaries,
                                                                                  conditions of existing
                                                                                  facilities).
                                                 73




5   Selecting projects and budgeting
    68. Projects that have successfully pass the screening step, should be selected and
        implemented through the budget processes. To this end, it will be necessary to set up an
        appropriate budget preparation procedure to encourage project prioritization.

5.1 Current situation

    69. The budget preparation process is governed by the Sate Fiscal Law of November 1967,
        but in addition to be outdated, the main provisions of this law are not enforced. For
        example according to the State Fiscal Law the budgets should be submitted to the
        legislature at least two months before the beginning of the fiscal year, while it is currently
        submitted to the General National Congress in December or later.

    70. The recurrent and development budgets are prepared in separate and non-coordinated
        processes. There is an institutional separation both at the central and line
        ministries/agencies levels. For the recurrent budget a budget circular is issued by the
        MoF, while for the chapter 3 a budget circular is issued by the MoP. These circulars are
        issued in June. Such a dual process, which consists of preparing the recurrent and
        development budget in separate and non-coordinated processes, leads generally to
        inefficiencies, because the economic composition of the budget within a sector cannot be
        optimized and the recurrent costs of investment projects after completion are less
        considered under such arrangements.


    71. The budget circulars give some general guidelines for budget preparation and include the
        format of forms to be completed by line ministries/agencies. However they generally do
        not notify expenditure ceilings to line ministries. In 2013 the budget circular for chapter 3
        included indicative expenditure ceilings for each ministry, but line ministries did not
        comply with these ceilings in their budget request.
                                             74


72. In practice, the development budget preparation process is open-ended. Within line
    ministries the planning department compiles requests from the directorates and
    subordinate agencies, but generally it does not prioritize them. As a result budget
    appropriations are disseminated among an excessive number of projects. Focusing the
    efforts on a reduced number of projects could improve the quality of budget execution.
    Notifying expenditure ceilings to line ministries at an earlier stage of the budget
    preparation cycle could encourage prioritization within line ministries, if it is make clear
    that the budget request should present within the ceilings sufficiently funded priority
    projects, other projects being eventually in a supplementary list..

73. Line ministries send to their budget request to the MoP for chapter 3 in September. Some
    budget conferences are held between the MoP and line agencies in November. Then the
    budget for chapter 3 is finalized by the MoP. Over the past several years, the budget has
    neither been submitted to Parliament nor approved in a timely manner.


74. The budget is currently enacted more than two months in late. The FY 2012 budget was
    approved in March 2013. Because in addition the allotment procedure is sometimes
    lengthy, in several sectors the execution of the development budget starts several months
    after the beginning of the fiscal year. This contributes with the current security situation
    and other factors mentioned in the PIM performance assessment to low development
    budget execution rates.


75. The 2013 budget circular for chapter 3 requested in addition to the costs for the budget
    year the project costs for one out-year. However, generally the forward costs of
    investment projects are not reviewed during budget preparation.


  5.2      Modernizing the development budget preparation process


    5.2.1 Directions for modernizing the process

76. The budget preparation process should be streamlined in the following directions:

           An effective feedback from budget execution to budget preparation is required to
  take into account the lessons from actual project implementation when preparing the
  budget. This will require strengthening the investment project monitoring system (see
  section 4).

 Strategic statements should be prepared and project narratives should explain how the
  projects fit the sectoral strategy.
                                                 75



   Projects should comply with the medium-term macro-economic constraints. When
    preparing the budget, it should be assessed both whether the costs of projects for the
    budget under preparation comply with the budget constraints and whether the forward
    costs, including the recurrent costs after completion of the projects, are sustainable.

   Recurrent and development budget preparation should be better coordinated. The
    following measures could contribute to better unify the budget preparation processes: (i)
    issuing a common budget circular for recurrent and development budget preparation; and
    (ii) reviewing together in common budgetary conferences the recurrent and the
    development components of the budget.

   77. Line ministries should be responsible for project selection in their sectors within the
       overall budget constraints. However, as noted some assistance and counter-expertise from
       the MoP is also necessary.


5.2.2 Forecasting the forward fiscal impact of capital spending


   78. Many investment projects being of multi-annual nature and having a forward fiscal
       impact, the following activities should be carried out:

      reviewing systematically the total costs and the forward annual costs of investment projects
       when preparing the budget;

      ensuring that these annual forward costs comply with the MTFF projections (if the MTFF is not
       yet in place these annual forward costs should not exceed their amount planned for the annual
       budget) ;

      including in the budget documentation an investment annex that will show for the budget out-
       years the annual costs of the investment projects included in the budget (see below).



5.2.3 Main activities for budget preparation


   79. The development budget preparation should include the following set of activities: (i)
       development budget implementation and sector policy reviews ; (ii) preparation and
       notification of expenditure ceilings that will frame budget preparation; (iii) preparation of
       budget requests by line ministries; (iv) budgetary conferences; (v) finalization and budget
       approval by Cabinet; (vi) budget tabled in Parliament.
                                                     76


     80. The organization of these activities is presented below. Concerning the period at which
         there are undertaken, some slightly different variants may be considered. However, it will
         be important to enforce some broad principles. Line ministries should be left with
         sufficient time to prioritize their requests within their ceilings for development
         expenditures21. The budget should be tabled in Parliament in October.


     81. In an initial phase (e.g., from January to April), line ministries will carry out the
         following activities:

        review of the financial and physical implementation of their development budget (see below
         section on monitoring);

        updating of the total costs and the forward costs of the ongoing projects in their sector;

        preparation or updating sector strategic statements;

        internal screening of new projects (or halted projects to be resumed) previously identified;

     82. The MoF should prepare in May-June a medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF) that will
         project annual fiscal aggregates for three years. These fiscal aggregates will consist of
         revenue and expenditures by broad economic categories (including total development
         expenditures), budget balance and main financing items.

     83. From the MTFF projections prepared by the MoF, the MoP will prepare indicative
         development expenditure ceilings for each ministry (or main budget holder). These
         ceilings should cover each year of the MTFF period. They should be reviewed and
         approved by the Cabinet. These ceilings should be notified to line ministries in June in
         the budget circular, which should cover both the recurrent and the development budgets
         (from 2015).

     84. If an MTFF is not prepared these indicative ceilings should be prepared at least for the
         budget under preparation. The ceilings for the next budget will be used for the following
         years.

     85. To prepare these indicative expenditure ceilings for each ministry, the MoP will take into
         account, among other the following elements:




21
  In the PEFA PFM performance measurement framework, four to six weeks are necessary to get the score B or A
for the indicator related to budget preparation.
                                               77


   The results of budget execution in previous years (to ensure the reliability of a data a
    robust monitoring system should be set up);

   updated forward costs of ongoing projects for the next year;

   relevance of identified large projects as regards to government’s strategy


86. The MoP should consult line ministries when preparing these indicative ceilings, notably
    to review the results of the development budget execution and the new large projects that
    are being identified.

87. Line ministries should prepare their chapter 3 draft budget according to the guidelines
    provided by the MoF and the MoP in the budget circular. Ministries should verify that the
    projects are in conformity with their sectors' strategies. They will have to make trade-offs
    between requests from their subordinated units. They should screen requests from
    subordinated units with respect to sector strategies and other appropriate criteria for
    screening projects.

88. Line ministries should transmit their budget request for chapter 3 to the MoP in July.
    These requests should include all information required to assess the projects:

   Completed project profile forms, including among other elements annual costs forecasts;

   Statement on the ministry strategy.

   Results of screening made by the line ministries.

   For large project, results of the independent review.


89. Then, in August, requests for the development budget and the recurrent budget should be
    reviewed for each ministry in joint budgetary conferences including experts from the
    MoF, the MoP and the line ministry. Generally these joint reviews should focus on:

   adequacy of sector programs in relation to strategy;

   if needed, corrections of balance between sectors;

   detailed review of large programs and large projects;
                                                   78


       ensuring that the annual forward costs of projects comply with the MTFF projections (if
        the MTFF is not yet in place these annual forward costs should not exceed their amount
        planned for the budget under preparation) ;

    90. Then, the budget is approved by the Cabinet.


5.2.4 The investment annex in the budgetary documents

    91. To show the forward fiscal impact of investment projects, a special investment annex
        should be included in the budget documentation. In the budget documents for year n, that
        annex will show for each project (or group of “small” projects):

       the total costs of the projects;

       if the project is an ongoing project, the amount actually spent before year n-1, the budget for
        year n-1 and if possible forecasts of budget execution;

       the annual costs from year n to year n+2 and the total costs beyond year n+2 ;

    92. Such an annex will not include new projects for the budget out-years, because in a first
        stage, the efforts should focus on the review of the forward costs of the investment
        projects to be included in the annual budget. Later, in function of progress made in
        preparing this annex and of the quality of costs forecasts, preparing every year a full-
        fledged three-year rolling public investment program (PIP) can be considered. Such a PIP
        should be consistent with the budget for its first year. Its out-years will be indicative, but
        in conformity with the MTFF aggregates

    93. A legal text (e.g. a decree) should stipulate the main steps of the development budget
        preparation process, the documents to be produced at each step, the responsibilities of the
        different actors (MoF, MoP, line ministries/main budget holders).


6   Monitoring
6.1 Current situation

    94. Budget execution reports on payments are currently collected annually. However, taking
        into account both the payment procedure and the reporting system, it is difficult to assess
        whether these reports are comprehensive. The payment and the reporting procedures
        involve different steps. The MoP authorizes allotments to each project, and then the
        Treasury makes transfers to the bank account of the ministries and implementing
        agencies, which in turn make the payments. Implementing agencies send reports on the
                                               79


      payments made to the planning department of their ministries which in turn consolidate
      them to transmit them to the MoP.

  95. Moreover, it would be necessary to clarify: (i) the way expenditures made from the
      appropriations carried-over from the previous budget year are accounted for and; (i) the
      method for accounting for the uses of letters of credits.

  96. Within ministries monitoring of physical progress in implementing investment projects is
      sometimes done on a case by case basis. However, there is no systematic procedure for
      monitoring progress in the physical implementation of investment projects.

6.2 Improving financial and physical monitoring


  97. Establishing a robust investment project financial monitoring system should be a priority
      action to improve PIM. Progress in project screening and budget preparation would be
      difficult or illusory without information on project implementation.

  98. In a first step, the financial monitoring system should produce:

     monthly reports on payments, such reports should be available three weeks after the end of the
      reporting period;

     six-month reports on legal commitments (e.g. signed contracts), including multi-year
      commitments, such reports should be available three weeks after the end of the reporting
      period.


  99. An information system is being implemented with the support of the World Bank. This
      system will track the payments and transfers of funds made by the Treasury. In addition,
      it will be necessary to verify that the uses of the allotments by the implementing agencies
      are duly reported. This may require setting up appropriate procedures. Allotments to line
      ministries/main budget holders or to implementation agencies should be made only if a
      statement of the use of the previous allotments is produced. In addition, to ensure the
      reliability of budget execution data, appropriations carried over and their uses should be
      clearly identified.

  100.       Physical monitoring of the implementation of projects should complete the
     financial monitoring and should be made at least every 6-month period for the projects of
     a significant size (e.g. projects of total costs more than LYD 10 millions).

  101.      Setting up a robust project financial and physical monitoring will need a
     preliminary study which will consist of:
                                                   80



              identifying and setting up procedures to ensure that payment made by
               implementing agencies are duly reported and systematically compared to the
               allotment made by the Treasury;

              reviewing the current procedures for processing the payments made from
               appropriations carried over after the end of the fiscal year, and if needed making
               recommendations to ensure that these payments are duly reported and well
               identified;

              reviewing the current procedures for processing the payments made from letter of
               credits and if needed making recommendations to ensure that these payments are
               duly reported and well identified;

              identifying the responsibilities for financial reporting;

              identify the additional functions to be considered for Treasury information system;

              making suggestions, for financial monitoring, on the format of the forms, the
               periodicity of the reports, the time needed to produce them;

              identifying the scope of physical monitoring (size of the projects to be monitored,
               sectors for which physical monitoring should be implemented in the immediate)

              identifying the responsibilities and procedures for physical monitoring;

              making suggestions, for physical monitoring, on the format of the forms, the
               periodicity of the reports, the time needed to produce them.

    102.        The project monitoring system should be coordinated by the MoP.


7   Training
103. Training is needed in most PIM areas. Lack of planning and socio-economic analysis of
project suggests that in every sectors priority should be given to sector planning, socio-economic
analysis of projects, and basic PFM procedures. Such training should involve staff of the
planning department of line ministries and staff of the ministry of Planning. A training program
should be prepared and implemented: The first step will consist of carrying out a training needs
assessment, which, among other activities will compare the skills needed for PIM and the skills
of existing staff.
                                                  81



104.     The modules of training should cover among others the following issues:

            Preparation of sector strategy. Analysis of some sectors, concrete example of
             strategies

            Presentation of the project cycle

            Project identification: analysis of needs and problems, projects and sector strategy,
             the logical framework.

            Project preparation: appraisal techniques (CBA, cost-effectiveness analysis, etc.),
             case studies ;

            Project operational management (planning activities, organizational issues) ;

            Monitoring

            Evaluation


8      Organizational issues
105. Responsibilities in PIM are both fragmented and duplicated. The division of
responsibilities between the implementing agencies reporting to the PPA and line ministries is
unclear, as well as between the PPA and the MoP. According to some officials, notably from the
ministry of Higher Education, sector ministries lack of information concerning projects of their
sectors, when there are implemented by an agency not placed under their responsibility, as it is
the case of ODAC. In such cases, decisions on the implementation and funding of these projects
can be taken without consulting the sector ministry.

106. Streamlined organizational arrangements should be defined and implemented. The
investment coordination function should be performed by a single entity (the MoP), while project
preparation, appraisal and implementation should be entirely placed under the responsibility of
line ministries. However, taking into account the current political situation, it may be difficult to
address this issue in the near future.
