                                              100298




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD            1
    This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do
    not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The
    World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
    information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status
    of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


    Design & Concept by GALESE SAC
    Cover Photo: World Bank Photo Library




2                                                                                  SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
                            Social Protection for
                          the Harder Road Ahead:
                       Containing the social costs of lower growth
                          in Latin America and the Caribbean



During a decade of rapid growth, more jobs and higher wages dramatically reduced poverty and drove
down historically high levels of inequality. Governments in the region complemented the gains from
growth with investments in social protection policies, further reducing poverty and inequality. Countries
in Latin America and the Caribbean are rightfully proud of these achievements.

As the region prepares for a long period of slower growth and tighter budgets, the value of their
investment in building social protection systems will grow. Social protection can help protect social
gains as labor earnings and employment fall. The evidence accumulated from the region’s experience
of which social protection interventions work and which do not, will be an essential resource to guide
difficult policy decisions.

Countries will move ahead with the long run development of their diverse social protection systems
as they are able. But in the shorter run three areas of policy action will rise in priority: (i) protecting
poor and vulnerable people through the lean years; (ii) finding fiscal savings in reforms to large and
regressive items of social policy; and (iii) fielding labor market initiatives to support workers during a
long, slack period and prepare them for economic recovery.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                   3
                                                  ©WORLD BANK PHOTO LIBRARY




4   SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Section I: The Road thus Far
In the wake of rapid economic growth, the region has achieved a remarkable reduction in poverty.
Poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean fell by more than 16 percentage points in almost a decade,
going from 41.6 percent of the population living with less than $4/day in 2003 to 25.3 percent in 2012.
As a result, 70 million people moved out of poverty. The region has also achieved impressive gains in
reducing extreme poverty, halving the number of people living with less than $2.5 dollars a day since
2003, down to 13.3 percent in 2012 (World Bank 2013).1

Years of high growth were also accompanied by a reduction of inequality and better shared prosperity.
Sustained economic growth, and inequality reduction efforts led to a notable rise in the incomes of those at
the bottom of the income distribution. The income of the poorest 40 percent grew faster than the income
of the overall population in most countries in the region (see Figure 1), and the regional Gini coefficient
for per capita income decreased by five points from 0.57 in 2000 to 0.52 in 2012. In 2011, for the first
time, Latin America and the Caribbean had more people in the middle class (as measured by a $10/day
threshold) than it had living in poverty. This change is largely due to the reduction in inequality that came
about through faster and more equitable income growth, and is driven by performance of countries in the
Southern Cone where the middle class is the largest economic class (World Bank 2013).

      Figure 1. Annualized Income Growth of Poorest 40 Percent Relative to Overall Population, Latin American and Caribbean Countries

                              10                              9,4
                                                                                                                                     Overall population                       Mean income bottom 40%
                                                   7,87
      Annualized income growth rate, percent




                                               8                        6,77                                               6,76                                                                               6,85
                                                                                                                                                                                                    6,04                5,78
                                               6                                  4,9                                                                                          4,79
                                                                                            4,39                                                                                          4,49

                                               4                                                                                     3,19                 3,05
                                                                                                       3,1       2,4
                                                                                                                                                                    1,86
                                               2    4,6       4,6       4,5                 4,3       1,31                                                                                                    4,4        4,7
                                                                                  3,3                                      3,9                                                            3,8       3,7
                                                                                                                 0,7                 1,1                  0,6       1,1           1
                                               0                                                                                               -1,01


                                    -2                                                                                                         -1,8
                                                                                                                                                                                     09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   13
                                                         13

                                                                   13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13
                                                                             13

                                                                                       13

                                                                                                 13

                                                                                                            13

                                                                                                                      13

                                                                                                                                13

                                                                                                                                          13




                                                                                                                                                               13




                                                                                                                                                                                               13

                                                                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                     11




                                                                                                                                                                                                              2004–
                                                    2004–

                                                              2002–




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2003–
                                                                        2003–

                                                                                  2003–

                                                                                            2003–

                                                                                                      2010 –

                                                                                                                 2003–

                                                                                                                           2003–

                                                                                                                                     2004–

                                                                                                                                                2000–

                                                                                                                                                          2003–

                                                                                                                                                                    2002–

                                                                                                                                                                                2005–

                                                                                                                                                                                          2008–

                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003–




                                                   AR (*) BO            BR        CL        CO        CR         DO        EC        ES         GT        HN        MX          NI        PA                  PE        UY(*)


Source: LAC Equity Lab tabulations of SEDLAC (CEDLAS and the World Bank) and World Development Indicators.
Note: Because the numbers presented here are based on SEDLAC, a regional data harmonization effort that increases cross-country comparability, they may differ
from official statistics reported by governments and national statistical offices. In cases where data are unavailable for a given country in a given year, values have been
interpolated using WDI data to calculate regional measures. The Latin America and Caribbean aggregate is based on 17 countries in the region for which micro data are
available at the national level. Urban and rural poverty rates are not available for the Latin America and Caribbean aggregate or subregions. (*)Only urban data.
Note: AR=Argentina, BO=Bolivia, BR=Brazil, CL=Chile, CO=Colombia, CR=Costa Rica, DO=Dominican Republic, EC=Ecuador, ES=El Salvador, GT=Guatemala,
HN=Honduras, MX=Mexico, NI=Nicaragua, PA=Panama, PE=Peru, PY=Paraguay, T&T=Trinidad and Tobago, UY=Uruguay



1	   The global extreme poverty line, which is used frequently to compare extreme poverty levels around the world is $1.25/day. But the level of economic development of the Latin America
     and Caribbean region has led analysts to more often use an extreme poverty line of $2.50/day, and a poverty line of $4/day. Poverty lines and incomes are expressed in 2005 US$ PPP
     (Purchasing Power Parity).




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                                                                                        5
    Growth in employment and earnings was central, but social policies also contributed to reducing
    poverty and increasing shared prosperity (see Figure 2). 61 percent of the decline in poverty in the
    region in recent years can be attributed to higher labor incomes, with more people working and workers
    earning more. Women’s higher earnings are responsible for 21 percent of the decline in poverty, and
    males’ earnings for 40 percent. Moreover, proceeds from transfers accounted for 23 percent of this
    reduction, while pensions contributed 13 percent, and other non-labor income the remainder (World
    Bank 2013).

    Figure 2. Reduction in poverty in Latin America and Caribbean: Share of income change due to various factors



                                                       Higher
                                                   employment rate
                                                        18%
                                            Pensions
                                              13%


                                                                      Increased
                                                                     earnings per
                                            Transfers                   worker
                                              23%                        43%




                                     Source: World Bank 2013




    During this period, social protection programs—noncontributory cash transfers in particular—were
    dramatically expanded, fueled by the greater fiscal yields of rapid economic growth. The importance
    of social protection in addressing poverty, inequality, and exclusion is more widely recognized than ever
    before. The past 10 to 20 years have seen the creation of conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs; the
    expansion of coverage of the elderly and disabled through social pensions; more attention to active labor
    market programs, especially for young people; and the initial development of integrated service delivery
    mechanisms to more accurately identify target households and deliver benefits more efficiently. With
    the gradual introduction in recent years of significant noncontributory elements in the social protection
    system the traditional truncation of the welfare state, that created formidable obstacles to protection,
    is being addressed (see Figure 3).




6                                                                             SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Figure 3. Evolution of Social Protection Policies in the Latin America and the Caribbean Region



                                                  Pensions                              Labor                             Social                               Systems
                                                                                                                        Assistance
                                                                                                                                                                Productive
                                                                                                                                                                 Inclusion
           2010s



                                                                                   ALMPs,training
                                                                                                                                                               New social
                                                 Reforms to                                                                                                   development
                                             improve coverage                                                           Social pensions                        ministries
                                              (including social                     Changes to
           2000s




                                                  pensions)                       unemployment                                                                    Social
                                                                                                                                CCTs                         intermediation
                                                                                    insurance
                                                                                                                                                                 services
                                                                                    Public works                                                                  Shared
                   World Summits                  Reforms to                          (crisis)                                                                  beneﬁciary
           1990s




                    propel rights-                 improve                                                                Social funds                           registries
                   based approach               sustainability,
                       to SPL                                                          Labor
                                                    reduce                          deregulation                        Food programs
                    Recognition of              fragmentation                                                              and CCT
                                                                                                                          precursors
           1980s




                    the social cost
                    of adjustment
           1970s




                                               Introduction of
                                                 contributory
                                                   pensions:
           1960s




                                                  retirement,                    Labor regulation
                                                survivorship,
                                                   disability




Section II: The Harder Road Ahead
After a decade or more of sustained expansion that started in 2000, economic growth has started
to slow in the region, and fiscal space is decreasing. Average GDP growth has been steadily slowing,
from close to 4 percent in 2011 to around 1 percent in 2014, and it is projected to reach only 0.8 percent
in 2015 (World Bank 2015e). Although the deceleration rates are not uniform across countries (with
some of the largest economies—Brazil, Chile, Peru and Venezuela—leading the downward trend), most
countries are likely to face a combination of monetary and fiscal policy constraints that could affect
their social expenditures and capacity for policy maneuver (World Bank 2015e). Government budgets
are being squeezed.2 The ample fiscal space that had been available during the 2008–09 economic
crisis enabled countercyclical public spending, including increased social protection, and contributed to
the region’s early recovery. But this cushion is now largely gone, and the relative lack of fiscal space
restricts countries’ capacity to engage in countercyclical spending. The problem is especially acute in the
Caribbean and Central America (World Bank 2015e).


2	   As World Bank (2015e) points out, the policy maneuvering space is increasingly limited also on the monetary policy side, where central banks are struggling to maintain inflation levels in the
     face of steady currency depreciations that are passing though via higher consumer prices. The threat of higher inflation rates is especially damaging for the poor and vulnerable given the
     higher than average consumption share of their budget.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                                                            7
                                                  © ANDREA BORGARELLO AND WORLD BANK




8   SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Despite fiscal pressures, the expectations to address exclusion in the region remain high, and
slower growth increases the need for social protection. Governments will be expected to continue to
achieve social gains, but as growth decelerates, the pace of poverty reduction is expected to stall and
employment to slacken. In Brazil, new-job creation began to stall in 2013 (Silva et al 2015) and at 7.5
percent, unemployment in July 2015 was already 2.6 percentage points above its July 2014 rate (World
Bank 2015c). In Mexico, poverty reduction is also stalling, driven by small increases in monetary poverty
even as the country has shown modest improvement in relieving other dimensions of deprivation such
as access to health and support for the elderly and disabled, housing and education.3 (CONEVAL 2015).

The arsenal of social protection programs can be effectively deployed to help contain the social costs
of low growth and tighter fiscal constraints. Countries in the region have somewhat different social
contracts and are at different stages of developing their social protection systems. A longer run agenda
to develop these systems is already being pursued by policy makers. However, with slower growth,
slower poverty reduction, slack labor markets and reduced fiscal space, three new areas of action rise
quickly in priority:

        	 protecting the poor and people made vulnerable through the period of slower growth;
        	 finding fiscal savings in reforms to large and regressive items of social policy;
        	 fielding labor market initiatives to prepare working people for economic recovery.

2.1. Protecting the poor and people made vulnerable through the period of slower growth

The wave of programming, innovation, and evaluation in social protection—especially innovations in
social assistance with the establishment of the conditional cash transfers and social pensions—has
begun to repair the historical truncation of the welfare state in Latin America and the Caribbean.4These
programs, their innovations, and their successes need to continue and to improve. Falling earnings
and job losses will create demand for policy responses. Governments will need to be ready to help
households manage shocks to earned income, and contain the possible effects on workers and the
work force of unemployment and discouragement.

2.1.a. Protecting the gains in poverty reduction

Extensive and rigorous evaluations of social assistance programs show their value to protecting
poor and vulnerable people and helping put them on a positive trajectory. Many social assistance
programs in Latin America and the Caribbean are well designed and implemented. The conditional cash
transfer (CCT) programs in particular have been extensively assessed. In almost every case and despite
variations in design, the programs reduce poverty, have increased use of health and school services.
Depending on both the specificities of the program’s design and of their evaluations, the programs
have shown the ability to affect, usually to a modest degree, final outcomes such as nutrition, health,
mental health, school completion, and learning. These gains have been made with little impact on the




3	 Mexico was the first country in Latin America to adopt a multi-dimensional Poverty Index as its official poverty measure in 2008. The multidimensional poverty measure was defined by the
   National Evaluation Council (CONEVAL) as a combination of income poverty and a set of deprivations (nutrition, education, social security, basic services, access to health services, and qual-
   ity and space of the dwelling).
4	 Latin America and the Caribbean, “truncated” social policies tied benefits to formal sector employment, having the effect of “cutting off” many of the poor and vulnerable from social
   expenditures as the region’s welfare states were built.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                                                          9
     labor supply of adults (DFID 2011; Fiszbein and Schady 2009; IEG 2011). Evaluations of school feeding
     programs are less abundant but also generally positive; they show improvements in school attendance
     and, to a lesser degree, schooling performance and child health (Adelman, Gilligan, and Lehrer 2008;
     Bundy et al. 2009; WFP 2013). Evaluations of social pensions programs are mixed, sometimes showing
     reductions in work effort among the elderly but sometimes also showing increased household earnings
     as the households either use the cash to alleviate constraints to their own-managed enterprises or
     rearrange labor among generations. A review of recent Latin American youth employment programs
     found that these initiatives affected at least one employment indicator positively (CEDLAS 2013).5 Not
     all programs perform equally well, however, so there is plenty of room for improvement.

     Social assistance programs remain pertinent, but there is plenty to be done to improve, which may
     become more urgent in the coming period of low growth. Most continental and a few Caribbean
     countries have had CCTs in place for several years now. The agenda is broad, with priorities including
     consolidation of operational tools and administrative systems, especially in younger programs. In some
     cases modifications to target groups, co-responsibilities and benefit structures to improve impacts is
     appropriate (figure 4). In Honduras, for example, the Bono Vida Mejor (Better Life Voucher) is focusing
     efforts on strengthening operations by improving payment and grievance and redress mechanisms. It
     is retargeting to focus on the extreme poor rather than all poor. It is also refining program design by
     switching from a flat payment structure to a payment per child or student and by introducing a new
     transfer for children in lower-secondary school to counter the high dropout rates during transition to
     secondary school (World Bank, 2014).

     Figure 4. Progression of Development for CCT Programs


                       Haiti                                          Honduras                                                      Mexico




            Pilot or limited-scale                                  Rollout and consolidation                             Second-generation reforms
            programs
                                                                    Strengthening service delivery,                       Moving from chronic poverty to
            Deﬁnition of targeting tools,                           expanding coverage, improving                         vulnerability or multidimensional
            selection of beneﬁciaries,                              targeting and information,                            poverty, evolution of corespon-
            operational challenges                                  modernizing payment systems,                          sibilities or beneﬁt structures,
                                                                    monitoring coresponsibilities,                        linking to other social services or
                                                                    establishing recertiﬁcation                           productive programs (CCTs as
                                                                    processes                                             platform to SPL systems)


     Note: CCT = conditional cash transfer. SPL = social protection and labor.




     5	   Of the 65 programs tallied in the CEDLAS (2013) study, 12 had rigorous impact evaluations and 7 had cost-effectiveness evaluations.




10                                                                                                                          SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Latin American and Caribbean countries have been substantially extending coverage of old-age income
security, often via non-contributory social pensions. Between 2000 and 2013, at least 18 countries
in the region introduced new programs or significant reforms to increase coverage (figure 5). Bolivia,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, and Peru expanded coverage
via noncontributory or “social” pensions that had little interaction with the traditional contributory
programs. In some cases (Ecuador, Panama, Paraguay, and Peru), these new programs are run by the
same agencies that handle social assistance for poor families with children. Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Trinidad and Tobago, and Uruguay have introduced significant reforms to their contributory schemes
to improve coverage, in general allowing those with insufficient years of service to earn a minimum
pension (Rofman, Apella, and Vezza 2014). These changes have begun to redress the truncation of the
Latin American welfare state long known for low coverage overall and that highly skewed toward the
upper end of the welfare distribution.

Figure 5. Timeline of Reforms to Increase Coverage of Old-Age Pensions in Latin American and Caribbean Countries,
2000–13




                                                                                          BO
                                                                                          CL                   BO
                                                                    BR                    BR                   PE
                                    AR         AR                   EC         UY         PE        ES         PY
   CR         MX                    MX         CO        UY         MX         MX         UY        PA        T&T         PE                   CO
  2000       2001       2002       2003       2004      2005       2006       2007       2008      2009       2010       2011       2012      2013




Source: Adapted from Rofman, Apella, and Vezza 2014.
Note: AR=Argentina, BO=Bolivia, BR=Brazil, CL=Chile, CO=Colombia, CR=Costa Rica, EC=Ecuador, ES=El Salvador, MX=Mexico, PA=Panama, PE=Peru, PY=Paraguay,
T&T=Trinidad and Tobago, UY=Uruguay




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                11
                                                   ©WORLD BANK PHOTO LIBRARY




12   SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
With larger and more sophisticated social programs, countries have started to look for ways to increase
overall effectiveness and efficiency by integrating and coordinating the provision of services. Following
the rise in implementation of social programs that started in the late 1980s, Latin American countries
began to develop tools and strategies that could help them manage the rapidly growing number of
social programs implemented by different agencies (often outside of the traditional “social” ministries
but that responded more broadly to poverty reduction efforts). Social registries and program inventories
are being used to help social programs identify, locate, and reach the poor who are underserved as well
as to identify which programs are duplicating efforts by targeting the same population with the same
services. Initially, these efforts were led by countries such as Brazil, Chile, and Colombia. Their efforts to
establish shared targeting instruments for multiple programs (Brazil’s Cadastro Único [Single Registry],
Chile’s Ficha CAS [CAS Card], and Colombia’s SISBÉN)6 as well as social intermediation services to link
beneficiaries to existing supply of programs (Brasil Sem Miséria, Chile Solidario, and Unidos in Colombia)
opened the way for other countries to develop similar tools. In the 2000s, a wave of institutionalization
and integration efforts led to the creation of new institutions for the coordination and implementation
of social protection programs (for example, new ministries of social development in Chile, Colombia,
Guatemala, and Peru, as well as the creation of a number of inter-ministerial committees). Integration of
service provision and improved coordination has significant potential to increase the effectiveness—and
efficiency—of the social protection system as a whole (see Figure 6).

Figure 6. Development of Social Protection Systems’ Delivery Tools


               Paraguay                                     Dominican Republic                                               Chile




       “Programitis”                                         Development of                                        Integrated SPL systems
       Multiple programs                                     (information) tools to                                Shared information
       implemented by diﬀerent                               manage supply and demand                              management tools, strong
       agencies with separate                                Beneﬁciary registries, social                         institutional capacity, and
       rules, targeting tools, MIS,                          intermediation services,                              common results and budget
       and so on                                             inventories, proﬁling, and so on                      mechanisms



Note: SPL = social protection and labor. MIS = management information systems



The capacity and experience built to date will provide a good basis for protecting poor and vulnerable
people during hard times ahead. The expansion of coverage and increase in benefits for Mexico’s
Oportunidades program was effective in softening the blow in one of the countries hardest hit by the
2008/9 Global Financial Crisis. Without the program changes, the incomes of people in the poorest
decile would have fallen by about 8 percent. However, with the changes their incomes dropped only
about 2 percent. Mexico was not alone in taking such action. Following the 2008/9 Global Financial Crisis,
19 countries in the region expanded their cash transfer programs by increasing coverage (5 countries),
benefit levels (3 countries) or both (11 countries). However, to serve better as social assistance during

6	   CAS = Comités de Asistencia Social (Social Assistance Committees). SISBÉN = Sistema de Identificación de Potenciales Beneficiarios de Programas Sociales (System for Selection of Ben-
     eficiaries for Social Programs).




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                                                   13
     a downturn, and especially to help vulnerable people who move in and out of poverty, the region’s cash
     transfer programs need to have three features that are presently rare. They need to: (i) have budgets
     that increase along with need, without waiting lists for entry; (ii) receive applications continuously
     rather than only in periodic retargeting procedures; and (iii) have targeting criteria that consider current
     income as part of eligibility rather than relying only on longer run correlates of chronic poverty as do
     many of the region’s proxy means tests (Grosh, Bussolo and Freije, 2014).

     2.1.b. Protecting the newly vulnerable unemployed from the pain of slackening labor markets

     In the context of slowing growth, governments in the region will face the challenge of providing effective
     and incentive-compatible income support to the unemployed as they look for new jobs. The larger, higher-
     income countries (including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay) have
     introduced unemployment insurance (UI) or unemployment insurance savings accounts (UISAs) but even
     in these countries, only about 22 percent of the unemployed received benefits during the 2009 Global
     Financial Crisis because informality and job turnover leave workers without the required contribution
     history to be covered (Vroman and Brusentsev, 2009). As part of the crisis response, most Latin American
     and Caribbean countries with national unemployment insurance plans changed the rules to expand
     coverage, at least temporarily, the Bahamas introduced a temporary program, and Mexico introduced but
     has not yet passed legislation for unemployment insurance. But there is more to do to build programs in
     other countries and a need for complementary actions for those who are not covered. Programs that offer
     temporary publically supported employment may complement traditional unemployment insurance or
     unemployment insurance savings accounts. Programs for temporary employment are relatively common
     in the region (larger in Chile and Mexico but also present in Bolivia and Peru as well as nascent in Antigua
     and Barbuda and the Dominican Republic), but they are small relative to countries in other middle income
     regions and to the scale of unemployment (Grosh, Bussolo, and Freije 2014).

     Youth merit special attention in active labor market policies to prevent long term “scarring” from
     early experiences of unemployment. Over 18 million youth 15-24 are not in education, employment,
     or training (NEETs, also referred to as “Ninis” in Latin America).7 Among those youth who are employed,
     informality is 40 percent higher than among the overall population. At 20 percent, the rate of Latin
     American and Caribbean youth who are NEETs is not out of line with the rates found in other developing
     regions (De Hoyos, Rogers, and Szekely 2015).8 However, addressing the issue is a strongly felt social
     need, especially in countries experiencing high rates of crime and violence linked to gang activity.
     Among the reasons that youth inactivity and unemployment merit special attention is that it can be
     ‘scarring’, resulting in lower employment and earnings rates for life.9 In 2008/9 global financial crisis
     youth suffered higher increases in unemployment than other age groups. In Mexico for example,
     the youth unemployment rate rose by 3.5 percentage point, while that for prime-age adults by 1.8
     percentage points. Similar trends were seen in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Ecuador. So,
     though something like swimming against the current, high caliber youth employment programs may be
     especially timely in a downturn to prevent long term losses (Grosh, Bussolo, and Freije 2014).


     7	   NEET is the most widely used term, adopted by many countries as well as the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). The common Spanish equivalent “NiNis”
          or “Ninis” derives from “ni estudia, ni trabaja” (“neither studies nor works”).
     8	   Youth who are out of school and out of work constitute 20 percent of the youth population globally, 11 percent in high-income countries, 17 percent in Europe and Central Asia, and 32 percent
          in the Middle East and North Africa. De Hoyos, Rogers, and Szekely 2015.
     9	   Székely and Karver (2015) find that for any given cohort of male youth ages 15 to 20, a 1 percent increase in the proportion of ninis predicts a 7 percent reduction in earnings for that cohort d
          20 years later. The “scarring” of ninis on women’s wages is somehow lower, at 3 percent, but women too suffer significant long-term effects: their likelihood of being employed at age 35-40
          falls by half of a percentage point by the experience of being ninis during their adolescence.




14                                                                                                                               SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Latin America and the Caribbean has been an incubator for comprehensive, multifaceted youth
employment programs and evaluation evidence shows these programs are a strong platform on
which to expand. The greatest benefits seem to come from initiatives that provide a range of support,
including training in technical skills but also socio-emotional skills and sometimes general cognitive
skills, practicums or apprenticeships, and job placement assistance. Stipends paid during training can
help defray expenses for transport, lunch, and ideally some opportunity costs, and they are especially
important to increase the access of poor youth to these interventions. Similarly, support for child care is
necessary to ensure that poor young mothers’ can access training and job-search services. To be useful
to job-seekers, employment services need to respond to employers’ demands labor and skills (Almeida
et al. 2012; Gonzáles-Velosa, Ripani, and Rosas-Shady 2012). In addition, entrepreneurship programs can
assist workers with limited prospects of achieving formal dependent employment. Entrepreneurship
support is more effective when it includes training and support to strengthen business skills as well as
access to appropriate credit and other financial services (Cho and Honorati 2013).

Governments are already expanding, and refining these programs, anticipating a need to scale up. For
example, in Argentina, the Jóvenes con Más y Mejor Trabajo program is operating at large scale. It provides
the full range of support to youth, such as labor market orientation, soft-skills training, completion of
secondary schooling or technical training, and supporting stipends and job search assistance. In Bolivia,
the much younger and smaller program Mi Primer Empleo Digno is set to expand following a successful
pilot implementation phase that provided remedial education and training in industrial sewing,
metalworking, and construction of housing units to young school dropouts. The program aims to insert
unemployed young people into the labor market or foster entrepreneurship among them.

2.2 Finding fiscal savings in reforms to large and regressive social policies;

On average, the region’s spending on social protection is in line with international comparators. And
evidence suggests that programs in Latin America and the Caribbean have, on the whole, a good track
record for effectiveness. However, consideration of how to finance the broadening social contract is
important, as is searching for ways to improve effectiveness. Concerns about slowing and low growth
and decreased fiscal space are rising, making politically challenging reform of expensive and regressive
parts of social policy urgent. There is technical consensus that energy subsidies are regressive
and damaging. Social protection tools can facilitate the design of compensatory packages to help
governments repeal these programs, which could result in significant fiscal savings. Furthermore,
spending on unbalanced contributory pension plans is of particular concern for three reasons: (i)
contributory pensions are typically the largest single component of social protection spending; (ii) the
de-facto mixed model of financing from earmarked taxes and governments’ general revenues through
the budget creates distortions and work disincentives; and (iii) without changes in key parameters,
such as minimum retirement ages and how benefits are indexed, rapid aging will escalate expenditures
further. Although direct savings from reforms to social insurance plans would only be had in the medium
and longer term, bold moves to contain future commitments can win governments better financing
terms from markets. Fiscal savings from improvements to social assistance will be harder to find and
smaller, but in a few cases it may be possible to achieve without hampering effectiveness.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                   15
                                                   ©WORLD BANK PHOTO LIBRARY




16   SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Social protection expenditures in Latin America and the Caribbean are within global norms, albeit
often lower than in other regions. Spending to meet the commitments of contributory pension
plans is the largest line-item of social protection spending, averaging about 3 percent of GDP in Latin
America, albeit with substantial variation—above 6 percent in Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay but below
1 percent in Guyana, Haiti, and Jamaica (OECD, IDB, and World Bank 2014). By way of context, spending
on social assistance programs, as a percentage of GDP, increased threefold over the 2000s, from an
average of 0.4 percent among 10 countries in 2000 to 1.2 percent in 2010, though it remains below
the world average of 1.6 percent or the OECD average of 2.9 percent.10 Expenditures on labor market
programs—unemployment insurance, employment services, training, wage subsidies, incentives for
self-employment, or direct public employment—are much lower, at about 1 percent of GDP in recent
years in Brazil and in selected years in Argentina; about 0.3–0.6 percent of GDP in Chile, Colombia;
and even lower in the other countries in the regional data.11 For comparison, the OECD average for
unemployment insurance spending alone is in the range of 0.7–1.0 percent of GDP, depending on the
year, and average OECD spending on active labor market programs (ALMPs) ranged from 0.5 percent
to 0.7 percent of GDP during the 2000s decade.12 In contrast, ALMP spending in the 10 Eastern and
Central European countries was 0.5 percent of GDP in 2008 and 1.0 percent of GDP in 2010 (Kuddo
2012).

In several countries, reductions in regressive energy subsidies may offer governments the fiscal
savings they need in the short run for successful public financial management. Spending on energy
subsidies by countries in Latin America and the Caribbean is not only the second highest in the world,
but several of countries in the region also spend significantly more on energy subsidies than on social
safety nets or social assistance. This has become not only a fiscal problem, but an important issue for
both energy policy and social policy in the region (figure 7). Energy subsidies exceed 5 percent of GDP
in Ecuador and Venezuela (IMF 2013), and energy and transport subsidies exceed 5 percent of GDP in
Argentina (World Bank 2015a). In Panama, electricity and liquid propane gas subsidies are far smaller,
at 0.75 percent of GDP, but each is still larger than any of the cash transfer programs and larger than
social assistance spending (World Bank 2015g). In Honduras, spending on energy subsidies, at 0.5
percent of GDP, is approximately on par with the cost of its CCT program (0.6 percent of GDP) (World
Bank 2014).




10	 World Bank Latin America and Caribbean SPL Data Base.
11	 World Bank Latin America and Caribbean SPL Data Base.
12	 OECD UI and ALMP spending averages from OECD iLibrary 3 data, http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                               17
     There is growing consensus around the importance of reducing energy subsidies, in order to meet
     environmental and economic, as well as social policy objectives. G20 leaders have recognized that
     “inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies encourage wasteful consumption, distort markets, impede investment
     in clean energy sources and undermine efforts to deal with climate change” and have committed to
     phase out and rationalize inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies that lead to wasteful consumption “while being
     conscious of the necessity to provide targeted support to the poorest” (G20 2009, 2013). Moreover, the
     efficiency and effectiveness of general price subsidies as instruments of social policy are limited for three
     reasons. First, price subsidies distort the input and consumption choices of firms and households, which
     can stall the development or adoption of newer, more productive technology. Second, generalized price
     subsidies are likely to be highly regressive and so to have muted impact on poverty reduction relative to
     their cost. Third, subsidies crowd out spending available for infrastructure investments and for other social
     services that not only benefit the poor more directly, but may be urgently needed to put a country on a
     higher productivity path. Price subsidies are a blunt instrument of social policy developed at a time before
     governments had the administrative capacity and experience to target assistance to poor and vulnerable
     households. Now that this capacity and experience is firmly in place in Latin America and the Caribbean
     they are a costly hold-over, with enormous fiscal weight that are holding countries back.

     Figure 7. Global Spending on Subsidies and Social Safety Nets, by Region



                                                5                     Social safety nets   Energy   Electricity   Food


                                                4
                  Spending, percentage of GDP




                                                3



                                                2



                                                1



                                                0
                                                    Europe and     Sub-Saharan Middle East    Latin America East Asia and   South Asia
                                                    Central Asia     Africa    and North      and Caribbean    Paciﬁc
                                                                                 Africa


     Source: World Bank 2015h.
     Note: Data on food subsidies not available for all countries.




18                                                                                                       SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
A few countries have reformed their energy subsidies, and more could take advantage of their social
protection system’s service delivery tools to do so. The newer social protection instruments are a
cheaper, more nimble and effective set of tools. Most Latin American and Caribbean countries now
have well-honed social assistance programs as well as the social registries that could serve as means
of compensating the repeal of demand-side subsidies as part of an energy reform package, especially
when compensation is targeted to the poor. Globally about half of countries that reform energy subsidies
provide some sort of social assistance in compensation. Sometimes the assistance is targeted to the
poor, other times it is deployed more broadly (IMF 2013). The Latin America and Caribbean’s experience
is similar. The Dominican Republic in 2010 replaced costly universal subsidies on gas and electricity with
targeted subsidies, raised the electricity tariff, and lowered the consumption ceiling below which electricity
is subsidized, thus improving targeting of the poor (IADB and World Bank 2013). This reform scenario was
made possible by the social registry created for its flagship social assistance programs.

As contributory pensions are the largest component of social protection spending their sustainability
is critical to fiscal health. Most countries in Latin America spend approximately 3 percent of GDP on
contributory pensions (ILO 2014).13 But Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay -countries that are already more
“aged” than many in the region and that offer high coverage and generous programs- spend over 6
percent of GDP on contributory pensions (figure 8). Demographic change14 and the maturing of the
systems could lead to much higher expenditures if current policies are unchanged—as high as 9 percent
and 13 percent of GDP by 2050 in Uruguay and Argentina, respectively, and 13 and 18 percent by 2100.
Of course, pension policy does change over time, but the magnitude of these numbers reinforces the
concern about sustainability.

Even taking into account contribution revenue from participating workers and employers, the fiscal
burden of contributory pensions is significant. Recent estimates of public pension spending net of
contributions using a uniform methodology across a range of countries are not available.15 However, the
few published estimates available from single-country studies illustrate the concern. In Colombia the
deficit between spending on contributory pensions and revenue from contributions was 3.8 percent of
GDP, and expected to fall as coverage of the Regimen de Prima Media falls but only to 2.1 percent of GDP
and not until 2050 (Bosch, et al, 2013). In El Salvador where over 98 percent of people who contribute do
so to the new plan of individual accounts, the contribution revenue going to the government is minimal.
In 2013 the government spent 2.6 percent of GDP on public pensions, and expected this figure to remain
constant until 2030, and then drop to 1.8 percent of GDP (World Bank 2015d). The pensions deficits are not
only important for fiscal balance but because they are regressive, financed from general taxes revenues
levied in part on families poorer than those with entitlements to social insurance.




13	 “Contributory” pensions are those financed by taxes that individuals pay on their own earnings during their working years. “Noncontributory” pensions —also referred to as “social pen-
    sions”— consist of cash transfers to individuals targeted on the basis of age and, sometimes poverty if means tested, on income.
14	 The region’s population is rapidly aging because of two trends: life expectancy has increased dramatically (from 52 years in 1950 to 74 years in 2010, expected to reach 85 years by the end
    of this century), and fertility rates are declining (from an average of six children per woman in 1950 to two today) (Rofman, Apella, and Vezza 2014). In France, the share of the population over
    65-years-old doubled, from 7 percent to 14 percent, over the course of 115 years. In contrast, a similar transformation took 26 years in Chile, 21 years in Brazil, and only 19 years in Colombia.
    The 25 fastest-aging countries include seven from Latin America: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Mexico, and Peru (Kinsella and He 2009).
15	 Public spending on social insurance benefits like old-age pensions, survivor and disability benefits, are not strictly comparable to spending on ‘non-contributory’ social assistance. This is be-
    cause social insurance is designed to mimic actuarial market insurance and is financed with ‘premiums’ in the form of ear-marked taxes. When considering the fiscal effort and sustainability
    of contributory plans, therefore, spending net of revenue from contributions is a better indicator. In Latin America and the Caribbean where several countries have introduced structural
    changes to social insurance, the contributions of many affiliates now flow in part or entirely into individual retirement savings accounts. This makes calculating public pension spending net
    of contributions more difficult.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                                                              19
                                                   ©WORLD BANK PHOTO LIBRARY




20   SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Figure 8. Pension Spending in Latin America and the Caribbean, Selected Countries and Years


                                                        10
            Total Pension Spending, percentage of GDP
                                                         9

                                                         8

                                                         7

                                                         6

                                                         5

                                                         4

                                                         3

                                                         2

                                                         1

                                                         0
                                                               JM    BO     GT    ES     EC     PE MX         CR    CO T&T CH            BR     AR     UY
                                                             (2009)(2010) (2009)(2010) (2010) (2012) (2012) (2009)(2012) (2010) (2010) (2010) (2011) (2010)


Source: World Bank Pension Database (http://go.worldbank.org/IRHX8QBQU0).
Note: As ‘contributory’ programs are typically financed through earmarked taxes (“contributions”) form employers and workers (and sometimes a separate statutory
contribution form governments, in addition to those made by government as the employer of civil servants), a more accurate comparison of the fiscal costs of social
insurance to spending on social assistance is to spending net of contribution revenue. This statistic is not recently, uniformly available across Latin American and
Caribbean countries.
Note: AR=Argentina, BO=Bolivia, BR=Brazil, CL=Chile, CO=Colombia, CR=Costa Rica, EC=Ecuador, ES=El Salvador, GT=Guatemala, JM=Jamaica, MX=Mexico, PE=Peru,
T&T=Trinidad and Tobago, UY=Uruguay



More action is needed to address the sustainability of the region’s pensions systems. ‘Parametric’
reforms –changes to contribution rates or to benefit calculations, eligibility parameters or indexing rules-
traditionally used to improve actuarial balances contributory pensions -- are always politically contentious
and have not been the main focus of pension policy in the region in recent years, though there are some
exceptions of governments taking action. Some OECS countries as well as Jamaica have introduced
changes in retirement age and contribution ceilings, but for the most part parametric reforms have
focused on special plans that cover only particular segments of the labor force (for example, Jamaica’s civil
service, Trinidad and Tobago’s public sector, and the Honduras teachers’ scheme), which are more likely
than national schemes to suffer from imbalances between commitments and revenue from contributions.
More significant adjustments to plan parameters seems likely in coming years as fiscal space narrows and
actuarial balances worsen. Even gradual shifts in certain parameters can have significant fiscal pay-offs in
time, and although direct savings from reforms to social insurance plans would only be had in the medium
and longer term, bold moves to contain future commitments can win governments better financing
terms from markets. A few more-innovative approaches to raising formality and thus contributions have
been tried and show some promise, as discussed in the next section. And there is room to improve the
articulation between contributory and non-contributory pensions in several countries, to reduce the
incentive for informal work.



SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                            21
     Social assistance budgets offer only a very limited potential for savings as expenditure is already
     relatively small, but in times of austerity there may be room to improve the impact or modestly trim
     the budgets of some programs. Overall the coverage of CCT programs has grown in the region since the
     programs’ founding, so that since 2006 the total number of people benefitting has been greater than the
     number living in extreme poverty as measured by US$2.50/day, and by 2010 equal to the number living
     in poverty as measured by US$4.0/day. Because targeting is imperfect, coverage of poor households
     is on the order of 50-60 percent in countries with large programs such as Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador and
     Mexico (Stampini and Tornarolli, 2012). In some such as Brazil, Ecuador and Mexico, the benefit levels
     have also grown substantially as well (Levy and Schady, 2013). In some cases such expansions may be
     in accordance with the progressive realization of goals toward well suited coverage and benefit levels,
     in others the size or generosity may have crept to levels that could be trimmed a bit. The coverage and
     benefits of social pension programs are even more prone to increase over time because they less often
     has a technical formula for updating benefit levels and target groups. The Panamanian program moving
     from “100 a los 70” to “120 a los 65” puts into the program name the sort of expansions that have been
     seen around the world with social pensions, with similar examples in Bolivia, Ecuador, and Mexico (see
     Bosch et al, 2015 and Rofman et al. 2014). Moreover the targeting of social assistance programs in the
     region, while progressive and in line with world experience, is nonetheless imperfect (see Cerutti et al,
     2014) and attention to updating targeting, refining targeting mechanisms or targeting more narrowly may
     be warranted in some programs. Thus a case by case review of social assistance programs may find ways
     to modestly increase impacts and/or shave their budgets.

     In the search for fiscal savings, one area that needs to be protected is financing for programs that support
     equality of opportunity among children, which across the region is still troublingly low. Early childhood
     affords a crucial window of opportunity to address inequality and the life course of the next generation.
     Recent analysis provides new evidence of the sharp differences in cognitive development between
     children in Latin America’s poorest and its richest quintiles, which affects their ability to learn and eventually
     to earn. In most cases, differences in wealth accounted for 75–86 percent of this difference in cognitive
     development (Schady et al. 2014).16 The substantial gaps highlight the magnitude of the challenge and the
     importance of developing policies that can help reduce this gap in development outcomes. In particular,
     chronic malnutrition in childhood—which is well known to cause deficits in cognition, school readiness,
     health, and future income—is too high in some countries, regions, or groups, most notably: 48 percent in
     Guatemala;17 31 percent in the state of Chiapas, Mexico;18 and 29 percent in rural areas of Peru.19 Programs
     to address nutrition and child development are usually multi-sectoral and social protection systems often
     play the role of delivery platform in providing income support and in identifying poor children who may be
     most in need of services.

     2.3 Fielding labor markets initiatives to prepare for economic recovery

     Along with the slowdown and long period of low growth, other pressures on the demand for labor are
     making themselves felt. Rapid technological and demographic change are reshaping the labor market.
     In reaction to institutions that can adapt only slowly to these changes, economic informality is likely


     16	 To cite only a few, differences in language development (as measured by TVIP scores) between children of the richest and poorest quartiles are statistically significant and large. In urban
         Colombia and rural Ecuador, the standard deviations were 1.23 and 1.21, respectively. Standard deviations were larger than 0.75 in the urban and rural areas of all five countries with the
         exception of rural Colombia.
     17	 Based on latest available data (2009) from the World Development Indicators Database.
     18	 Data from Mexico’s 2012 National Health and Nutrition Survey
     19	 Data from Peru’s 2013 Demographic and Health Survey.




22                                                                                                                           SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
to grow unless forestalled by changes in social protection and other regulatory and tax policies. To be
ready to achieve a higher productive potential, countries in Latin America and the Caribbean will need
labor institutions and labor market regulation that support risk-taking, mobility and enterprise.

2.3.a. More mobile labor and human capital

Observed from the labor market, a telling indicator of a middle income trap is stagnant labor and human
capital, which constrains creative destruction and the reallocation of labor to the most productive jobs.
The prevailing labor institutional and regulatory models assume little labor mobility across geography and
between sectors as well as longer employee-employer relationships than the norm in Latin America and
the Caribbean. Technology and demography are further challenging the assumptions. Worker protection
regulation in Latin America and the Caribbean was initially modeled on the European welfare system
with provisions for severance pay and worker health and safety. As a result, generous protections were
offered to the relatively small share of the workforce who worked in the public civil service, in state-owned
enterprises, or in private regulated employment. In the 1980s and 1990s a wave of labor market reform,
launched as part of structural adjustment policies, set out to increase labor market flexibility and keep
the rise of wages in check (Stallings and Weller 2001; Heckman and Pages 2004; Vega 2005). According
to recent studies, Latin America and Caribbean countries have set labor market regulations in a range
where impacts on employment and productivity are modest (Betcherman 2013). But a prolonged period
of slower growth saps buoyancy from the labor market, and the rate of technological and demographic
change will be felt more sharply than during the recent period of economic growth. These forces could
motivate policy maker to search anew for ways to ensure that labor market regulation does not stifle
factor mobility, productivity and growth.

Informality has always been high in the region, and without a redefinition of key labor institutions,
technological change will raise this further. Digital technologies are shrinking firm sizes and increasing
on-demand or free-lance work, reducing the formality of work contracts even among high skilled
workers and adding to the different causes of informality in the region (World Bank 2015a). Despite a
decline in the last decade, economic informality continues to be a prevalent phenomenon - over 40
percent of workers in the region are informally employed or work in unskilled self-employment 20.

Countries have recently launched a number of innovative initiatives to increase formality, but these
efforts have had modest rather than transformative impacts. One approach is to make it more attractive
to workers to choose formal contracts by subsidizing (some of) the social insurance contributions of
groups who have a hard time moving to formality (such as youth, low-income or self-employed
workers). Chile and Costa Rica have been using this approach and seen affiliations or contributions rise.
A second approach is to encourage small firms to formalize by simplifying regulations or tax collection -
a route taken in Brazil with the SIMPLES program. A third approach, being used by Argentina and Brazil is
to increase oversight and inspections in an effort to raise compliance with social insurance contributions.
(Bosch, Melguizo, and Pagés 2013). None of these approaches –individually or in concert- has provided
a way for countries to substantially or sustainably lower levels of informality. In a new, lower-growth
equilibrium, their impact is likely to be even more limited.




20	 SEDLAC Statistics




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                     23
                                                   ©WORLD BANK PHOTO LIBRARY




24   SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Countries may scrutinize anew different parts of the labor institutional and regulatory apparatus for
solutions that will strike the right balance between protection and encouraging formal employment
and enterprise. Achieving such a balance requires change on several fronts, including making formal
contracts more flexible, lowering the promises and contribution requirements for key social insurance
protections, and support for working people to up-skill and re-skill to meet new market demands.

In sharp contrast to the ‘flexicurity’ movement of labor reforms across Europe, employment protection
regulations in most of Latin America and the Caribbean have remained unchanged. Long-standing legal
provisions for severance pay are ubiquitous. Overall, Latin America and the Caribbean is in the middle
range of generosity internationally regarding severance pay21 , though the administrative requirements
in the region tend to be less cumbersome than in other regions. The shortcomings of severance pay are
widely known: they depend on the relatively small and inefficient risk pools provided by a single firm;
they are not prefunded, and hence insolvent firms might not pay workers; and they can make firms
unduly cautious about hiring (Holzmann and Vodopivec 2012). As mentioned previously, the larger,
higher-income countries have introduced unemployment insurance (UI) or unemployment insurance
savings accounts (UISAs) to overcome some of these problems, but mostly without changing the
severance pay regulations that continue to stymie new hiring.

In a long period of low-growth, one area of active interest will be wage policies, including minimum-
wage setting, and their impact on productivity and competitiveness. In Brazil, for example, minimum
wages have almost doubled since 2002—an important contributor to poverty reduction not only through
the increased earnings of minimum-wage workers but also because many social benefits are indexed
to changes in the minimum wage. However, such a fast increase raises the question of sustainability.
Recent analysis suggests that though its current level (as measured by the share of gross national
income per worker or as a share of median or mean wages) is in line with international comparators, the
minimum wage in Brazil has grown faster than in most Latin America and Caribbean countries in recent
years and, in 2012–13, faster than productivity growth in a third of Brazilian manufacturing firms (Silva,
Almeida, and Strokova 2015).

On balance, in financing social protection, Latin America and the Caribbean is moving gradually toward
more general revenue-based funding and away from its traditionally high reliance on payroll taxes. The
notion that payroll-based financing of social protection perpetuates the divide between formal and
informal sectors, has gained momentum in Latin America (Gill, Packard and Yermo 2005; Baeza and
Packard 2005; Levy 2008; Ribe, Robalino, and Walker 2012). With the gradual introduction in recent years
of significant noncontributory elements in the social protection system (social pensions, subsidized
health insurance), the link between a formal job and social protection is being broken, albeit amid
plenty of controversy, inconsistencies, and contradictory incentives. Pragmatically, Latin America and
the Caribbean countries will continue to combine general revenue and payroll tax-financed elements
for years to come. This de-facto ‘mixed model’ of financing has added distortions and disincentives to
historical segmentation that threatens to render labor and human capital stagnant. As growth slows,
efforts to minimizing the distortions and disincentives of this reality through careful program design and
articulation between programs will become even more important. Although a recovery in growth may
be years away, this agenda is key in ensuring working people are ready to be more productive.


21	 Benefits for those with five years of service range from a low of five weeks of pay in Belize, Grenada, and Suriname to 21 or more weeks in Argentina, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
    El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and Uruguay.




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                                                          25
     2.3.b. Encouraging work even among those with low labor force participation or earnings

     Productive inclusion—ensuring that social assistance beneficiaries have access to additional programs and
     services that can help to increase their employment or earnings—has been gaining increasing emphasis.
     As the basic components of income support programs have been solidified, attention is shifting toward
     finding ways to connect families to complementary means of raising their own incomes. This policy objective
     is easy to understand but complex to achieve for four reasons. First, the reasons that families have low or
     volatile incomes are varied, so different families need to be connected to different programs. The needs for
     support of smallholder agricultural workers, landless agricultural workers, and urban informal or domestic
     service workers may be very different. Second, as a corollary, the range of programs that may be pertinent is
     wide and spread across multiple sectors, agencies, and levels of government administration. Third, pertinent
     programs often lack coverage or may need to be modified to serve the clients of social assistance well.
     Fourth, the institutional and administrative arrangements to make effective linkages between programs may
     be missing or nascent. In Jamaica’s CCT, Programme of Advancement Through Health and Education (PATH),
     families go through a recertification process that assigns eligible families to participate in the “Steps to Work”
     program and receive case management in addition to the cash transfers for two years, after which they leave
     the program. In Mexico, the CCT program Prospera (previously Oportunidades) recently launched additional
     social, financial, and productive inclusion components, giving program beneficiaries preferential access to a
     range of complementary programs meant to support their income-generation capacity. With less favorable
     labor markets there will be fewer jobs on offer, so it will be harder for the programs to show success. But
     they may remain a policy favorite if countries are trying to reduce the number of people in receipt of social
     assistance or unemployment benefits.

     Once labor markets tighten, aging countries will want to increase labor force participation rates and may
     focus on groups where they are low –youth, older workers and women. The problem of youth employment
     has already received some attention in the region, as discussed above. The issue of how to keep older
     workers productive and employed has received relatively little attention, in contrast to beginnings in Europe
     (Schwarz and Arias 2014) and East Asia Pacific (World Bank, 2015f). However, lifelong skills frameworks
     being developed in Argentina and Chile may help. Labor force participation of workers 65 and older in Latin
     America and the Caribbean—at just over 20 percent—is an intermediate level in global terms.22 Women’s
     labor force participation has shown strong secular growth (as it has around the world), but at 50 percent, it
     remains lower than the men’s rate and lower than the women’s rate in Europe or East Asia. It is especially low
     (about 40 percent) in the Dominican Republic and Honduras but higher (about 60 percent) in Bolivia, Peru,
     and Uruguay (Pagés, Pierre, and Scarpetta 2009, figure 2.8). Multifaceted labor activation policies may help
     to raise the participation rates and earnings of potential workers in these groups.

     2.4 Keeping the Long Run View while Managing the Short Run Adjustment Demands

     Social protection is an integral and permanent part of government poverty reduction and risk management
     strategies. The region’s experience in the wake of financial, fiscal and economic crisis during the 1980s and
     1990s shows social protection as a foundation of public policy, as have the gains in poverty and equity during
     the recent years of high growth. Social protection systems mitigate extreme poverty through redistribution
     of resources, help households manage risks and invest in their futures, and can support employment and
     productivity. In short, they are an essential element of the social contract.

     22	 The region’s labor force participation among the elderly is about double that in high-income OECD or Eastern European countries, and on rough par with the Middle East and North Africa and
         East Asia, but well below that in South Asia or Africa (Pallares-Miralles, Romero, and Whitehouse 2012)




26                                                                                                                          SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
©WORLD BANK PHOTO LIBRARY




                            SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD   27
     Social protection systems should support individuals and families over the life cycle and across
     the welfare spectrum. Individually and collectively the programs should be appropriate to context,
     adequate, cost-effective, equitable, incentive compatible, sustainable and dynamic. These systems
     are composed of a variety of programs for different age groups and risk profiles, ranging from income
     support and programs to ensure adequate nutrition for poor infants to voluntary retirement schemes
     that ensure consumption smoothing for the formerly high income elderly. The overall elements in
     the system need to be comprehensive and balanced. And because individuals’ and families’ needs are
     different and change over time, they must be able to quickly find their way to the appropriate segment
     of the system. Achieving these features of a social protection system requires careful planning and
     institutional coordination, and should be supported by the development of administrative tools for cross-
     program coordination. A systems approach is crucial to improve responsiveness to crises, effectiveness
     at combating poverty, and the promotion of opportunities through improved human capital, better jobs
     and higher productivity.23

     Despite the progress in building social protection systems in the region in recent years, there is still much
     to do. Poverty is still high in some countries, and in sub-national regions in others. Chronic poverty
     and social exclusion persist among some groups, especially the indigenous, rural and disabled. At the
     same time the rising middle class creates demands for more insurance-type programs. Persistent
     informality, technological and demographic change challenge the current systems of social protection
     and labor regulation. Even climate change adds demands for disaster relief and support to those who
     need to change their livelihoods. And while there is a strong base on which to build, there is room for
     improvements to the parameters or functioning of individual programs and the balance among them.

     As the region enters a period of lower economic growth, fiscal sustainability and efficiency will rise
     in importance on the policy agenda. In good macro-fiscal times, countries often focus on increasing
     coverage and addressing social inclusion, fairness, and human rights concerns while also focusing on
     improving implementation. When resources are scarce, however, considerations of cost-effectiveness
     and sustainability gain prominence in addition to long-standing issues such as informal economic
     activity and competitiveness.

     The same downturn that can sap fiscal resources can also spur innovation and reforms that move
     countries toward better serving social protection systems in the longer run. In fact, past crises gave rise
     to the creation and expansion of many social protection programs in Latin America and the Caribbean,
     now seen as part of the basic provisions. On the social assistance side, countries now face the inherent
     tensions of assisting the poor to get through hard times while also ensuring fiscal sustainability. Fiscal
     crisis can facilitate difficult actions such as subsidy reform. On the side of labor regulation, it becomes
     even more important to get the balance between protection and incentives right, to spur individuals’
     enterprise, and to help promote employment and productivity. Despite country specific differences,
     improving individual programs to guarantee their effectiveness remains at the heart of the social
     protection and labor agendas.




     23	 World Bank, 2012




28                                                                       SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
Annex – Spending on Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs

Figure A1.1. Social Assistance Spending (% of GDP), Latin America and the Caribbean

                                  3
      Spending, percentage GDP


                                 2,5

                                  2

                                 1,5

                                  1

                                 0,5

                                  0
                                         ARG         BOL     BRA     CRI      DOM      ECU     GTM       HND      MEX       PAN   PER     SLV    URY

                                                 2001              2002             2003             2004            2005         2006
                                                 2007              2008             2009             2010            2011         2012
                                                 2013              ECA 2005         ECA 2010         ECA 2013


  Source: World Bank LAC SP Database
  Note: Ecuador, Honduras up to 2012. Brazil up to 2011.



  Figure A1.2. Social Assistance Programs, Spending Composition 2012, Latin America and the Caribbean

  100%
    90%
    80%
    70%
    60%
    50%
    40%
    30%
    20%
    10%
     0%
                                   ARG         BOL         BRA     CRI     DOM       ECU       GTM      HND      MEX        PAN   PER     SLV         URY
                                 CCTs                              School feeding                    Other food prog              Family allowances
                                 Social pension                    Child beneﬁts                     Disability beneﬁts           Funeral allowance
                                 Education beneﬁts                 Special beneﬁts                   Emergency beneﬁts            Other SSN

  Source: World Bank LAC SP Database
  Note: Brazil 2011




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                                 29
     Figure A1.3. Social Assistance Spending Composition by Country, 2000-2013

         %GDP                                                                          % GDP
                                        Argentina                                                                        Bolivia

        2,50                                                                         2,50
        2,25                                                                         2,25
        2,00                                                                         2,00
        1,75                                                                         1,75
        1,50
        1,25                                                                         1,50
        1,00                                                                         1,25
        0,75                                                                         1,00
        0,50                                                                         0,75
        0,25                                                                         0,50
        0,00                                                                         0,25
            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013    0,00
                                                                                            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
         %GDP                            Brazil
      3,00                                                                            %GDP
                                                                                                                      Costa Rica
      2,75
      2,50
      2,25                                                                           2,50
      2,00                                                                           2,25
      1,75                                                                           2,00
      1,50                                                                           1,75
      1,25                                                                           1,50
      1,00                                                                           1,25
      0,75                                                                           1,00
      0,50                                                                           0,75
      0,25                                                                           0,50
      0,00                                                                           0,25
          2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013      0,00
                                                                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
         %GDP
                                         Ecuador
                                                                                      %GDP
                                                                                                                     El Salvador
        2,50
        2,25                                                                         2,50
        2,00                                                                         2,25
        1,75                                                                         2,00
        1,50                                                                         1,75
        1,25                                                                         1,50
        1,00                                                                         1,25
        0,75                                                                         1,00
        0,50                                                                         0,75
        0,25                                                                         0,50
        0,00                                                                         0,25
            2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013         0,00
                                                                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
         %GDP
                                       Guatemala
                                                                                      %GDP
                                                                                                                      Honduras
        2,50
        2,25                                                                         2,50
        2,00                                                                         2,25
        1,75                                                                         2,00
        1,50                                                                         1,75
        1,25                                                                         1,50
        1,00                                                                         1,25
        0,75                                                                         1,00
        0,50                                                                         0,75
        0,25                                                                         0,50
        0,00                                                                         0,25
            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013    0,00
                                                                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
         %GDP
                                         Mexico
                                                                                      %GDP
        2,50                                                                                                           Panama
        2,25
        2,00                                                                         2,50
        1,75                                                                         2,25
        1,50                                                                         2,00
        1,25                                                                         1,75
        1,00                                                                         1,50
        0,75                                                                         1,25
        0,50                                                                         1,00
        0,25                                                                         0,75
        0,00                                                                         0,50
                                                                                     0,25
            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013    0,00
                                                                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
         %GDP
                                           Peru
                                                                                      %GDP
        2,50                                                                                                           Uruguay
        2,25                                                                        2,50
        2,00                                                                        2,25
        1,75                                                                        2,00
        1,50
                                                                                    1,75
        1,25
        1,00                                                                        1,50
        0,75                                                                        1,25
        0,50                                                                        1,00
        0,25                                                                        0,75
        0,00                                                                        0,50
            2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013   0,25
                                                                                    0,00
                                                                                        2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

     Source: World Bank LAC SP Database
     Note: Ecuador, Honduras up to 2012. Brazil up to 2011.



30                                                                                                        SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
  Figure A1.4. Active and Passive Labor Market Programs Spending (% of GDP), Latin America and Caribbean

                                 1,2
                           GDP   1,2
                                   1
                         GDP
                percentage

                                   1
                                 0,8
              percentage


                                 0,8
                                 0,6
                                 0,6
                                 0,4
      Spending,




                                 0,4
    Spending,




                                 0,2
                                 0,2
                                   0
                                   0




                                          2009
                                          2014
                                          2004
                                          2009
                                          2014




                                          2004
                                          2009
                                          2014
                                          2004
                                          2009
                                          2014
                                          2005
                                          2010
                                          2000
                                          2005
                                          2010

                                          2007
                                          2012
                                          2002
                                          2007
                                          2012
                                          2004




                                          2004



                                          2004
                                          2009
                                          2014
                                          2004
                                          2009
                                          2014
                                          2004
                                          2009
                                          2014
                                          2000




                                          2002




                                          2009
                                          2014




                                       2004
                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2004
                                       2009
                                       2014




                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2004
                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2000
                                       2005
                                       2010
                                       2000
                                       2005
                                       2010
                                       2002
                                       2007
                                       2012
                                       2002
                                       2007
                                       2012
                                       2004




                                       2004
                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2004
                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2004
                                       2009
                                       2014
                                       2004
                                       ARG   BRA   CHL       CRI     ECU       GTM      HND        MEX     PAN        PER      SLV       URY
                                       ARG   BRA   CHL       CRI     ECU       GTM      HND        MEX     PAN        PER      SLV       URY
                                                      Pasive LM            ALMP         ECA 2005           ECA 2010
                                                      Pasive LM            ALMP         ECA 2005           ECA 2010
 Source: World Bank LAC SP Database




 Figure A1.5. Labor Market Programs, Spending Composition 2012, Latin America and the Caribbean
 100%
 100%

  80%
  80%

  60%
  60%

  40%
  40%

  20%
  20%

   0%
   0%                       ARG      BRA      CHL      COL   CRI      DOM GTM            HND     MEX     NIC    PAN        PER     SLV    URY
                            ARG and
                        Placement    BRArelated services
                                              CHL      COL   CRIInstitu tional training
                                                                      DOM       GTM      HND     MEX       Workplace
                                                                                                                PAN training
                                                                                                         NIC               PER     SLV    URY
                        Placement  and related services
                        Alternate training                      Ins titutisupport
                                                                Special   onal training
                                                                                   for apprenticeship      Workplace
                                                                                                           Recruitment training
                                                                                                                         incentives
                        Alternate
                        Employmenttraining
                                      maintenance incentives    Special
                                                                Supported support  for apprenticeship
                                                                             employment                    Recruitment
                                                                                                           Rehabilitationincentives
                        Employment maintenance incentives       Supported employment                       Rehabilitation

 Source: World Bank LAC SP Database




SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                                     31
                                                        References
     Adelman, S. W., D. O. Gilligan, and K . Lehrer. 2008. “How Effective Are Food for Education Programs? A Critical Assessment of
            the Evidence from Developing Countries.” Food Policy Review 9, International Food Policy Research Institute, Wash-
            ington, DC.

     Almeida, R., J. Arbelaez, M. Honorati, A. Kuddo, T. Lohmann, M. Ovadiya, L. Pop, M. L. Sanchez Puerta, and M. Weber. 2012.
              “Improving Access to Jobs and Earnings Opportunities: The Role of Activation and Graduation Policies in Developing
              Countries.” Social Protection and Labor Discussion Paper 1204, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Baeza, C. and T. Packard 2005. Beyond Survival. Protecting Households from Health Shocks in Latin America. Washington DC:
              World Bank

     Betcherman, G. 2013. “Labor Market Institutions: A Review of the Literature.” Background paper for the World Development
             Report 2013, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Bosch, M., A. Melguizo, and C. Pagés. 2013. Better Pensions Better Jobs: Towards Universal Coverage in Latin America and the
             Caribbean. Washington DC.: Inter-American Development Bank.

     Bosch, M., S. Bernstein, F. Castellani, M.L. Oliveri and J. Villa. 2015. “Diagnosis del Sistema Previsional Colombiano y Opciones de
             Reforma”, Unidad de Mercados Laborales y Seguridad Social, Nota Tecnica N. 825, BID

     Bundy, D., C. Burbano, M. Grosh, A. Gelli, M. Jukes, and L. Drake. 2009. Rethinking School Feeding: Social Safety Nets, Child
             Development and the Education Sector. Directions in Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     CEDLAS (Center for Distributive, Labor and Social Studies). 2013. “Policy Scan and Meta-Analysis: Youth and Employment
            Policies in Latin America.” Background paper for the CEDLAS “Labour Markets for Inclusive Growth” Project, National
            University of La Plata, Buenos Aires.

     Cerutti, P., A. Fruttero, M. Grosh, S. Kostenbaum, M. L. Olivieri, C. Rodriguez-Alas and V. Strokova. 2014. “Social Assistance and
               Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from the Social Protection Database.” Social
               Protection and Labor Discussion Paper 1401, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Cho, Y., and M. Honorati. 2013. “Entrepreneurship Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta Regression Analysis.” Discussion
               Paper 7333, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.

     CONEVAL (National Council for Evaluation of Social Development Policy). 2015. “Medición de la pobreza en México y en las
           entidades federativas 2014.” PowerPoint presentation, CONEVAL, México City. http://www.coneval.gob.mx/Medi-
           cion/Documents/Pobreza%202014_CONEVAL_web.pdf

     De Hoyos, R., H. Rogers, and M. Szekely. 2015. “Out of School and Out of Work: Challenges and Solutions around Ninis in Latin
             America.” World Bank, Washington DC. Forthcoming

     Ferreira, F. H. G., J. Messina, J. Rigolini, L-F. López-Calva, M. A. Lugo, and R. Vakis. 2013. Economic Mobility and the Rise of the
                Latin American Middle Class. World Bank Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Washington DC: World Bank.

     Fiszbein, A., and N. Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty. World Bank Policy Re-
               search Report. Washington DC: World Bank.

     Gill, I. S., T. Packard and J. Yermo. 2005. Keeping the Promise of Social Security in Latin America. Washington DC: World Bank




32                                                                                        SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
González-Velosa, C., L. Ripani, and D. Rosas-Shady. 2012. “¿Cómo mejorar las oportunidades de inserción laboral de los
        jóvenes en América Latina?” Technical Note IDB-TN305, Labor Market and Social Security Unit, Inter-American
        Development Bank, Washington DC.

Grosh, M., M. Bussolo, and S. Freije, eds. 2014. Understanding the Poverty Impact of the Global Financial Crisis in Latin America
         and the Caribbean. Directions in Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.

G20 (Group of Twenty). 2009. “Leaders’ Statement, The Pittsburgh Summit, September 24–25, 2009.” http://www.financial-
        stabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/g20_leaders_declaration_pittsburgh_2009.pdf.

———. 2013. “G20 Leaders’ Declaration, Saint Petersburg Summit, September 5–6, 2013.” http://www.financialstabilityboard.
       org/wp-content/uploads/g20_leaders_declaration_saint_petersburg_2013.pdf.

Heckman, J., and C. Pagés, eds. 2004. Law and Employment: Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean. Chicago: Univer-
      sity of Chicago Press.

Holzmann, R., and M. Vodopivec, eds. 2012. Reforming Severance Pay: An International Perspective. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

IADB (Inter-American Development Bank) and World Bank. 2013. “Notas de Política, República Dominicana: Día del Diálogo, 9
         de marzo de 2013.” Policy Note 87111, World Bank, Washington DC.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2011. “Evidence and Lessons Learned from Impact Evaluations on Social Safety Nets.”
         Washington, DC: World Bank.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2013. Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications. Washington, DC: IMF.
Kinsella, K., and W. He. 2009. “An Aging World: 2008.” International Population Reports P95/09-1, U.S. Census Bureau, Wash-
          ington DC.

Kuddo, A. 2012. “Public Employment Services and Activation Policies.” Social Protection Discussion Paper 1215, World Bank,
        Washington, DC.

Levy, S. 2008. Good Intentions, Bad Outcomes: Social Policy, Informality, and Economic Growth in Mexico. Washington, DC:
          Brookings Institution Press.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), IDB (Inter-American Development Bank), and World Bank.
       2014. Pensions at a Glance: Latin America and the Caribbean. Paris: OECD Publishing.

Pagés, C., G. Pierre, and S. Scarpetta. 2009. Job Creation in Latin America and the Caribbean: Recent Trends and Policy Chal-
           lenges. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Ribe, H., D. Robalino, and I. Walker. 2012. From Right to Reality: Incentives, Labor Markets, and the Challenges of Universal Social
           Protection in Latin America. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Rofman, R., I. Apella, and E. Vezza, eds. 2014. Beyond Contributory Pensions: Fourteen Experiences with Coverage Expansion in
        Latin America. Directions in Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Schady, N., J. Behrman, M. C. Araujo, R. Azuero, R. Bernal, D. Bravo, F. Lopez-Boo, K. Macours, D. Marshall, C. Paxson, R. Vakis.
        2014. “Wealth Gradients in Early Childhood Cognitive Development in Five Latin American Countries.” Policy Research
        Working Paper 6779. Washington, DC: World Bank



SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD                                                                                            33
     Schwarz, A., and O. Arias. 2014. The Inverting Pyramid: Pension Systems Facing Demographic Challenges in Europe and Central
             Asia. Europe and Central Asia Reports. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     Silva, J., R. Almeida, and V. Strokova. 2015. Sustaining Employment and Wage Gains: A Skills and Jobs Agenda for Brazil. Direc-
                 tions in Development Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     Stallings, B., and J. Weller. 2001. “Employment in Latin America: Cornerstone of Social Policy.” CEPAL Review 75: 181–200.

     Vakis, R., J. Rigolini, and L. Lucchetti. 2015. Left Behind: Chronic Poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC:
                World Bank.

     Vega Ruíz, M. L., ed. 2005. La Reforma Laboral en América Latina: 15 Años después. Lima: International Labour Organization.

     Vroman, W., and V. Brusentsev. 2009. “Unemployment Compensation in a Worldwide Recession.” Paper, Urban Institute,
             Washington, DC.

     World Bank 2012. “Resilience, Equity and Opportunity: The World Bank’s Social Protection and Labor Strategy 2012–2022.”
             Consultations Report, World Bank, Washington DC

     ———. 2013. “Shifting Gears to Accelerate Shared Prosperity in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Latin America and the Carib-
            bean Poverty and Labor Brief, World Bank, Washington DC.

     ———. 2014. “Honduras—Social Expenditures and Institutional Review.” Public Expenditure Review, Report 95648-HN, World
            Bank, Washington, DC.

     ———. 2015a. 2016 World Development Report: Internet for Development. Forthcoming.

     ———. 2015b. “Argentina Poverty Measurement and Analysis.” Internal memorandum, World Bank, Washington DC.

     ¬———. 2015c. “Brazil: Monthly Economic Update Spt” Macroeconomics and fiscal Management Global Practice, World Bank,
            Washington DC.

     _____. 2015d. “El Salvador: Estudio de Gasto Público Social y sus Instituciones”, Oficina Regional para América Latina y el
              Caribe, Banco Mundial, Washington DC.
     ———. 2015e. Latin America Treads a Narrow Path to Growth: The Slowdown and Its Macroeconomic Challenges. LAC Semian-
              nual Report, April 2015. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     ———. 2015f. “Live Long and Prosper” Regional Report of the East Asia Pacific Chief Economist’s Office, World Bank, Washing-
            ton DC. Forthcoming,

     ———. 2015g. “Panama: Social Sectors Institutional and Expenditure Review.” Social Protection and Labor Practice, World Bank,
            Washington D.C.

     ———. 2015h. The State of Social Safety Nets 2015. World Bank, Washington, DC:

     WFP (World Food Programme). 2013. “State of School Feeding Worldwide 2013.” Annual report, WFP, Rome.




34                                                                                     SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD   35
www.worldbankgroup.org/lac




 36                          SOCIAL PROTECTION FOR THE HARDER ROAD AHEAD
