                                                   100553




    Federation for Disability Originations in Malawi
                      (FEDOMA)


PROJECT NAME     :    Promoting Inclusion of Children with Disabilities
                      into Basic Education for all Programmes in
                      Malawi


PROJECT NUMBER    :   TF 99386


REPORTING PERIOD :    3 MONTHS (June to August, 2015)


AUTHOR            :   Hastings P. Magombo


DATE OF SUBMISSION:   1st September, 2015
     1. INTRODUCTION
       This report mainly covers Inclusive Education project activities that have been carried out
       in the months of June, July and August 2015. The objective of the project is to test innovative
       methods to promote the enrollment of children with disabilities currently excluded from
       mainstream schools and influence the development of an inclusive education policy. The project
       has been carrying out its activities with the aim of promoting accessible quality education
       for learners with disabilities in inclusive schools of the project area. In order to achieve
       the projective main objective, several activities have been carried out as a strategy to
       meet the learning needs of children with disabilities in the project educational districts of
       Lilongwe Urban, Lilongwe Rural west, Salima and Mchinji. The Schools that are in the
       project area are as follows: Salima: Kaphatenga, Lifidzi, Chipoka, Yambe, Salima LEA,
       Lifidzi, Senga Bay, Ngolowindo, Sakwi and Matenje. Mchinji: Kamuzu, Sitolo,
       Kamangirira, Sundwe, Kainsa, Kamwendo, Kavunguti, Phanga, Kayeka and Chisasa.
       Lilongwe (urban and Rural West): Kaliyeka, Khumula, Kawale, Kalambo, Chatata,
       Chinkhuti, Chinsapo, Likuni Boys, Tsapa and Malingunde. It is significant therefore to
       emphasise that this report covers the planned activities for the reporting period, activities
       implemented, achievement and successes, challenges encountered, lessons learnt and
       planned activities for the next reporting period.


     2. ACTIVITIES PLANNED TO BE CARRIED OUT

Activities that were planned to be implemented from June to August 2014 are as follows:

NO      ACTIVITY

1       Inclusive Education Training for Ministry of Education Science and Technology Key
        Staff.

2       Assessment of children with disabilities in 30 targeted schools; 10 school each district of
        Mchinji, Salima, and Lilongwe.

3       Mobilisation for preparation and submission of school improvement plans by the
        District Infrastructure Development Team in collaboration with the School Management
        Committees for the 30 targeted schools under the project

4       Dissemination of the situational analysis Report on SNE EMIS Data for tracking
        learners with disabilitie in the Inclusive Education Districts by the University of Malawi
        (Chancellor College) Consultants

5       Lobbying for the adoption of add-on system for children with disabilities to EMIS data
        entry system.

7       School visits for assessment on Inclusive Education Practices in the project area.

8       Conduct Planning meeting for the project activities to be implemented for a period of six
        months

9       Dissemination of a situational analysis report on Needs assessment for children with
        disabilities in the project area to stakeholders by Roy Hauya and Joseph Pafupi.

10      Training of the project team on inclusive education.

11      Conduct orientation of successful biding Contractors to the targeted schools in the
        districts for the development of disability friendly structures.

12      Training of mainstream class teachers in the remaining 14 schools of the project area..



     3. ACTIVITIES IMPLEMENTED

       Activities that have been carried during the reporting period are as follows

DATE                ACTIVITY                                                   LOCATION

10th to 11th June, 36 Ministry of Education key staff (Directors, Chief Livinstonia Beach
2016               Education Officers, Principal Education Officers and Hotel
                   Proffessional Education Officers) were trained on
                   policies and practice on Inclusive Education

22nd June to 1st 1009 Children from 30 Primary schools (10 schools in Salima, Lilongwe
July, 2015       each district) were clinically assessed by a Physio and        Mchinji
                 therapist,    Ophthalmologist,    Audiologist   and Districts.
                 Community Nurse to identify their disability and
                 needs.

15 July, 2015       Collection of School Improvement Plans for 30 Salima, Lilongwe
                    Primary schools (10 schools in each district) in and Mchinji
                    preparation for submission to FEDOMA for
                    assessment and standardization.

24th July, 2015     Dissemination of SNE EMIS Data Situational Pacific Hotel                      in
                    Analysis Report In Salima, Mchinji and Lilongwe Lilongwe.
                    Districts by University of Malawi Consultants.

27th July, 2015     Lobbying Ministry of Education for the adoption of an      Ministry       of
                    add-on system for tracking learners with disabilities to   Education Science
                    EMIS data entry system designed and presented by           and    Technology
                    University of Malawi, Chancellor College Consultants       (SNE Department)
4th to 13th August, School visits for assessment on Inclusive Education Salima,   Mchinji
2015                Practices in the project districts.                 and Lilongwe

17th August 2015    Inclusive Education Project Planning meeting by the NOM Conference
                    IE project Team (Project Manager & District Room
                    coordinators).

18th August, 2015   Dissemination of Needs Assessment for Children with Pacific Hotel
                    Disabilities report to 50 stakeholders.

19th    to    21st Participation of Inclusive Education Training by 4 IE Limbe TDC                      in
August, 2015.      Project Team                                          Blantyre

23rd    to   28th Introduction of selected building contractors (SKARD Lilongwe, Salima
August, 2015      Elite Building Contractors) assigned for development and        Mchinji
                  of School Improvement Plans to the District Education Districts
                  Managers, Head Teachers and School Management
                  Committees



   4. PROJECT ACHIEVEMENTS AND SUCCESSES

           Training of 36 Ministry of Education Science and Technology Key staff on inclusive
            education has promoted awareness among the staff members on mainstreaming issues
            pertaining to education of learners with disabilities in the education sector.

           Clinical screening of 1009 children in the 30 schools has enabled the project to identify
            the rightful children with disabilities that need early intervention to increase their access
            to education in the inclusive schools. These include 111 Visual impairment, 40 Hearing
            Impairment , 95 Leaners with ear infection, 15 learners with Cerebral Palsy, 2 learners
            with Hydrocepphalus and 42 with physically Impairments.

           Head teachers and School management committees from 30 schools in collaboration with
            their District Education Managers in Salima, Mchinji and Lilongwe have developed their
            own school improvement plans that will make their schools disability friendly which
            have been submitted to FEDOMA for approval.

           41 stakeholders from Disability Peoples Organisations, Ministries of Education, Health,
            Gender and Disability Affairs, and Nongovernmental Organisation have appreciated the
            need for Special Needs Education Data Information system from the Primary school,
            Zone, District, Division and National as a strategy to track the learning needs of children
            with Disabilities.
       Ministry of Education has adopted the newly introduced SNE EMIS data analysis system
        for children with disabilities which will be piloted in the 30 targeted schools of Mchinji,
        Salima and Lilongwe.

       District Education Managers, Head teachers and mainstream teachers have been
        motivated to provide appropriate support to learners with disabilities through the
        Inclusive Education trainings conducted by the project team.

       Through the Planning Meeting the project team (project Manager & District Coodinators)
        has unveiled various activities that will strengthen the implementation of Inclusive
        Education establishing active Action Learning Teams, Policy dialogue and lobbying for
        active volunteers to identify more children with disabilities who are out of school.

          46 stakeholders from Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Gender and
          disability affairs, Non-Governmental Organisation, and Disability Organisations who
          participated in the dissemination of Needs Assessment for children with disabilities
          report have been influenced and motivated to be proactive in providing appropriate
          services to meet the educational needs of children with disabilities for an inclusive
          education agenda to be a success.

       The project team has acquired knowledge and new skills to serve the inclusive education
        project better through the inclusive education project training.

       Provision of the Building Contractors for the develop school improvement that make a
        disability friendly learning environment for learners with disabilities has energized the
        school management committees to support inclusive education.

5. LESSONS LEARNT

  Engagement of key staff in the Ministry of Education Science and Technology through training is
  a major tool for changing their mindset to promote inclusive education practices and provision of
  equitable access of educational services to children with disabilities at all levels of the education
  sector.

  Early Clinical assessment for children with disabilities needs to be priority before providing
  educational services for children with disabilities.

  Harnessing School Management committees to support learners with disabilities is essential in
  advocating for school improvement that makes the school environment friendly for learners with
  disabilities.

  Some schools management committees are able to make their schools friendly to children with
  disabilities using school improvement grants from Government.

  Key barrier for children with disabilities not staying in school is failure of classroom teachers to
  meet learning needs of children with disabilities in the classroom and making schools disability
  friendly.
  Large numbers of children with disabilities are not benefitting from the available educational
  resources due to lack of awareness among service providers.

  Learners with disabilities and other learners are able to support each other in the process of
  teaching and learning e.g. the case of Salima LEA and Malingunde F.P. School.

  Promoting teaching of survival skills or vocational skills other than academic subjects only is
  essential for learners with severe learning disabilities as a strategy for inclusive education to
  benefit all children with disabilities.

  Mainstream teachers are willing to support children with disabilities regardless of the class size
  and limited knowledge and skills of teaching children with disabilities.

6. CHALLENGES ENCOUNTERED IN THE PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

         Negative attitude by some key staff in the ministry of education who value children with
          disabilities as a minority group to benefit from educational resources.

         Some learners with disabilities are travelling long distances from home to school which is
          a threat to their life.

         Unfair and discriminatory preparation of examination for children with disabilities in the
          schools that supporting children with disabilities.

         Unavailability of appropriate and effective assistive devices, teaching learning and
          assessment resources for children with disabilities in the school.

         Some learners with disabilities are in school without learning due to large class sizes or in
          adequate mainstream class teachers.

         Some district coordinators are unable to visit some schools due geographical and distance
          barriers e.g. Mchinji.

         Some learners who are learning in junior primary schools have challenges to finish the
          primary school cycle (standards 1 to 8).

         Late submission of school improvement plans by school management committees and
          District Education Managers has delayed the process for identifying contractors to
          conduct the school improvement exercise.

         Some parents were reluctant to send their children with disabilities for clinical assessment
          due to negative attitude and cultural beliefs.

         Some Inclusive education district coordinators have little classroom experience that
          makes it difficult for them to advise the mainstream teacher on good inclusive teaching
          practices.
7. ACTIVITIES PLANNED TO BE IMPLEMENTED IN THE NEXT REPORTING
   PERIOD.

  According to the revised World Bank Project document the project team outlined the following
  activities for implementation.

  NO     ACTIVITY                                   FREQUENCY            MONTHS

  1      Training of 333 mainstream teachers        4 days/ district     September and October
         from 14 phase 2 schools on Inclusive                            2015
         education

  2      School Assessment visits                   8 Days/ Month        Monthly from
                                                                         September 2015 to
                                                                         February,2016.

  3      Provision of Assistive Devices for         2 days/District      October 2015
         children with disabilities who have been
         clinically assessed.

  4      Refresher Training for mainstream          2 days/ District     October and December
         teachers from 16 phase 1 schools                                2015

  5      Project Meetings                           1 day/ Month         September 2015, to
                                                                         February, 2016

  6      School Improvement Plans                   7 weeks              August, September,
         Implementation                                                  and October, 2015

  7      Recruitment and Selection of Inclusive     2days/ District      October, 2015
         Education Community volunteers in
         each district

  8      Inclusive Education Management and         1days/district       December, 2015
         Planning workshop for Head teachers,
         Primary Education advisors, and Section
         Heads

  9      Institutionalization of Action Learning    Monthly              September, October,
         Teams in the project targeted schools                           November,

  10     PTA, SMC and Mother Groups Training        1 day/district       January, 2016
         on Inclusive education

  11     Verification of Teacher Training Manual    4days                October, 2015
12   Development of Monitoring and            1day              November, 2015
     evaluation tool for community
     Volunteers in the Project Schools

13   Policy Dialogue Meetings with Ministry   1 day             January, 2016
     of Education

14   SNE add-on EMIS tool piloting and        3 days/district   October, 2015
     training
