                                              BANGLADESH                                              100526
                   Proposed Country Partnership Framework FY2016 – 2020
                                           Executive Summary


COUNTRY CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT AGENDA

1.      Bangladesh lies along the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta—Asia’s largest and the
world’s most densely populated delta. The country’s 160 million inhabitants live on a land mass
of nearly 150,000 km2, resulting in a population density of about 1,600 per km2. The delta not only
marks the country’s physiology, but also the culture and livelihoods of its people. Like all delta
environments, Bangladesh is a hotspot for natural disasters and climate change. Today, most
Bangladeshis live in rural areas, but new employment opportunities in the industrial and service
sectors have fueled urban population in recent years.

2.     Bangladesh has proven to be remarkably resilient despite its challenging
circumstances and achieved significant human development gains over the last four decades.
Bangladesh’s impressive progress on health outcomes, population growth, access and equity to
education, and gender equality is well documented. In 1971, Bangladesh ranked well below India
in many social indicators, but today, with less than 60 percent of India’s income per capita, it ranks
higher in most such indicators, as well as above many other low- and lower-middle-income
countries with similar or better initial conditions in 1971 (see Table 1).

                    Table 1: Social Indicators for Bangladesh and Comparator Countries
                                                                                 Low-income        Lower middle-
                                                Bangladesh        India
                   Indicator                                                      countries      income countries
                                                    1971 2013     1971 2013      1971 2013           1971    2013
     GDP per capita (constant US$ 2005) [1971-2013]  259   621     272 1,165      376     456         410   1,261
    Life expectancy (years) at birth    [1971-2012]   47     70      50     66      46      62          52     66
     Infant mortality rate              [1971-2013]  149     33    141      41    145       53        124      44
     Total fertility rate               [1971-2012]  6.9    2.2     5.4    2.5     6.7     4.1         5.6    2.9
     Mean years of schooling of adults [1985-2013]   2.4    5.1     2.4    4.4     2.3     4.0         3.1    5.4
     DPT child immunization rates (%) [1985-2103]      2     97      18     72      24      80          27     76
     Access to improved sanitation (%) [1991-2012]    35     57      18     36      22      37          30     47
     Prevalence of undernourishment (%) [1991-2012]   34     16      26     17      34      26          25     15
Source: WDI. Mean Years of schooling: Barro and Lee (2013) UNESCO (2013b) and HDRO estimates. Low and lower middle
income groups comprise countries with per-capita GNI <US$1,045 and US$1,046-US$4,125 respectively in 2015.

3.       Rapid growth enabled Bangladesh to cross the threshold to lower middle income
country (LMIC) status of per capita GNI of $1,046 in FY14. Per capita income increased
further in FY15 to US$1,220. GDP grew well above the average for developing countries in recent
years, averaging 6.2 percent since 2010. While Bangladesh has achieved its ambition to reach
middle-income-status by 2021 ahead of time, the challenge will be to further accelerate growth so
that it moves well past the threshold and further up the income range of LMICs.

4.      Several factors are behind the resilience of Bangladesh’s economy, against the
backdrop of a volatile global economy. Robust macroeconomic fundamentals at the onset of the
financial crisis, strong growth of exports and remittances, and relatively insulated financial
markets have played an important role. Bangladesh’s exports doubled their world market share
between 1995 and 2012. The RMG sector has been a key contributor, with its share of total exports
accounting for more than 80 percent in FY14. Bangladesh is now the world’s second largest
                                                          Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


garment exporter, making it unique among low-income countries because of the high share of
manufactured goods in its exports.

5.      Growth in the near and medium-term is expected to rise modestly. If stability prevails,
Bangladesh’s strong domestic demand, gradually improving investment climate, and moderate
single digit inflation are expected to raise GDP growth to 6.7 percent in FY17 and 6.8 percent in
FY18. Political instability and declining export competitiveness in European markets constitute
the main risks in the medium-term. Especially the resurgence of prolonged and intense political
instability would hamper private sector activities and threaten macroeconomic stability.

6.      Bangladesh has made good progress to achieve the WBG’s twin goals of eliminating
extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity. The country is on track to achieve
the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the incidence of extreme poverty by 2015.
Projections using 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) data (the latest
available) indicate that the national poverty rate fell to 24.8 percent in 2015, less than half the 58.8
percent rate in 1991-92. Based on the US$1.25 global poverty measure, the number of the poor
fell by 12 million, from around 77 million to 65 million, at a rate that was 60 percent faster than
in the rest of the developing world, excluding China. In addition, Bangladesh is also amongst a
select group of countries worldwide that experienced a decline in inequality. Between 2000 and
2010, inequality in rural areas, where about 70 percent of the population continues to reside,
remained more or less unchanged, while inequality in urban areas trended downwards. With a Gini
index of about 0.3 at the national level, inequality is lower than in Nepal, India, Sri Lanka,
Indonesia, and most East Asian countries.

7.      Increases in labor incomes have been a main driver of poverty reduction and
declining inequality. The structural shift from agriculture to industry and services has accelerated
in recent years and created new and better paid jobs. In the non-agricultural sector, net employment
rose by more than 10 million between 2002-03 and 2013, outstripping the 3.3 million increase in
agriculture. Labor productivity increased dramatically across the board: the growth in output per
worker was especially large in the industrial and agricultural sectors, while services also
experienced a significant increase. Notwithstanding the fall in agriculture’s share in total
employment, increases in farm incomes accounted for more than 90 percent of the poverty
reduction between 2005 and 2010.

8.     Despite Bangladesh’s remarkable development achievements, significant challenges
remain in its quest to eliminate extreme poverty. Bangladesh continues to be one of the poorest
countries in the region, with constrained public services and comparatively weak institutions. Even
though it has done fairly well in recent years, many others, e.g. China, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam,
have done much better (see Table 2).




                                                                                                      2
                                                                    Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


             Table 2: Income Levels: Bangladesh and Comparator Asian Countries: 1980 – 2013
                                  GDP per capita               GNI per capita, Atlas method
                                   (current US$)                      (current US$)
                            1980          2013 % (annual)       1980        2013 % (annual)
         China                193        6,807        11.4       220       6,560          10.8
         South Korea        1,778       25,977         8.5     1,900      25,920            8.2
         Sri Lanka            273        3,280         7.8       280       3,170            7.6
         Vietnam             239*        1,911         7.7     220**       1,740            9.0
         Thailand             683        5,779         6.7       710       5,340            6.3
         Indonesia            536        3,475         5.8       510       3,580            6.1
         India                271        1,499         5.3       270       1,570            5.5
         Philippines          685        2,765         4.3       700       3,270            4.8
         Bangladesh           220          958         4.6       220       1,010            4.7
         Pakistan             296        1,275         4.5       340       1,360            4.3
         Source: World Development Indicators. *Data for 1985; ** 1989.



9.      Earlier this year the WBG conducted a Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) which
highlights the creation of more and better jobs as the key challenge for eliminating poverty
and boosting shared prosperity in Bangladesh. Jobs remain a critical concern in the country:
the labor force is growing by 3.1 percent per annum—1.3 times the South Asian and 1.7 times the
global average—and 21 million people are projected to enter the working age population over the
next decade. Many young Bangladeshis remain trapped in low-wage, labor intensive, and insecure
informal work. Accelerating the employment shift of casual workers and small farmers engaged
in agriculture to salaried employment in more dynamic and remunerative sectors of the economy
is an important priority. At the same time, growth and employment opportunities associated with
diversification of agriculture and value addition in the agricultural supply chains must be captured.

10.     One major impediment to higher growth rates, private sector development and job
creation is the low level of investment in infrastructure. Bangladesh devotes a smaller
percentage of GDP to investments than other countries in South Asia. Public investment in hard
infrastructure stands at less than 2 percent of GDP, resulting in lower infrastructure quality. China,
Thailand, and Vietnam invest more than 7 percent of GDP. Unless Bangladesh’s infrastructure
bottlenecks are addressed, they risk becoming increasingly important constraints for growth. WBG
estimates indicate that reaching sustained growth rates of 7.5-8.0 percent would require an increase
in infrastructure investments to around 10 percent of GDP per year.

11.      The SCD identifies foundational and transformational priorities where concerted
efforts by the government and other stakeholders would yield the highest payoffs for
promoting sustainable growth and creating jobs. As described in Table 3 below, foundational
priorities are areas where Bangladesh has mostly done well in the past, but which continue to be
pre-requisites for faster job creation and growth and therefore require sustained policy attention.
Transformational priorities represent lagging areas, where concerted actions over the next three to
five years could have a profound impact on the pace of progress towards eliminating poverty and
boosting shared prosperity.




                                                                                                              3
                                                                       Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


                      Table 3: Summary of Key Priorities for Action Identified by the SCD

    PRIORITY AREAS WITH POTENTIALLY TRANSFORMATIVE IMPACT ON TWIN GOALS
    Energy sector: key priorities include increasing the supply of electricity and natural gas, diversifying sources of
    power supply, retiring polluting and expensive emergency diesel generators, eliminating energy subsidies (and the
    resulting significant fiscal burden), and eliminating distorted market signals.
    Impact on twin goals: Increased availability of electricity helps increase economic activities, which in turn
    generate jobs and income opportunities, thus reducing poverty.
    Inland connectivity and logistics: key priorities include upgrading and integrating key transport corridors (in
    particular the Dhaka-Chittagong highway), improving management of the port in Chittagong, reviving inland water
    transportation, and improving the maintenance of existing assets.
    Impact on twin goals: Improved connectivity will help reduce transport time and costs and boost productivity,
    which will help promote enterprise, generate jobs and increase incomes of workers.
    Regional and global integration: the key priorities are to tap considerable potential to capture a higher share of the
    manufacturing jobs moving out of higher-income countries by reviving the stalled trade reform agenda; moving up to
    higher value added manufacturing; and to make migration more remunerative, affordable, inclusive, and safe.
    Impact on twin goals: Increased export-led growth will help accelerate and diversify the source of GDP growth
    and create new jobs that will help improve incomes and living standards.
    Urbanization: key priorities are to improve urban competiveness and livability, especially for the poor (e.g.
    connectivity, efficient land use, public services and amenities) and to reduce environmental externalities (air and
    water pollution).
    Impact on twin goals: Improving the livability and quality of urban amenities will make growth more
    environmentally and socially sustainable and ensure that the poor also benefit from urbanization
    Adaptive delta management: key priorities are to promote agricultural productivity and diversification; to enhance
    long-term planning for better land and water use and natural resource management; and to revitalize and strengthen
    key infrastructure to protect the population, reduce vulnerability, and secure growth.
    Impact on twin goals: A holistic long-term approach to managing economic development of the delta will ensure
    that growth is sustainable, inclusive and reduces the vulnerability of the poor to natural disasters.
    FOUNDATIONAL PRIORITIES
    Macroeconomic stability and related cross-cutting challenges: Key priorities include achieving higher revenue
    mobilization through tax policy and tax administration reforms; better implementation of the Annual Development
    Program; and improved health of the financial sector and enhanced financial intermediation.
    Impact on twin goals: A strong macroeconomic framework is essential to promote growth, financial sector stability
    and private sector competitiveness needed to create jobs and boost the incomes of the poor.
    Human development: Key next-generation priorities are related to reducing malnutrition, improving the quality of
    public service delivery (including workforce skills); increasing public funding for health and moving towards
    universal health coverage; and extending coverage of social protection to the urban poor.
    Impact on twin goals: Investing in skills and education will help generate jobs in the formal sector and foster
    income opportunities; access to quality healthcare and improved social protection coverage will reduce the
    vulnerability of the poor and enhance their ability to participate in the labor market.
    Institutions and business environment: Stronger institutions are needed to manage a larger and more complex
    economy, to meet the aspirations of a more diverse and heterogeneous population, and to ensure that the prevailing
    business environment is conducive to higher investment and growth.
    Impact on twin goals: Stronger institutions can help foster a business-friendly environment for growth, which in
    turn will increase economic opportunities to grow incomes.




II. PROPOSED WORLD BANK GROUP COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORK

12.     The creation of more and better jobs that contribute significantly to growth and
poverty reduction will require several complementary transitions to be achieved
simultaneously. First, given that the majority of the poor continue to live in rural areas and remain
largely dependent on subsistence agriculture, it will be important for agriculture to continue to
perform well, with improvements over time both in agricultural productivity and diversification,
as well as increased agri-business. Second, to enable higher value-addition in the economy as a
whole, Bangladesh needs to help people move out of agriculture and into manufacturing—

                                                                                                                             4
                                                         Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


particularly manufacturing for exports. Third, Bangladeshi businesses will need to diversify both
their products and markets, building on a nascent competitive advantage in areas such as
pharmaceuticals, shipbuilding, leather goods, jute-based goods (including particularly footwear),
ICT (including business process outsourcing), and varieties of light engineering. To do so,
Bangladesh will first have to remove the binding constraints to growth posed by low access to
reliable and affordable power, poor transportation infrastructure, limited availability of serviced
land, rapid urbanization and vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters, among others.
In addition to these bottlenecks, some industries may also face specific constraints in taxation,
labor laws, access to finance, and sector-specific infrastructure, which the Government of
Bangladesh will need to help the business community address. There is also still room to grow
the RMG sector: although Bangladesh is already the second-largest exporter of ready-made
garments after China, it is still only about one-quarter of its size in China.

13.     The proposed CPF‘s overarching goal is to create more and better jobs. This will
refocus the WBG’s strategic directions on policy areas which could help remove stubborn
impediments to job creation and poverty reduction. The CPF is aligned with the Government’s 7th
Five Year Plan and the proposed program is anchored in the five transformational priorities
identified in the SCD (see Table 1), with the clear objective of increasing engagement in these
areas to make a dent in poverty reduction. In particular, the Bank will shift more financing toward
energy and transportation infrastructure—areas where progress has been limited, where the WBG
has a comparative advantage and where it must play an active role to remain relevant. The program
also takes into account the legacy portfolio and will continue to support the foundational priorities
through engagements which have already been initiated, specifically in health, education, social
protection, revenue mobilization, financial sector, and the business environment—areas where the
Bank enjoys a comparative advantage, or has played a leadership role in leveraging donor support.

14.     Bangladesh’s weak governance and institutions have undermined the sustainability
of reforms, and the CPF will support institutional capacity-building through activities
embedded in operations across the portfolio. This is a critical long-term agenda that needs to
be tackled on a sustained basis across multiple fronts. At the national level, the Bank will continue
ongoing efforts to improve public financial management, public procurement, civil service reform,
service delivery (through, for example, linking the use of personal IDs with service delivery),
access to information, and transparency in state-owned enterprises.

15.     In defining the program for the outer years, the CPF will consider three selectivity
criteria: i) consistency with the Government’s 7th Five Year Plan to ensure strong country
ownership; ii) alignment with policy priorities identified in the SCD; and iii) the WBG
comparative advantage, taking into account the knowledge and financing support provided by
other development partners. As in the past, this CPF will also maintain a degree of flexibility such
that the WBG can respond rapidly to changing country priorities, evolving country context or
unforeseen events such as natural disasters.

16.   The activities in the CPF are structured around three focus areas consistent with the
South Asia Regional Strategy—growth, social inclusion and climate and environmental
management. The combined outcomes of these activities are expected to contribute to a series of



                                                                                                   5
                                                         Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


CPF objectives and will contribute to the achievement of Bangladesh’s national goals as articulated
in the 7th Five Year Plan (see Results Framework below).

   Focus Area 1: Growth and Competitiveness: Bangladesh has sustained impressive growth
    rates over the last decade, fueled by a young population, jobs in manufacturing, increased
    agricultural productivity and remittances from overseas workers. But it will need to grow even
    faster in order to create enough jobs for the 2 million new workers—male and female—
    stepping into the labor force each year. Increasing investments and jobs in the private sector
    will require Bangladesh to undertake a broad set of reforms to further enhance competitiveness.
    Bangladesh also shares a 4,100 km border with India, making regional cooperation an
    imperative to attract investments and boost growth. To support these objectives, WBG
    activities will seek to remove barriers to growth such as increasing electricity supply,
    improving transport connectivity, expanding financial intermediation and creating an
    environment conducive to doing business, among others.

   Focus Area 2: Social Inclusion: Bangladesh achieved remarkable progress in expanding
    health and education services to the poor, with special attention to girls, and in creating work
    opportunities for women, particularly in the RMG sector. Even so, pockets of poverty persist
    across the country, malnutrition afflicts children from both low and higher income households,
    and access to public services remains constrained. Most workers are trapped in informal
    employment, with little opportunity to upgrade their skills and find better jobs. The WBG
    activities under this area will aim to consolidate the equity and access gains in health and
    education, and address the next generation of challenges related to quality, higher education
    and skills development, with continued due regard to gender. In addition, the WBG will seek
    to expand coverage of social protection, access to clean water and sanitation, and bring the
    rural poor into the folds of the country’s progress with support to their livelihoods.

   Focus Area 3: Climate and Environment Management: With two-thirds of its landmass
    less than five meters above sea level, Bangladesh is highly susceptible to sea-level rise and
    storm-induced tidal flooding which climate change is raising to an existential threat. The future
    is likely to threaten food security and freshwater supplies (especially because of saline
    intrusion into shallow groundwater), and increase prevalent water-related diseases, and
    repeated damage to poorly-sited or poorly-constructed infrastructure. To manage the complex
    Bangladesh delta effectively, the Government is preparing an integrated and holistic long-term
    plan—the Delta Plan 2100—to promote safe living through greater resilience and sound
    economic development. The Plan is based on an adaptive delta management (ADM) approach,
    which ensures that all sectoral investments take into account the long term uncertainties related
    to climate change and growth. WBG support will be aligned with the ADM principle, with
    activities focused on boosting Bangladesh’s resilience to natural disasters, improving the
    management of water and natural resources and modernizing agriculture by promoting
    productivity with climate-smart technology, diversification and accelerating the move up the
    value chain.




                                                                                                   6
                                                                         Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


                        Bangladesh CPF (FY16-20) Proposed Results Matrix
       The CPF objectives and indicators shown below are for discussion purposes and subject to change

Focus Area 1: Growth and Competitiveness
Description: In order for Bangladesh to create enough jobs for the 2 million new workers stepping into the work force every
year the country will need to grow faster. This focus area concentrates on removing barriers to growth by supporting increasing
access to electricity supply, improving transport connectivity, strengthening service delivery in local government, strengthening
financial sector efficiency and streamlining business environment.

Link with twin goals: SCD identifies that in addressing bottlenecks in key areas such as (i) increasing availability of energy
will increase economic opportunities in urban/rural areas; (ii) improving connectivity will help reduce transport time and cost
and boost productivity, which will help promote enterprise, generate jobs and increase incomes of workers; (iii) improving
livability of cities, strengthening business environment and enhancing financial intermediation can result in transformational
growth, create more and better jobs and lifting greater numbers out of poverty.

Country development goals: The government plans to accelerate growth by prioritizing attention on infrastructure development.
The key elements will concentrate on ensuring efficient and cost effective supply of primary energy, strengthening the use of
river transport to provide a low cost alternative to road transport and coordinating the roads and strengthening the performance
of the port. The government goal also identifies several drivers of growth such as improving the investment climate, enhancing
the efficiency of the financial sector and improving urban governance through the provision of affordable basic infrastructures
and services.
CPF Objectives                          CPF Objectives Indicators                     WBG Program
1.1 Increased power generation          1.1.1 Generation capacity increased           Ongoing:
capacity & supply of electricity        (MW)                                             Sidhirganj Power
                                        Grid :                                           Rural Electricity Transmission &
                                                                                          Distribution
                                        1.1.2 Electricity output increased (GWh)         Rural Electrification and Renewable
                                                                                          Energy Development II
                                        1.1.3 Number of households, businesses        Pipeline:
                                        and farmers have access to clean energy          Ghorashal 4 Power Generation
                                        services                                         Sidhirganj Power –AF
                                                                                         Gas Sector Efficiency Improvement
                                                                                         Sirajganj II (MIGA)
                                                                                         Sirajganj IV (MIGA)
                                                                                         Ghosrashal 3 (MIGA)
1.2: Improved transport connectivity    1.2.1 Percentage of population living         Ongoing:
                                        within 2 km of all season road in the            Second Rural Transport
                                        selected rural areas                          Pipeline:
                                                                                         Dhaka-Chittagong Inland
                                                                                          Waterways

1.3: Improved delivery of basic         1.3.1 Number of people in selected urban      Ongoing:
services by local government            areas provided with improved basic               Local Governance Support II
                                        services                                         Municipal Governance and Services
                                                                                      Pipeline:
                                        1.3.2 Number of municipalities                   Pro-Poor Slums Integration
                                        demonstrating improvement in the annual
                                        performance assessment
1.4: Enhanced business environment      1.4.1 Reduce border crossing time at          Ongoing:
for regional and global integration     existing land ports                              Private Sector Development Support
                                                                                         Bangladesh Investment Climate
                                                                                          Fund (BICF) (Advisory)
                                        1.4.2 Development of new economic             Pipeline:
                                        zones                                            Regional Connectivity 1
                                                                                         Dhaka-Chittagong Inland
                                                                                          Waterways
                                                                                         Private Sector Development Support
                                                                                          II
                                                                                         Competitiveness Advisory (BICF 2)


                                                                                                                                   7
                                                           Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


                                                                           Trade and Investment (DTIS and
                                                                            Institution Support)




1.5: Increased financial   1.5.1 Outstanding foreign exchange (FX)      Ongoing:
intermediation             long term loans of participating financial      Financial Sector Support
                           institutions (PFI) (US$mil)                     Investment Promotion Financing
                                                                            Facility
                           1.5.2 Number of insurance and voluntary      Pipeline:
                           pensions account holders                        Modernization of State Owned
                                                                            Banks
                                                                           Insurance and Private Pensions
                                                                            Development
                                                                           Investment Promotion and
                                                                            Financing Facility II




                                                                                                             8
                                                                          Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


Focus Area 2: Social Inclusion
Description: The aim of this focus area is to consolidate the equity and access gains in health and education, address next
generation of challenges in related to quality, higher education and skills development, expanding social protection coverage,
access to clean water and sanitation and improving opportunities rural livelihood opportunities.

Link with twin goals: SCD identified that investing in skills and education will help generate jobs in the formal sector and foster
income opportunities; access to quality healthcare and improved social protection coverage will reduce the vulnerability of the
poor and enhance their ability to participate in the labor market.

Country Development Goals: The government strategy emphasizes for inclusive growth which include creating productive
employment opportunities, access to services for the marginalized people, supporting skills development in response to market
demand and fostering greater labor market participation particularly for women. The government plan also seeks to significantly
reduce poverty and extreme poverty rate. The plan also focuses human development, social protection and social inclusion as
essential elements of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy.
CPF Objectives                         CPF Objective Indicators                      WBG Program
2.1 Improved access and quality of     2.1.1 Number of out of school children        Ongoing:
education (primary, secondary,         enrolled in primary schools                       Primary Education Development
tertiary)                                                                                 Program III
                                       2.1.2 Increased completion rates for              Reaching Out of School Children III
                                       primary and secondary education for the           Secondary Education Quality and
                                       poor (lowest 20% income quintile)                  Access Enhancement
                                                                                         Higher Education Quality
                                       2.1.3 System of regular learning                   Enhancement
                                       assessment for primary and secondary              Skills and Training Enhancement
                                       level is institutionalized                    Pipeline:
                                                                                         Skills and Training Enhancement –
                                                                                          AF
                                                                                         College Education Development
                                                                                         Global Program for Education grant
2.2: Improved access to quality        2.2.1 Increased percentage of deliveries      Ongoing:
health services                        by skilled birth attendant                        Health Sector Development
                                                                                          Program
                                                                                         Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                     Pipeline:
                                                                                         Health Sector Development – AF
                                                                                         Health Sector Development
                                                                                          Program II
2.3: Improved social protection        2.3.1 Number of targeted poorest              Ongoing:
coverage for the poor                  beneficiaries receiving social protection      Safety Net Program for the Poorest
                                       benefits                                       Income Support for the Poorest
                                                                                         Program
                                                                                     Pipeline:
                                                                                      ID Management System Project
                                                                                      Safe Overseas Migration for the
                                                                                         Poor
2.4 Enhanced income opportunities      2.4.1 Percentage of beneficiary               Ongoing:
for the poor                           households with an incremental income          Nutun Jibon Livelihood
                                       increase of at least 30%                          Improvement Project
                                                                                      Social Investment Program Project
                                       2.4.2 Number of youth employed through            II
                                       program facilitation and sustained for at
                                       least one year




                                                                                                                                  9
                                                                        Bangladesh CPF Consultations, Oct – Nov 2015


Focus Area 3: Climate and Environment Management
Description: This area is aligned with government’s Adaptive Delta Management (ADM) principle and focused on boosting
country’s resilience to natural disasters, management of water and natural resources and modernizing agriculture by
promoting productivity with climate smart technology, diversification and accelerating the move up the value chain.

Link with twin goals: A holistic long term approach to managing economic development of the delta will ensure that growth
is sustainable, inclusive and reduces the vulnerability of the poor to natural disasters.

Country development goals: The government’s goal is to adequately address climate change, reduce risks for disasters and
significantly improve environmental performance. The government is preparing an integrated and holistic long term plan – the
Delta Plan 2100 to promote safe living through greater resilience and sound economic development.
CPF Objectives                          CPF Objective Indicators                   WBG Program

3.1: Increased resilience to natural   3.1.1 Number of Wards with                   Ongoing:
disasters (urban/coastal)              decentralized emergency response                Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery
                                       services in Dhaka and Sylhet                     and Restoration
                                                                                       Coastal Embankment Improvement
                                       3.1.2 Number of people with access to           Multipurpose Disaster Shelter
                                       multipurpose shelters in select coastal         Urban Resilience
                                       districts                                    Pipeline:
                                                                                       Regional Climate Services
                                       3.1.3 Number of people able to
                                       understand and respond to early warning
                                       information

3.2: Improved water resource           3.2.1 People under reduced risk of erosion   Ongoing:
management for climate resilience      and flooding (number)                           Water Management Improvement
                                                                                    Pipeline:
                                       3.2.2 Area protected against frequent           River Management Improvement I
                                       erosion and flooding (ha)                       Water Management Improvement –
                                                                                        AF
3.3: Increased adoption of             3.3.1 Increase in yield of selected          Ongoing:
sustainable agricultural practice      agricultural commodities                        National Agriculture Technology
                                                                                        Program Phase 2
                                                                                       Modern Food Storage Facilities
                                                                                       Coastal Embankment Improvement
                                                                                        Project




                                                                                                                            10
