                                                 100525 v5


Trust Fund for Environmentally &
Socially Sustainable Development



Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX 3 - Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change
for– Hydropower

August 2015
© 2015 The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




                              Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for
                              the Sava River Basin


                              ANNEX 3 - Guidance Note on Adaptation to
                              Climate Change for – Hydropower

                              August 2015


                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                              This work was made possible by the financial contribution of the World
                              Bank’s Water Partnership Program (WPP) - a multi-donor trust fund
                              that promotes water security for inclusive green growth (wa-
                              ter.worldbank.org/water/wpp) and the Trust Fund for Environmentally
                              & Socially Sustainable Development (TFESSD) .

                              DISCLAIMER
                              This work is a product of The World Bank with external contributions.
                              The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work
                              do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
                              Executive Directors or the governments they represent.

                              The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included
                              in this work. The boundaries, colours, denominations, and other infor-
                              mation shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on
                              the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory
                              or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

                              RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
                              The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World
                              Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be
                              reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial purposes as long
                              as full attribution to this work is given.

                              Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should
                              be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H
                              Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail:
                              pubrights@worldbank.org.




Project No.     A040710
Document no.    1
Version         8
Date of issue   August 2015
Prepared        ZAT/DAH
Checked         RSS
Approved        BAE
                                                                                                                                                     Page i
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower 
 




                                              Table of Contents
                                                                                                                                            Page No


1             Introduction ..................................................................................................................... 1 

2             Climate change impact on Hydropower – Vulnerability Screening ................................. 2 

3             Scenarios for climate change in Sava River Basin ......................................................... 3 

4             Case studies - Expected magnitude of climate change impact on Hydropower
              Sector in Sava River Basin ............................................................................................. 4 

5             Adaptation and Mitigation Guidelines ............................................................................. 7 
5.1           Structural adaptation measures ...................................................................................... 7 
5.2           Non-structural adaptation measures ............................................................................... 7 

6             References: .................................................................................................................... 8 




                                                               List of Tables
                                                                                                                                         Page No.

TABLE 1: HYDROPOWER CLIMATE CHANGE VULNERABILITY ACCORDING TO HPP CHARACTERISTIC ...................................................... 2 
TABLE 2: HPPS IN THE SAVA RIVER BASIN USED AS CASE STUDY .................................................................................................  4 
TABLE 3: ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION FROM THE HYDROPOWER SECTOR FOR THE SRB COUNTRIES ............................ 7 


                                                              List of Figures
                                                                                                                                         Page No.

FIGURE 1: LOCATION OF VRBAS RIVER BASIN WITHIN SAVA RIVER BASIN ......................................................................................  1 
FIGURE 2: RELATIVE CHANGE IN ENERGY PRODUCTION FIVE CLIMATE SCENARIOS CM1‐CM5 AND NEAR AND FAR FUTURE ...................... 5 
FIGURE 3: CHANGE OF ENERGY PRODUCTION FOR HPP BAJINA BAŠTA BY SEASONS ......................................................................... 6 
                                                                                                                 Page 1
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 

      GUIDANCE NOTE ON ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE
          FOR THE SAVA RIVER BASIN – HYDROPOWER

1         Introduction
This report provides guidance note for decision making on the adaptation needs related to hydropow-
er in the Sava River Basin (SRB). This guidance note is one of the components of the Water and Cli-
mate Adaptation Plan (WATCAP) being prepared by the Consultant for the International Sava River
Basin Commission (ISRBC) under World Bank funding.1 It builds on the main WATCAP report (World
Bank, 2013b), the report on the development of future climate scenarios (Vujadinovic and Vukovic,
2013) and on the report on development of the hydrologic model for the Sava River basin (World
Bank, 2013a). Thus, the guidance note is designed to provide fundamental and flexible instruction on
how to conduct impact and vulnerability assessments in the energy sector, specifically for hydropower
facilities along with identification opportunities and entry points for integration of climate change miti-
gation and adaptation measures into the hydropower energy (HPE) sector processes.

An eminent example upon which this guidance note on the hydropower sector is based is The Inte-
grated Water and Energy Nexus Study (IWENS) for the Vrbas Basin, a tributary of the Sava River
(see Figure 1), that represents a snapshot of the complex and integrated use, development and man-
agement of water resources, in order to meet the water needs of multiple users and their future har-
monization as well as adapting to climate change.2




Figure 1: Location of Vrbas River Basin within Sava River Basin


1 COWI AS of Norway were contracted by the World Bank to undertake the development of the hydrologic model – World
Bank Contract No - 7162102
2 COWI (2012) Update of the Water Resources Management Basis for the Vrbas River Basin, project report for the World

Bank.
                                                                                                                   Page 2
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 
In order to provide proper information about climate change impact on the hydropower sector various
analysis were performed with useful results that define an adaptation strategy direction. Similarly,
though less extensive analysis is done for the purpose of completing this Adaptation Guidance note
and also by giving an example for conducting a more profound and detailed analysis in the future.



2            Climate change impact on Hydropower – Vulnerability Screening
Climate change (CC) impact on the hydropower sector is mainly seen in the effects on power genera-
tion potential. Hydropower production would either be positively or adversely affected, depending on
the CC effects and how are they managed. Change of three climate parameters as a consequence of
CC should be analysed, namely: precipitation, temperatures and evaporation/evapotranspiration (ET).
These three parameters are all important components of the hydrological cycle that affects river dis-
charge, which in turn is a major input to power generation calculation.
Consequently, major projected climate change impacts on the HPE sector are:

   Decreased or increased HP generation potential due to more or less precipitation and conse-
    quently more or less river runoff;
   Reduced or increased energy demand for heating or cooling, with regard to CC by means of high-
    er or lower air temperatures;
   A decrease or increase of installed flow for facilities changing HPP effectiveness;
   Flooding and landslides damage or complete destruction of HP structures (e.g. dams, transmis-
    sion and distribution networks) that may create conflict with downstream communities, increase
    social vulnerability e.g. through involuntary resettlement; and
   Energy security and economic development activities will be compromised and production costs
    will increase.

Major vulnerability of hydropower plants and systems to CC lies in change of key parameters for
power production, because they are directly linked to climate parameters. Key parameters whose
change would largely affect hydropower production are:

   River discharge or mean flow and on specific dam profiles: a significant change would affect pro-
    duction in the same direction;
   Duration curves or a fluctuation of discharge in one time period (i.e. year, season,…) for the dam
    profile: a change would affect the change in total volume used for production and in the same
    manner production by itself;
   Evaporation/ET would affect volume of available water for production.

Some characteristics of hydropower facilities affect their vulnerability to climate change. For instance,
electricity generation capacity relative change would be decreased or increased in a bigger or a
smaller scale depending on the type of facility, size of the reservoir, etc. The vulnerability of different
hydropower characteristics to CC are given in Table 1.
Using the pattern shown in Table 1, it is possible to define adaptation strategies depending on a spe-
cific situation.

Table 1: Hydropower climate change vulnerability according to HPP characteristic

                                                                   Reservoir storage area: 
                                         HPP type                                                Reservoir size 
               Climate                                                  volume ratio 
 Climate 
              parameter 
parameter                  Reservoir                    Pumped 
               change                   Run‐of‐river                High            Low       Large          Small 
                             type                       storage 
Evapo‐

tion/E
  ra‐

   T 




               Increase                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                      Page 3
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 
                                                                                      Reservoir storage area: 
                                                        HPP type                                                    Reservoir size 
                      Climate                                                              volume ratio 
 Climate 
                     parameter 
parameter                             Reservoir                          Pumped 
                      change                        Run‐of‐river                       High             Low      Large          Small 
                                        type                             storage 

                         Decrease                                                                                                   


                         Increase                                                                                                   
     runoff 
     River 




                         Decrease                                                                                                   


                          Flood                                                         N/A                                         
    Temporal  
    variability 




                         Drought                                                                                                    

                         Seasonal 
                                                                                                                                    
                          offset 


Legend:                              bigger decrease                                bigger increase 
                                     smaller decrease                               smaller increase 
 



3                  Scenarios for climate change in Sava River Basin
Climate change analysis in Sava River Basin starts with simulations of the future hydrologic regime
using a hydrological model for the SRB developed in HEC-HMS. The future climate scenarios are
taken from five Global Climate Models (GCM)/Regional Climate Models (RCM) simulations under the
A1B Special Report on Emissions Scenario (SRES)/Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) scenario and are later in text denoted as climate models -CM1 through CM5. With each cli-
mate model (CM) daily flows are simulated for three 30-year periods:

1. 1961-1990 (past or baseline climate scenario),
2. 2011-2040 (near future climate scenario), and
3. 2041-2070 (distant future climate scenario).

According to work undertaken under this WATCAP study climate change in the Sava River Basin im-
plies:3

      Temperature increase about 1°C in the near future and 2.3°C in the distant future,
      Change of mean annual precipitation ranges between -6% to +4% across the Basin, but seasonal
       change takes values between -12% to +14% in the near future and as much as -32% to +19% in
       the distant future, as a mean value for all stations on the Basin. For some parts of the SRB differ-
       ence is as high as ±30% in near and ±40% in the distant future;
      Seasonal variability as described by the 5 used climate models (i.e. CM1 to CM5) is not the same
       for all. Predictions of two climate model for the near future and three for the distant future indicate
       an increasing precipitation trend will occur in the winter and a decreasing trend in the summer
       season.



3 COWI, 2013: Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin: Completion of the WATCAP with the construction

of a hydrologic model.
                                                                                                                                Page 4
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 
Taking the information from Table 1 and the overall climate scenario results for the Sava River Basin
area overall, the following conclusions can be drawn:

     With increasing evaporation/ET, due to temperature increase in the future, a bigger decrease of
      hydropower production is expected to occur on reservoir type and pumped storage type dams
      with a high storage area/volume ratio and small reservoirs. Other types of HPP would show
      smaller effects, but still experience a decrease of hydropower generation;
     A decrease in river runoff would affect power generation with a reduction on all facilities but in par-
      ticular with run-of-river schemes in the SRB because they are highly and solely dependent on riv-
      er runoff; and
     Floods in the fall/winter and droughts in the spring/summer would mostly affect run-of-river HPPs
      and HPP with small reservoirs. With this climate change parameter an overall power generation
      decrease is expected.

From all of the above it can be concluded that, in the future it would be customary to have lower pow-
er generation from the hydropower sector on the Sava River Basin from bigger or smaller schemes,
depending on the region and the HPP facility. The magnitude of the change has been reviewed by
conducting further analysis through case studies that are described below.



4              Case studies - Expected magnitude of climate change impact on
               Hydropower Sector in Sava River Basin
In the Sava River Basin there are 20 hydropower plants (HPP) with installed capacity larger than 10
MW (see Chapter 2.4.5 of this Report)). Four HPPs were selected as case studies for analysis of CC
impact on energy production. The choice of HPP is made based upon the energy production magni-
tude and the share in average total energy production in the SRB or in other words upon their signifi-
cance in the hydropower sector in SRB area. In addition, data needed for analysis were directly avail-
able from the developed Sava River Basin HEC-HMS Model since for each plant location of those
four plants there is hydrological station included in model. All four HPPs are reservoir type dams.

Table 2: HPPs in the Sava River Basin used as Case Study
                                                                                                                              Share** 
                                                     Reservoir     Installed                   Average          Share* in 
                                                                                                                               in total 
                                        Reservoir     storage      capacity     Installed     yearly pro‐        average 
                                                                                                                              installed 
    Country        HPP       River       volume        area:        [MW]‐       discharge    duction (ref.    total energy 
                                                                                                                              capacity 
                                         (mil m3)     volume       ref. year      (m3/s)     2005‐2007)        production 
                                                                                                                                in SRB 
                                                       ratio         2005                    [GWh/year]        in SRB [%] 
                                                                                                                                  [%] 
    Slovenia     Blanca       Sava         9.95         0.13          43           500            144             2.2            1.8 

Bosnia and 
                 Bočac       Vrbas         52.1        0.045         110           240            308             4.8            4.5 
Herzegovina 
                 Zvornik     Drina         89.0        0.146          96           620            515              8             3.9 
     Serbia      Bajina 
                             Drina         340         0.036         360           644           1691             26            14.7 
                 Bašta 
                                                                         609 of 
Total Sava River Basin (reference                                                                    2658/6445 
                                                                        2449 in                                         41      24.9 
year 2005)                                                                                             total 
                                                                          total 
Source: Adapted from the “Sava River Basin management Plan”, Draft version, 2013. 
*this refers to share of specific HPP’s yearly average energy production in total yearly average energy production (from hydropower 
sector) in whole SRB 
**this refers to share of installed capacity of the specific HPP in total installed capacity (from hydropower sector) in SRB 

Simulated daily flows for the above mentioned three 30-years periods and five climate models scenar-
ios are used to calculate the daily production for selected HPPs, with the following assumptions and
generalizations:
                                                                                                       Page 5
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 

   Efficiency coefficient value for generator is taken to be the same for all HPPs, ηgen=0.95;
   Efficiency coefficients for turbines that are used in the four chosen HPPs are:

                                                       Francis         0.92
                                                       Kaplan           0.9

   Useable head for energy production and for each dam is taken as a constant for each day’s pro-
    duction calculation,
   All dams are close to dam type and no flow and head losses in the tunnel or penstock are taken
    into account.

Depending on the available daily flow, the flow through the turbines is calculated as:
If Qriver  Qinstalled then Qturbines  Qriver
If Qriver  Qinstalled then Qturbines  Qinstalled .

Energy production is calculated using the formula:
                                       E   gen turb  9.81  Qturb  H  t [kWh]

 gen -coefficient of generator efficiency [-]
turb -coefficient of utilization of turbines [-]
Qturb -flow through turbines [m3/s]
H -dam head, difference between upstream of the dam water level (in reservoir) and downstream wa-
ter level [m]
 t -time period for which energy is calculated, 1day=24h

From the above the daily and yearly productions are calculated. The resulting averages for each 30-
year period’s energy production for both near and distant future scenarios are compared in relation to
the baseline scenario (period 1961-1990). The results are given in Figure 2.




                                                                                                    
Source: Figure produced by COWI 

Figure 2: Relative change in the annual energy production under A1B emission scenario for five climate
              model chains CM1-CM5 in near future (left) and distant future (right)


The results for all HPPs in the near future show a small expected change in the average annual ener-
gy production, with rather small variation between the scenarios except for HPP Bočac. Based on the
ensemble median values (as a more robust estimate than the ensemble mean, which might be under
influence of extreme values in short samples like this one), an increase in the range of 1-1.5% is ex-
                                                                                                  Page 6
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 
pected at two HPPs on the Drina River (Bajina Bašta and Zvornik), and a small decrese is expected
at HPP Bočac. HPP Blanca in Slovenia results in 0% change. Greater variation for HPP Bočac gives
a power production decrease of 4% with CM4 and an increase of 9% with CM5, thus indicating a
higher uncertainty related to the Vrbas basin hydrologic simulations and consequently to the derived
energy production.

For the distant future the variation between the scenarios is greater, which is expected with the simu-
lation period being further away from the observation period. The energy production is expected to
change more markedly in this period, between -8% (HPP Bočac) and +4% (HPP Bajina Bašta), alt-
hough the order of the magnitude of these changes is still in the range of the modelling and meas-
urement uncertainties. The trend at two HPPs on the Drina River (Bajina Bašta and Zvornik) is re-
versed and their annual energy production is expected to decrease slightly by 1-2%. The decreasing
trend for HPP Bočac continues in this period as well, while the energy production at HPP Blanca is
expected to increase.

In addition to the results shown in Figure 2, seasonal energy production variability is analysed for
HPP Bajina Bašta. These results are portrayed in Figure 3. The near future results show greater en-
ergy production in the winter and fall seasons, while in the spring a decrease in energy production is
expected. Interestingly, the energy production in the summer season is not expected to change signif-
icantly. The distant future results show greater decrease in the spring and summer seasons (by 4%
and 10% on average, respectively), whilst in the winter and fall energy production is expected to in-
crease by 11% and 5%, respectively, on average.




                                                                                                     
Figure 3: Change in the seasonal energy production for HPP Bajina Bašta under A1B emission scenario
             for five climate model chains CM1-CM5 in near future (left) and distant future (right)
DJF=December‐January‐February,  
MAM=March‐April‐May,  
JJA=June‐July‐August,  
SON=September‐October‐November 
 
                                                                                                                          Page 7
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 



5          Adaptation and Mitigation Guidelines
Although predictions of climate scenarios vary over the SRB and by different scenario, it is likely that
in the near future no severe alterations of climate that would substantially affect the hydropower sec-
tor will happen, while in the distant future water availability would decrease and with it energy pro-
duced in hydropower facilities.

Although the SRB is predicted to have small (near future) and moderate (distant future) decreases in
overall hydropower production as a consequence of CC, these changes are not expected to be se-
vere and it is highly unlikely that this would cause detrimental effects on human activities. Further-
more, there are other green power sources available (e.g. solar, wind etc.) and a lot of possible
measures for adaptation and mitigation to counteract these CC effects.

Notwithstanding, on average dependence on hydropower energy for all SRB countries is around 45%,
defined as a percentage of hydropower produced from the total energy used (see Table 3 ). Conse-
quently, hydropower is very important for the SRB and it follows that work on adaptation and mitiga-
tion measures should be started now in order to assure proper and timely resilience to climate change
in the future.

Table 3: Electricity consumption and production from the hydropower sector for the SRB countries
                                                              Average yearly electricity    Share of used electricity 
                                Average yearly electricity 
                                                              production from the hy‐       from hydropower com‐
SRB country                       consumption [Billion 
                                                              dropower sector [Billion      pared to total electricity 
                                    kWh] 2000‐2010 
                                                                  kWh] 2000‐2010               consumption [%] 
Bosnia and Herzegovina                      8.70                        5.49                         63.15 
Croatia                                    14.12                        5.98                         42.36 
Montenegro                                  3.37                        1.87                         55.41 
Serbia                                     28.62                       10.49                         36.67 
Slovenia                                   12.56                        3.73                         29.71 
                    Sum:                   67.35                       27.56                    Average 45.5%
Data source: U.S Energy Information Administration 

Adaptation and mitigation options, both structural and non-structural for the estimated climate change
impact on Sava River Basin are summarized below:


5.1        Structural adaptation measures
   Enhance dam structural parameters-diverting upstream tributaries to decrease river runoff, new
    reservoir storage, modifying spillways, changing number and/or types of turbines;
   Build robust dams with large reservoirs that can cope with extreme events;
   Flexible design for installed capacity;
   Consideration of planned structural measures before implementation. This includes all uses of the
    reservoir (e.g. hydroelectricity, irrigation, drinking water supply, tourism, etc.) before reservoir con-
    struction or enlargement.


5.2        Non-structural adaptation measures
   Consideration of ecological aspects, as structures can generate significant impacts on the water
    courses (morphological changes, barriers to fish migration, etc.);
   Reduce energy demand by promoting public awareness campaigns and training in energy effi-
    ciency;
                                                                                                    Page 8
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 
   Improving hydrological forecasting to improve operational rules and utilization of HPP capacity,
   Improve operation and maintenance practices at power stations;
   Incorporate future reduced or increased generation capacity in design, depending on specific loca-
    tion on the basin;
   Consider using more pumped storage hydropower technology in order to match the energy avail-
    able to the needs of the consumers and in order to cover peak loads;
   Adoption of an integrated water resources and disaster management approach;
   Integration of climate change considerations into the management and operation of HE power
    generation, transmission and distribution system;
   Replacement of incandescent bulbs with ones with low energy consumption;
   Assess and use other renewable energy production facilities such as wind power or solar power
    plants;
   More profound analysis for most likely estimation of projected climate variations over HPP lifetime;
   Identification of cost-effective new designs and modification of existing designs to deal with specif-
    ic risks for the HPP construction site;
   Undertaken regular reviews of permitting and licensing of hydropower schemes to assess river
    flow regimes and minimum and maximum water levels according to season, to ensure sufficient
    storage in the reservoir to absorb the spring flood and to tie this into the RBMPs;
   Incorporating climate change into existing codes and guidelines concerning hydropower;
   Establish a mandatory reporting mechanism for all hydropower companies to provide full opera-
    tional details on river flow and discharge to improve future monitoring records;
   Development of guiding principles on integrating environmental aspects in the use of existing hy-
    dropower plants such as increase in HPP efficiency, flow regulation, as well as in the planning and
    construction of new hydropower plants;
   Better development / implementation of strict rules (riparian rights) for discharge of water into riv-
    ers and for water withdrawal.



6        References:
1. Blackshear B., Crocker T., Drucker E., Filoon J., Knelman J, Skiles M. (2011) Hydropower Vul-
   nerability and Climate Change-A Framework for Modelling the Future of Global Hydroelectric Re-
   sources, Middlebury College Environmental Studies Senior Seminar. Available at
   http://www.middlebury.edu/media/view/352071/original/ (retrieved December, 2013).
2. COWI (2013) Integrated Water and Energy Nexus Study for the Vrbas River Basin, Guidance
   Notes, Project report for World Bank.
3. COWI (2012) Update of the Water Resources Management Basis for the Vrbas River Basin, pro-
   ject report for the World Bank.
4. COWI (2013) Water & Climate adaptation plan for the Sava River Basin, Completion of the
   WATCAP with the construction of a hydrological model-Development of the Hydrologic Model for
   the Sava River Basin, Draft project Report for the World Bank.
5. ISRBC (2013) Integration of water protection in developments in the Sava River Basin (Flood,
   Navigation, Hydropower, Agriculture), Background paper No. 9 for SRBMP, International Sava
   River Basin Commission. Available at:
   http://www.savacommission.org/dms/docs/dokumenti/srbmp_micro_web/backgroundpapers_final
   /no_9_background_paper_integration_of_water_protection_in_developments_in_the_sava_rb.pdf
   (retrieved November, 2013).
6. ISRBC (2013) Sava River Basin Management Plan (SRBMP), Draft version, International Sava
   River Basin Commission. Available at: http://www.savacommission.org/srbmp/en/draft (retrieved
   November, 2013).
7. UNECE (2009) Guidance on water and adaptation to climate change, United Nations Economic
   Commission for Europe, New York and Geneva. Available at:
   http://www.unece.org/index.php?id=11658 (retrieved December, 2013).
                                                                                            Page 9
Water & Climate Adaptation Plan for the Sava River Basin  
Guidance Note on Adaptation to Climate Change for Hydropower  
 
8. U.S Energy Information Administration (2010) International Energy Statistics. Available at:
    http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/ipdbproject/iedindex3.cfm?tid=44&pid=44&aid=2&cid=regions&syid=19
    80&eyid=2012&unit=QBTU (retrieved December, 2013).
9. USAID (2007) Adapting to climate variability and change, A Guidance manual for development
    planning, United States Agency for International Development. Available at:
    http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNADJ990.pdf (retrieved December, 2013).
10. Vučković D., Melentijević M., Milovanović M. (2004) PostojećestanjeizgrađenostinaslivuDrine,
    Pregledni rad, Vodoprivreda 0350-0519, 36 (2004) 207-208, p. 39-49.
11. Internet web sites of responsible companies for HPPs with dam specifications data used in the
    report:
12. http://www.dlhe.rs/latinica/he-bajina-basta
13. http://www.dlhe.rs/latinica/hidroelektrana-zvornik
14. http://www.henavrbasu.com/hev/Doc.aspx?cat=137&subcat=138&lang=cir&id=196
15. http://www.he-ss.si/he-blanca.html
