                                            100535

Regulating Water Services Provision in
               MENA

                   Summary Report




 Center for Mediterranean Integration, Villa Valmer,
                Marseille, July 28-30




                                                       1
                              Agenda at a glance

                                      Tuesday, July 28

9:00-12:00      Regulation of Water Utilities – A Primer

12:00 – 13:00   Lunch

13:00 – 14:15   Establishing a Water Regulatory Authority: Experiences from Palestine
                and Albania

14:15 – 17:00   Benchmarking Water Utilities: Nuts and Bolts, Activities and Case
                Studies

17:00 – 19:00   Light dinner reception and Meet and Greet

                                  Wednesday, July 29

9:00 – 11:30    Cost Recovery and Financial Sustainability, and the MENA Experience

11:30 – 12:15   Case Study: Australia – Regulation, Scarcity, and Desalination

12:15 – 13:15   Lunch

13:15 – 17:00   Pro-Poor Regulation, View from Civil Society, Regulation in Fragile
                Situations and Cost Recovery Team Activity

19h             Dinner in Marseille

                                  Thursday, July 30

9:15- 10:30     Utility Perspective: Public-Private Partnerships Under the French
                Contractual Model: Marseille Metropole, SEM -Veolia

10:30 – 11:00   Regulatory resources

11 – 11:30      Wrap up of workshop, collection of evaluations

Noon            End of workshop




                                                                                        2
Introduction

Scarce and unevenly distributed water resources have made water a key economic
and social development issue in the Middle East and North Africa region. More than
three quarters of the population of World Bank client countries in MENA have access
to clean water and improved sanitation, but service is often not continuous, and
access to water in rural areas often lags behind, as do access to sanitation and
wastewater treatment.

Balancing cost-recovery and affordability concerns are recurrent priorities for
service providers and policy-makers in MENA World Bank client countries, as well as
improving environmental sustainability and water resources management, given the
scarcity of water resources in the MENA region.

The World Bank and the Center for Mediterranean Integration (CMI) in partnership
with GIZ and the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), organized
the first regional workshop on Regulating Water Services Provision in MENA in
Marseille, France, on July 28-30th, 2015.

The workshop brought together water and sanitation service providers, regulatory
authorities and policy-makers from several countries of the MENA region (Egypt,
Morocco, Palestine and Tunisia) as well as Albania, Australia, France, the Netherlands
and the US. Development partners and civil society representatives also participated
in the workshop, with the objective of discussing the potential for regulation of water
services as an instrument to reach sustainable water and sanitation services for all in
the region.

This workshop looked at the potential of regulation for improving these aspects of
water and sanitation services provision, by considering the experience of developing
and developed countries alike. As well as this summary report on the proceedings of
the workshop, this event has sparked interest in the creation a formal or informal
Community of Practice on the topic of the regulation of water and sanitation services
in the MENA region.




                                                                                     3
                    Opening session: A Primer on Regulation
                         Day 1: Tuesday, July 28 2015
                                  09:00-12:00

    8:30 – 9am   Registration

    9:00 –       Welcome and Participants' Introduction      Mourad Ezzine, Director, CMI,
    10:00                                                    and Yogita Mumssen, Senior
                                                             Infrastructure Economist,
                                                             World Bank

    10:00 –      Regulation of Water Utilities – A Primer,   Mark Jamison, Director, Public
    10:45        followed by Q&A                             Utility Research Center (PURC),
                                                             University of Florida
    10:45 –      Coffee Break
    11:00

    11:00 –      Institutional Arrangements and the          Mark Jamison, PURC
    12:00        Political Economy of Regulation,
                 followed by Q&A




Opening

The session began with participants describing their objectives and expected
outcomes from the workshop. The Palestinian delegation described their current
situation working on regulatory and institutional reform of the water sector and
developing an independent regulatory council. Tunisia and Egypt were particularly
interested in comparing their experience with that of other Mediterranean countries
working in similar conditions; Tunisia was particularly interested in strategic
planning for Water Supply and Sanitation. Finally, Morocco was interested in the
potential application of a regulatory framework as part of an ongoing national water
sector reform.
The organizers thanked the participants and encouraged them to think about staying
in touch with each other and keeping abreast of future developments in the water
sector in the region via a formal or informal Community of Practice, which could be
supported by the World Bank. Dr. Jamison also pointed out to a number of key
references for further reading.1


1   Including the PURC and PPIAF resource: regulationbodyofknowledge.org



                                                                                               4
1. Regulation of Water Utilities - A Primer - Mark Jamison

The session began with participants prioritizing their regulatory objectives in the
Water Supply and Sanitation sector. Balancing cost-recovery and affordability
concerns were recurrent priorities, as well as improving environmental
sustainability and water resources management, given the scarcity of water
resources in the MENA region. Customer satisfaction and the provision of
equitable services to all was also a priority concern.

Dr Jamison highlighted the importance of not considering regulation in a vacuum: the
quality of the organizations of the water sector goes a long way in determining the
quality of the regulation. There are several overarching considerations for regulators
in the water sector: (i) credibility (ensuring that stakeholders have confidence in the
regulation of the water sector); (ii) legitimacy (consumers must be convinced that the
regulatory system will protect them from the exercise of monopoly power, whether
reflected in high prices, poor service, or both); (iii) transparency (the regulator is held
accountable by customers, politicians and utilities); and (iv) efficiency. Below are the
main regulatory functions in the water sector; note that these may be (and often are)
split between different institutions or regulatory authorities, and may be informal
(e.g. decision-making processes) or formal (laws, decrees):

      Issuing licenses,
      Setting performance standards,
      Monitoring performance standards,
      Establishing price levels and rate structure,
      Establishing a uniform system of accounts,
      Arbitrating stakeholder disputes,
      Performing management audits (and evaluating business plans),
      Developing human resources,
      Coordinating activities with other agencies, and
      Reporting sector performance and commission activities to appropriate
       government authorities.

During the Q&A, Morocco explained that it was in the process of regionalizing water
supply and sanitation and wondered whether it would be better to establish regional
water regulators. Responses from various regulatory experts included that a national
or a regional regulator would both be possible; but a national regulator may present
additional benefits, in terms of capacity/ human resources as well as benchmarking.
Participants also wondered how regulators were established and selected. It was
discussed that the advantage of a commission or a panel of regulators is that it
decreases the risks of the regulator becoming corrupt. It also allows for a range of
skills and expertise, as regulators often need to have legal, technical and
economic/financial skills as well as political awareness. Some independent regulators
have a corporate structure, with a board of directors who hires a CEO to do day-to-



                                                                                         5
day operations. Regulators that are elected tend to focus more on 'populist' issues
and are less independent.

Dr. Mark Jamison is the director of the Public Utility Research Center (PURC) at the
University of Florida and serves as its director of Telecommunications Studies. He
provides international training and research on business and government policy,
focusing on utilities and network industries. He co-directs the PURC/World Bank
International Training Program on Utility Regulation and Strategy, and is working
with the Bank and its Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) on
regulation in low-income and fragile states. Dr. Jamison’s current research topics
include leadership and institutional development in regulation, competition and
subsidies in telecommunications, and regulation for next generation networks. He
has conducted education programs in numerous countries in Asia, Africa, Europe, the
Caribbean, and through the Americas. Dr. Jamison has served as special academic
advisor to the chair of the Florida Governor's Internet task force and as president of
the Transportation and Public Utilities Group. Previously, Dr. Jamison was manager
of regulatory policy at Sprint, head of research for the Iowa Utilities Board, and
communications economist for the Kansas Corporation Commission. He has served
as chairperson of the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners Staff
Subcommittee on Communications, chairperson of the State Staff for the
Federal/State Joint Conference on Open Network Architecture, and member of the
State Staff for the Federal/State Joint Board on Separations. He serves on the editorial
board of Utilities Policy.


2. Institutional Arrangements and the Political Economy of Regulation

The regulator's role is to safeguard the public interest, by ensuring the sustainability
of the resource, ensuring accountability for consumers who are not on the system and
future consumers, as well as mediate between customers, service providers and the
government. However, vested interests can destroy the value of regulation: for
instance, favored consumers like prices that are too low, but powerful labor groups
and input suppliers benefit from inflated prices. It is particularly important, when
establishing a regulatory authority, to clarify each sector institution's role and
avoiding overlaps, as well as define the key principles of regulation:

      Defining the scope of regulation
      Ensuring stakeholder participation, transparency and accountability
      Defining and prioritizing public service obligations
      Designing and implementing of performance incentives for service providers,
       based on benchmarking studies
      Developing regulatory agency leadership and professional support staff.

The regulator may be led to deal with conflicts between stakeholders, which may
stem from (i) a lack of clarity on roles ("authority conflicts"), (ii) disagreements over


                                                                                       6
current/ historical facts and causal linkages ("cognitive conflicts"), (iii) conflicting
priorities and different weights on outcomes ("value conflicts") and/or (iv) the fact
that stakeholders benefit differently ("interest conflicts").

Several case studies highlighted the various issues tied to the political economy of
water which a regulator could run into, and the way countries around the world have
dealt with them. Uganda's regulator has experimented with a performance indicator
with weighted priorities (e.g. access, efficiency, Non-Revenue Water, etc) in order to
help operators focus on investing in priority areas. The case of Rio de Janeiro, which
filed a lawsuit and negotiated an agreement with Sao Paulo over the allocation of
water resources in the country, highlighted the adaptive capacity of the sector in
dealing with pressures on water resources. Finally, in response to concerns over how
to ensure the consumers do pay their water bills, Albania shared its model contract
between service provider and consumers, which is available on its website.




                                                                                      7
    Establishing a Water Regulatory Authority: Experiences from
                       Palestine and Albania
                    Day 1: Tuesday, July 28 2015
                            13:00 – 14:15



3. Keynote Speech by Minister of Water, Palestine and Head of
Palestinian Water Authority - Honorable Minister Mazen Ghunaim

Water in Palestine is subject to resources constraints and political and human
pressures, as well as service provision constraints due to the weak state of the
infrastructure, which impedes economic and human development. The Minister
highlighted that most of the catchment area in Gaza cannot be used due to salinization
and sewage contamination. The Palestinian government is trying to find solutions to
this problem, including desalination; its focus is on trying to build strong, transparent
institutions to manage the sector.

Since 2009, it has been implementing a plan for the reform of the water sector, which
prioritizes cost recovery, strategic planning and awareness raising efforts. The
planned water sector reform would entail (i) a new law on water to determine
regulation, policy, the sustainable use of water resources and water allocation issues;
(ii) a new national water company to supply water to the 3 main operators and
provide technical support to the 226 small water services providers current
operating in Palestine, which under the reform process will be reduced to few number
of regional water and sanitation utilities, as well as (iii) a new regulatory authority to
provide permits, regulate tariffs, and deliver licenses to water operators.

Palestine is keen to understand the experience of other countries, including those that
are leading a water sector reform plan. In particular, there is a need to learn more
from other countries on how consumers can be encouraged to pay their water bills,
when there has been a culture of avoiding payment (which contributes to low cost
recovery for operators).

Minister of Water, Palestine, Mr. Mazen Ghunaim, was born in Amman, Jordan in
1966. He graduated from Paris University XI in 1993. He is specialized in electrical
and industrial engineering. His work experience began as industrial engineer in
Jordan, and in energy generation in Tunisia. In 1997, he was nominated as a deputy
to the Director General of the Palestinian Energy Authority until 2003. In 2003 he
became the Director General of the Ministry of Energy and Nature Resources for two
years and Director General of Nature resources Sector for another two years. In 2008,
he was nominated as a Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Local Government, in charge
of the development of the Palestinian local governmental sector. The Ministry under


                                                                                        8
his leadership is developing strategic plans, infrastructure and capacity building
development projects for all Palestinian LGUs. Currently, Mazen Ghunaim is the Head
of Palestinian Water Authority, and Head of the committee on negotiation of the
permanent status of the water with Israel and also a member of the Arab Council of
water ministers.



4. Case Study: Albania: Establishing a Water Regulatory Authority - Avni
Dervishi

After briefly introducing the audience to the water resources and water sector in
Albania, Mr. Dervishi outlined the reasons for establishing an independent regulator
in Albania. These included (i) the protection of consumer interests; (ii) ensuring the
financial sustainability of the utilities; (iii) encouraging competition within the sector;
and, (iv) protecting water resources and the environment. There were political and
logistical challenges associated with the transfer of regulatory competencies in the
first year, and the need for government support (particularly budgetary) in the first
year of establishment.

The National Regulatory Commission (composed of 5 members) regulate the water
sector, through the following instruments:

      Licensing of utilities: at the moment, there is only one license, but there are
       discussions for separating bulk and retail water utilities licensing;
      Tariff regulation, including tariff approval: this competency was initially
       disputed by local governments. This has now been clarified: utilities submit a
       plan to local governments for approval, and final approval rests with the
       regulator. There are tariff for 3 categories of consumers for water, as well as
       bulk water tariff, which now covers 113% of O&M costs and 80% of total costs
       on average. Some utilities cover all their costs from their own revenue.
      Performance monitoring: The regulator has established performance
       contracts with the municipality, and with the regulator. Tariffs and
       performance are reviewed yearly, and the regulator has defined 10 KPIs.
       Utilities are grouped based on the number of water connections and ranked
       every year. The National Commission assigns a weighing to each KPI every
       year. Next year, they plan on adding more KPIs (16). In particular, one of the
       KPIs is 'regulator perception', which measures the compliance of utilities with
       the regulator in terms of licensing, responsiveness, participation with training,
       etc.
      The regulator also carries out studies on customer satisfaction, which have
       shown that there is a willingness to pay more for better services, and a need
       to improve water quality as 80% of consumers buy bottled water for drinking.
      Transparency and customer protection: the regulator has put in place
       mandatory service contract, setting the rights and obligations of both parties


                                                                                         9
       as well as complaint resolution mechanisms; it has also instituted public
       hearings as part of the tariff-setting process.

The National Regulatory Commission also measures its efficiency, and has calculated
that their services 'cost' 52 cents per customer. The budget for the Commission comes
from regulatory fees, which are collected from the utilities. The main budget items for
the Commission have to be approved by the government.


Mr. Avni Dervishi is the Chairman of the National Regulatory Commission of the
Water Regulatory Authority in Albania since May 2008. As a Civil Engineer, he has
over 30 years of experience in research, design, supervision, management of water
supply and sewerage systems and water regulatory sector. He has been a leader of
sector reform in Albania, such as his participation in the development and
implementation of the water sector strategies, especially, in regulatory terms. He has
participated in many national and international Conferences representing the Water
Regulatory Authority and its current achievements and challenges. Under Mr.
Dervishi’s direction, the WRA has made significant steps forward by expanding and
strengthening the role of regulation in the water sector.




                                                                                    10
   Benchmarking Water Utilities: Nuts and Bolts and Case Studies
                 Day 1: Tuesday, July 28 2015
                         14:15 – 17:00


 14:15 – 15   Benchmarking Water Utilities,        Bill Kingdom, Global Program Lead,
              followed by Q&A                      World Bank

 15 – 16h     Practical exercise on Benchmarking   Group work
              (Coffee Break included)

 16 – 16:30   Case Study: Regulation and           Ben de Ru, Waternet
              Benchmarking in the Netherlands,
              followed by Q&A




5. Benchmarking Water Utilities - Bill Kingdom
Performance improvements can derive from management initiatives within the
operator (internally motivated) as well as from incentives developed by oversight
agencies (externally motivated. In both instances, the purpose of benchmarking is to
develop an understanding of relative performance and possible ways for meeting
improved performance targets. Mainly two types of benchmarking methodologies are
used by service providers and sector regulators:
    Metric benchmarking, which is when service providers are ideally grouped
       into business units that face similar operating conditions, and the use of input
       resources to deliver outputs are compared. There are four most commonly
       used methods for data analysis in order to assess relative performance:
       regression analysis; average input/output ratios; sophisticated ratios (based
       on more stratified samples); and data envelopment analysis.
    Process benchmarking, which aims to provide a means of achieving best
       possible performance based on the detailed analysis of operating systems.
       Regulator may take a role in identifying best practices and sharing them.

A set of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) are used by many regulatory authorities
to identify trends, evaluate performance, and establish targets. It may be difficult to
get a 'like per like' comparison, so the evolution of KPIs per se and comparisons
between utilities and between countries may not tell the full story. Sometimes these
core indicators are given specific weights and aggregated into an aggregated
Performance Indicator (as is the case in Uganda). The assessment of relative
performance is a mix of art and science and practitioners should make their
assessments using multiple tools, and be cognizant of factors that are outside the
control of management but impact on use of resources.



                                                                                    11
No matter what methodology is used, a solid data collection and analysis system, and
quality data is necessary for benchmarking. Improved data quality can be achieved
by using data verifiers (e.g. consulting engineers, independent from engineering
activities); error bars can also be assigned to each data point. A quick benchmarking
exercise demonstrated that uncertainties in data points can have a wide variation in
the final performance ratios. A good resource for benchmarking at the regional or
international level is IBNET.

Benchmarking can be a powerful tool to influence utility management, but there are
different ways to apply it. Some regulators apply peer pressure through so-called
"sunshine regulation", in which the regulator sheds some light on the performance of
the sector. The model of writing an annual 'State of the Water Sector' report is a good
way to start demonstrating what the regulator is trying to achieve, which can then
help civil society pick up on the performance of services. Some regulators also apply
incentives and penalties to low-performing utilities; but in this case, enforceability is
key.


Mr. Bill Kingdom is the Global Lead for Water Supply and Sanitation in the World
Bank. During his career in the water sector he has worked extensively in the UK, USA,
Canada, South Asia and East Asia. Bill has led many urban and rural water supply
investment projects, supported regulators, provided policy advice and implemented
a number of innovative PPP projects including small town design build lease
contracts in Vietnam, wastewater operations contracts in Canada, city-wide
concession contract in Romania and performance based leakage contract in
HoChiMinh City. He is currently leading a project in India to deliver 24/7 water
supplies in three cities in Karnataka. Bill has undertaken, and provided advice to,
benchmarking studies in many countries including UK, USA, Canada, Vietnam,
Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, India and Bangladesh. He set up the IBNET system in the
World Bank which is now the world’s largest database of water utilities.



6. Case study: Regulation and Benchmarking in the Netherlands with
Public Sector Providers - Ben de Ru

Ben briefly introduced the audience to the water sector in the Netherlands, which is
composed of 26 water boards (a board is elected every 4 years, which sets the
guidelines for the next 5 years, as well as the budget and the tariffs on wastewater
treatment and flood protection) as well as 10 (public) drinking water companies.

Waternet promotes and implements a voluntary "sunshine" benchmarking system, in
order to learn and improve overall efficiency. All water boards and water companies
have joined this benchmarking exercise, even though it is not mandatory. The fact
that Waternet promotes voluntary comparisons between utilities/ water boards


                                                                                      12
ensures that the quality of the data is quite high; it is available through open data on
their website. Waternet operates several types of benchmarks, including a national
benchmark for wastewater treatment every 3 years, which assesses over 75 KPIs
related to wastewater treatment, financial sustainability, environmental
sustainability, energy consumption and innovation.



Mr. Ben de Ru has been working with Waternet in Amsterdam since 2009 as Team
leader Program Management within the Waste Water department. Waternet is
responsible for drinking water, wastewater and surface water (flood control) in the
Amsterdam area. As team leader and program manager, Ben is responsible for the
wastewater treatment investment program, which contains multiple wastewater
projects such as new wastewater treatment facilities and the optimization of the
wastewater treatment facility. Since 2012, Ben has been working part-time with
World Waternet as a Program manager for the Sanitation Program in the province of
Banten Indonesia. World Waternet is part Waternet and a non-profit organisation
that supports developing countries in their efforts to improve Sanitation, Drinking
water supply and Water management. World Waternet is active in amongst others
Africa, Suriname and Indonesia.




                                                                                     13
    Cost Recovery and Financial Sustainability and MENA Water
                 Day 2: Wednesday, July 29 2015
                           8:30 – 11:30


 8:30 – 9am    Recap of Day 1                           Yogita Mumssen and Mark
                                                        Jamison

 9 – 9:45am    Approaches to Rate-Setting, Cost,        Mark Jamison
               Incentives and Prices

 9:45 – 11:30 MENA experience with cost recovery        All Participants – Moderated by
 am           and financial sustainability (including   Bill Kingdom and Mark Jamison
              Coffee Break)



Opening
The participants reflected on the purpose of regulation, which is one of the many tools
available to improve the performance of the sector. It is important to bear in mind
that the expected outcome is to reach sustainable, equitable and affordable access to
WSS for all, and that regulation is not an end in itself. A formal regulator is not always
necessary (e.g. in the Netherlands, there is no regulator, as there is adequate human
and technical capacity), but it can help strengthen the sector, provided other aspects
are working too (e.g. systems for mediation and arbitration).


7. Approaches to rate-setting, cost, incentives and prices - Mark Jamison

The water sector is known for having prices that do not cover the costs of the service.
Typically, if prices do not cover the costs of providing the service, someone else has
to pay for the shortfall; it could be the users, the people in the service area, or the
government, which is ultimately the citizens. In order for services to be technically
and commercially viable, regulators must first estimate the cost of the service
provided by the utilities. It is important to understand that prices need to cover the
costs of investment, not just the costs of O&M; otherwise this will discourage future
investment. The basic formula to calculate the Cost of Service (i.e. revenue required
by the service provider) was discussed.
Another form of calculating allowable cost recovery or revenue which regulators use
is Price Cap Regulation, which allows for regular change in prices based on the rate
of inflation, minus an expected productivity factor (other adjustments can be taken
into account too). Price cap regulation generally provides greater incentive to be
efficient and reduce cost, but is not as widely used in systems which require heavy


                                                                                          14
investment and where the emphasis is on greater investment and increasing tariffs.
There are also Hybrid Schemes, where operator and customers share efficiency
gains and which provides additional incentives for efficiency.
Since data may be imperfect or change over time, the regulator will need to re-
evaluate the estimated revenue required by the utility regularly. The frequency of the
revisions will depend on the degree of confidence of the price calculations – and is
often seen as one of the differences between cost of service and price cap regulation.
A good accounting system that is the same over time and across operators is
necessary so that the regulator can compare unit costs across service providers and
be more efficient. The regulator also needs to put in place methods for reporting key
information, and procedures for audits on key information. Cross-checking different
sources of information may also help, as operators may report accounting costs for
different government authorities, which can help the regulator gain a better
understanding of the financial health of the utility.
Tariff categories (e.g. social tariffs) and rate structures (e.g. increasing/ decreasing
block, flat fee, connection fee, seasonal fee, wastewater pricing) can be designed in
order to maximize cost-recovery as well as ensure affordability of services. Improving
technical and commercial efficiency can improve cost recovery independently of tariff
levels.


8. MENA experience with cost recovery and financial sustainability

The participants shared their current and planned sector performance with regards
to cost recovery and financial sustainability.
Egypt explained that tariff reform for water is current underway, with a resolution
adopted by the Council of Ministers in June 2015. By 2020, O&M, rehabilitation as well
as depreciation will be fully covered by utilities, with the state providing subsidies to
recover costs in the meantime.
Palestine outlined its vision for cost recovery of the sector, which is based on the
following pillars:
      Proper management of fixed assets
      Implementation of accrual accounting
      Proper financial treatment of grant fund
      Effective regulation
      Utilize economies of scale
      Efficiency of O&M
      Socio-Economic Factors
      Staff optimization and HR development
      Proper costing and tariff setting


                                                                                      15
Palestine's 2014 Water Law 2014 stipulates that tariffs must guarantee cost recovery
for service providers (costs include O&M, asset depreciation on real costs, loans and
interest and development investments). The next steps for Palestine lies in designing
an incentive program to help municipalities to join the reform process, as well as
strengthening the sanitation network and dealing with the culture of non-payment
for water and sanitation services.
Morocco has a complex set of institutional checks and balances for tariff setting,
which involves the Ministry for Energy, Mines, Water and Environment, the Ministry
of Finance, the Ministry of General Affairs which has set up an interministerial council
for tariff approval, as well as the Ministry of the Interior which looks after tariffs at
the 'commune' level. There are public and private operators involved in Morocco,
with ONEE managing both bulk production and most of the water distribution, as well
as a number of private operators (essentially in cities) and multi-sector service
providers. A performance contract has been established between ONEE and the
Moroccan government, which includes planned tariff reform. Cross-subsidies from
energy to water and related to bulk water services were described.
Tunisia gave a snapshot of the sector, including its water resources constraints.
SONEDE provides water 24/7 in densely populated areas and currently has a
coverage rate of 83%. The tariff system is complex, with 7 categories of consumers
with an 8-fold increase in tariffs between the first and the last category. There are
cross-subsidies between categories of consumers, and between service areas. As
there is no mechanism in place for reviewing tariffs, cost-recovery for SONEDE has
been steadily declining due to inflation and other incidences on the costs of labor,
electricity, etc. ONAS (Sanitation) only recovers 63% of their costs and benefits from
an annual government subsidy. Finally, cost recovery (when measured as a
percentage of opex and depreciation) for drinking water supply in rural areas is low
at 67%; the government again provides a subsidy as tariffs are capped at 1 dinar per
cubic meter. Tunisia is engaging a discussion on potential reform for the 2016-2020
development plan.




                                                                                      16
       Case Study on Water Regulation in Australia: Sydney Water
                    Day 2: Wednesday, July 29 2015
                             11:30 – 12:15



9. Key Messages: Regulation in the Water Sector (Case Study: Australia)

       Regulation is an economic and political process
       Better regulation can contribute to better outcomes, if accompanied by
        sector and governance reform
       Regulation evolves - you don't have to solve every problem at once.
       The regulator has to have its own business plan with its own objectives and
        priorities
       There are a lot of challenges in building up institutional capacity; capacity-
        building needs to go not just to the regulator, but also the utility.


IPART was established in 1992 as an independent transparent regulator of Sydney
Water, a Government-owned corporatized water utility, in order to deal with issues
linked to the pricing of water: cost recovery (low profits), inefficient delivery and
pricing of services, and cross-subsidies. The entrenched cross-subsidies reflected the
politicization of pricing with impacts on consumers and the environment, political
control, as well as the lack of efficiency and prices benefiting those with political
power. IPART's approach evolved over time. It initially focused on removal of cross-
subsidies. It set tough efficiency targets and used this to unwind the cross-subsidies
while avoiding large increases in prices for some customers. After 2000 it focused on
commercial returns and investment incentives as the cross-subsidies had been
largely eliminated. .
IPART has used weighted average price caps in regulating electricity but in water it
has set specific individual prices.This is because Sydney Water wanted the regulator
to take responsibility for changes in price structure. However this system may be
inefficient and some consider it heavy-handed, so a move to a Weighted Average Price
Cap is overdue.
What has been achieved after 20 years of regulation? There are no longer any cross
subsidies: tariffs reflect the costs of service. Efficiency has increased, and the
profitability of Sydney Water has also improved. Residential bills have remained
constant or decreased in real terms for most of the period, but when costs rose due
to a new desalination plant to increase reliability, IPART achieved a 40% real increase
in prices in 4 years. Investment in desalination was linked to water security issues
during a long-term drought in the 2000's; in 2011, the Government decided to


                                                                                     17
privatize its desalination plant. IPART established a price path that underpinned the
privatization. The prices reflect the efficient costs of the plant and allow for recovery
of shutdown costs and fixed costs when the plant is shutdown.
The regulator had to ensure that the removal of cross-subsidies between different
categories of consumers did not affect affordability. IPART collected a lot of data on
the effects of change in tariff structures on households, and put that information in
the public domain. The Australian State Government provides a rebate for pensioners
and people on social benefits. During the major initial major price reforms Sydney
Water also set aside some funds to cope with households who find it difficult to deal
with increase in charges.


Mr. Eric Groom has been a significant contributor to the development of regulation
in Australia since 1992 when he joined the Independent Pricing and Regulatory
Tribunal of NSW on its establishment. IPART was the first independent multi-sector
utility regulator established in Australia and has had responsibility for the regulation
of energy, water, public transport and, more recently, local government in NSW. Eric
worked with IPART as Chief Economist and then Principal Adviser for 1992-2004 and
then 2007-2014. During this period he was also an advisor to the South Australian
Government, the Tasmanian, ACT and Northern Territory regulators, and, most
recently, the Australian Energy Regulator on the development of regulatory
frameworks. In 2015 he was awarded the Australian Public Service Medal for his
outstanding contribution to the development of regulation in Australia and, through
the Greenhouse Gas Abatement Scheme and Energy Savings Schemes, the reduction
in greenhouse gas emissions. From 2004-2007 Eric was a Senior Regulatory
Specialist with World Bank. During this period he led a program of research on the
regulation of the water sector and contributed to the review and development of
energy regulation and energy efficiency frameworks in a number of countries in East
Asia and the Pacific, Middle East and North Africa, and Eastern Europe. Before joining
IPART Eric worked with the NSW and New Zealand Treasuries, primarily on the
governance of government-owned businesses tax policy and social impact modelling.
Since 2014 Eric has been an independent advisor on regulation and sector reforms.
His clients have included the energy regulators of the Philippines and Vietnam, the
Australian Energy Market Commission, Sydney Water, the Department of Premier
and Cabinet, and the NSW Department of Industry. In 2015 he was appointed to an
expert panel on regulation for PPIAF/World Bank.




                                                                                      18
       Pro-Poor Regulation, Civil Society and Fragile Situations
                     Wednesday, July 29 2015
                            13:15 – 17:00


 13:15 –       Pro-poor regulation: Tariff structures,   Mark Jamison (PURC) and Roland
 14:00         subsidies, citizen/pro-poor               Werchota (GIZ)
               engagement, followed by Q&A

 14:00 –       Team activities on cost                   All Participants
 15:00         recovery/tariffs (Coffee Break
               included)

 15:00 –       View from Civil Society,                  Hachmi Kennou, Executive
 15:30                                                   Director, Institut Méditerranéen
               followed by Q&A
                                                         de l'Eau (IME)

 15:30-        Special End of Day Wrap-Up: What is       Mark Jamison, PURC, and Roland
 16:30         missing, and Fragile States?              Werchota, GIZ




10. Pro-poor regulation - Roland Werchota and Mark Jamison

Including the poor in the regulation of WSS services is the only way to ensure
universal service provision. But how to we (i) identify (ii) reach sustainably and (iii)
monitor the provision of services to the poor? There are several ways to identify the
poor: by location, by asking communities or local governments to identify its poorest
members themselves, or by using consumption/ standard of living as a proxy. The
latter is usually less challenging. Tariffs have to recover the costs of water services
provision - otherwise, the poor will ultimately lose out. There are ways to ensure the
affordability of tariffs for the poor, by modifying the tariff structure to ensure a
distribution of the costs of service between consumer categories for instance.
The challenge lies in the fact that WSS service providers tend to ignore low-income
areas. If the poor already have access to WSS services, the regulator can collect data
on the quality of services, and ensure there have appropriate feedback mechanisms
in place for the utility to engage with them. If they do not have access to WSS services,
the regulator must ensure that there are participation systems in place so that the
poor are heard and plans are made for them to be reached with services. There is
nothing wrong with different service standards (e.g. house connections/ communal
taps) as long as the minimum service standards (as mandated by national law or
WHO) are respected.




                                                                                            19
During the Q&A session, countries shared their experience of juggling the tradeoff
between affordability and cost-recovery. Tunisia noted that their current tariff
categories subsidizes people who are better off than the poor, but also that the
tendency to make the rich pay more can also have negative externalities as they can
choose to dig their own wells, thereby lowering the revenue of the utility and posing
additional environmental risks. In Morocco, consumers who use less than 12 cubic
meters per month get subsidies. The presenters highlighted that it is important to
engage civil society and the poor in a dialogue with the service provider, rather than
having illegal connections. It is the regulator' and civil society's job to accompany the
service provider in this process.

Mr Roland Werchota is a trained civil engineer (public works) and economist and
has been working in the water and sanitation sector for the last 25 years. His
professional work engaged him mainly in Africa and the Middle East where he spend
over 30 years. He started his carrier in the private construction business with water
resource management and water and sanitation related infrastructure development.
Thereafter, he was working for consultants from several countries and GIZ in the
development cooperation heading programs for restructuring of service providers
and designing and implementing water sector reform. With his works on reforms he
concentrated on policy and legal framework development, regulatory frameworks
and up-scaling of access for water and sanitation through pro-poor financing
mechanism. He was also engaged in the international and national dialogue on human
rights to water and sanitation and good governance in the sector. Presently, he is
senior advisor in Kenya for the technical cooperation GIZ as part of a joint German
Program with KfW, the German agency for financial cooperation, both in the
framework of the Kenyan – German Bilateral Cooperation.



11. View from Civil Society - Hachmi Kennou, Institut Mediterraneen de
l'Eau

Prior to 1992, civil society engagement in the water sector was mostly limited to
measures to protect consumer rights. Since then, civil society has evolved to include
organizations concerned with sustainable development as well as the protection of
consumer rights. In the MENA region, civil society is implicated in the water sector
through bottom-up approaches (particularly in governance, awareness-raising) and
top-down approaches (e.g. Mohamed VI Foundation for Environmental Protection).
There are differences between some organizations, which focus on the
preoccupations of the North (particularly on water quality and environmental
sustainability) and the South (focus on sustainable access to WSS services).
Partnership with civil society could be improved in the water sector, particularly as
it could help mobilize financial services. Regional approaches to networking in the
water sector have emerged recently, and include the Euro-Mediterranean
Partnership, Plan Bleu, FIEA, IME, CMI and others.


                                                                                      20
During the Q&A, Morocco explained that they have started to include civil society
representatives in the water sector, particularly in the river basin agencies. Egypt
noted that there are around 3000 NGOs in the water sector, with whom they try to
work. Palestine looks at CSOs as partners that may know information that they do
not have.

Mr. Hachmi Kennou started his career working on water pollution issues in France,
modellingwater resources management in the basins of the “Garonne and Adour”
rivers. Afterwards, in Tunisia, he worked in the Urban Hydraulic Division of the Public
Works Ministry and started his career in urban sanitation and the protection of cities
against floods, before becoming Director and subsequently Chairman of the National
Sanitation Authority (ONAS) as well as General manager of two urban development
societies. Since 2002, Mr Hachmi Kennou is in charge of the General Secretary of the
Mediterranean Water Institute (IME), one of the most active professional water
networks in Mediterranean region. Mr Kennou was also elected Governor to the
World Council in 2003.



12. Conclusion: What does it take to set up regulation?

      What are the sector's strengths to leverage when establishing a regulatory
       authority: a supportive line ministry? Strong political will? Civil society? All
       this will help decide what institutional configuration will work best for the
       country.
      The regulator should be backed by a coalition to manage change, which
       includes allies and engages opposition in a meaningful way.
      The regulator will need to overcome both systemic opposition, as well as
       opposition from people who may lose out from its establishment.
      The regulator should look for some short-term wins
      Don't finish setting up your regulatory authority too soon! Make sure you
       have a good system of checks and balances in place.
      Change sector culture so it accepts the system.
      Practice adaptive management: Think of next steps, reflect on what works
       well and what does not, and change focus if needs be.




                                                                                      21
   The Utility Perspective: Public-Private Partnerships Under the
                     French Contractual Model
                       Thursday, July 30 2015
                             13:15 – 17:00


 9 – 9:15     Recap of Day 2                        Mark Jamison and Yogita Mumssen

 9:15-        Utility Perspective: Public-Private   Jean-Marc Mertz, Marseille
 10:30        Partnerships Under the French         Metropole, and Alain Meysonnier,
              Contractual Model                     SEM-Veolia, moderated by Bill
                                                    Kingdom, World Bank

 10:30 – 11   Regulatory resources                  Mark Jamison
 am

 11 – 11:30   Wrap up of workshop, collection of    Mourad Ezzine, Bill Kingdom and
              evaluations                           Yogita Mumssen

 Noon         End of workshop




13. The Utility Perspective: Public-Private Partnerships Under the French
Contractual Model

Bill Kingdom, Global Water Sector Lead at the World Bank, moderated the discussion
between two panelists operating under the French model of delegated contracts for
services in the City of Marseille.

The first panelist, Jean-Marc Mertz, described the City of Marseille’s role as the
“maître d’ouvrage” in monitoring the various PPP contracts into which it has entered.
He explained that the Community of "Marseille Provence Metropole" (MPM)
approved, on the 8th of July 2011, the principle of delegating the exploitation of both
the drinkable water and the sanitation services through “leasing”. There are four
contracts of public delegation : one concerning the public water service and three for
the public sanitation (East, Central, West). There were several main selection criteria,
including price, security of the resource, and service quality. He explained that there
is a “dedicated legal structure for each contract”. He described the key Performance
Indicators (KPIs), and how sanctions are applied in the case of breach of contract, e.g.
penalties in case of non-achievement of the fixed objectives. An audit is performed
once a year, by an external and qualified auditor, based on the values production
process related to the previous year's data.



                                                                                       22
Mr. Meyssonnier followed by describing the 15-year water contract (recently
renewed) between his company, Societe des Eaux de Marseille (SEM) of the Veolia
Group, and the City of Marseille. He described it as embodying the following
characteristics:

      Performance based
      A new type of governance with more transparency and control for the city
      Technological innovations and higher service commitments
      Social development and sustainable development targets
      A shorter duration and a dedicated company

Questions from the participants centered on:
    Who implements/ executes the audits? Are they truly independent from the
      provider? How is the data verified?
    How are disputes handled?
    According to the OECD, prices in France are relatively higher than elsewhere
      in the OCED, and is this related to the risk in the contractual arrangements and
      the duration of the contracts?
    What type of competition is there for the contracts in the first place?



Mr. Jean-Marc Mertz, technical engineer, began his career at the Ministry of Finance.
In 1984, he joined the technical services of City of Marseille where he held various
key positions notably in the following areas: climate engineering, fleet manager and
managing director for safety and prevention. In 2004, he joined the "Urban
Community of Marseille Provence Metropole" where he served as Deputy Director in
charge of urban ecology, Deputy Director in charge of waste management, General
Inspector and Deputy Director in charge of urban services. He now serves as Deputy
Director for water and yacht harbors management.

Mr Alain Meyssonier joined the Marseille Water Company as Director of Foreign
Affairs and spent 20 years developing the activities of the Marseille Water Group at
the international level. He then was appointed Director of the Marseille Provence
Area in charge of the proper execution of the concessionary public-services contracts
for drinking water and sanitation signed with various Marseille Provence Métropole
municipalities until March 2014 when he took the position of Deputy General
Director in charge of the group's development in France and internationally. He is
also Chair of the Corsica Provence Committee of Foreign Trade Advisors of France. He
holds a MBA in Business Administration and Management from ESSEC Business
School.




                                                                                   23
14. Regulatory resources

Mark Jamison described the Body of Knowledge on Infrastructure Regulation
(BoKIR) on which PURC is working jointly with the World Bank and PPIAF. He
provided a history of how the BoKIR was created and its purpose, as well as its
latest initiative to provide expertise on regulation in low-income and fragile /
conflict states.




                                                                                   24
