                                   A F R I CA O P E R AT I O N S S E RV I C E S S E R I E S



                                                               100509


A Handbook on Financial
Management Information
Systems for Government
A Practitioners Guide for Setting Reform
Priorities, Systems Design and
Implementation
(Based on a compilation of experiences in World Bank- nanced projects)

Ali Hashim




                 ore Operatio
                C
                                ns
                                   S
                                 ervices




                Quality    OS
       DE P




                Capacity
                Results
            C




            FM
                  ASP
                        EN


                  THE AFRICA REGION             |   THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




A Handbook on Financial
Management Information
Systems for Government
A Practitioners Guide for Setting
Reform Priorities, Systems Design and
Implementation
(Based on a compilation of experiences in World Bank-financed
projects)



Ali Hashim
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202–473–1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202–522–2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Contents
Foreword  ix

Acknowledgements  xi

About the Author  xiii

Abbreviations  xv
                                                                                                                     iii
   Introduction  1
I. 

    Some Basic Concepts  7
II. 
        Rationale for Implementing Integrated Government Fiscal Management Systems   7
             Diagnostic Study  7
        Functional Requirements of Agencies Responsible for Economic Management   8
        Considerations in the Design of an IFMIS   9
        What is Involved in Setting up these Systems?   11

III. Policy Framework and Institutional Reforms   13
        Policy Framework  13
             Budget Management Law and Associated Regulations   13
             Budget Classification Structure and Chart of Accounts   14
             Reporting Requirements  15
        Institutional Arrangements  15
             Arrangements for Banking Government Funds – The Treasury Single Account
                 (TSA)  15
             Arrangements for Processing Payment and Receipt Transactions   15
        Alternative Institutional and Banking Arrangements for Setting up a TSA and for
           Processing Payment Transactions  16
        Other Legislation and Frameworks that Regulate the Operation of Automated
           Systems  20
        Requirement for Setting up an IT Capability   21

IV. Development of an Information Architecture for Government Fiscal Management   23
        Functional Processes in Government Fiscal management (GFM)   23
             Macro-Economic Forecasting  23
             Budget Preparation  23
             Budget Execution, Accounting and Fiscal Reporting   23
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                                     Cash Management  24
                                     Position, Payroll and Benefits/ Pensions Management for Govt. Retirees   24
                                     Debt Management  24
                                     Revenue Administration (Customs, Tax and Excise and Internally Generated
                                        Revenues)  24
                                     Auditing  24
                                Information Systems Architecture for Government Fiscal Management   24
                                Systems for Macro-Economic Forecasting   25


iv                      V. Treasury Systems – Functional Processes, Information Flows and Systems Modules   29
                                Core Functional Processes   29
                                     Treasury System  29
                                Treasury Systems Functionality   30
                                Budget Execution using the Treasury System   30
                                     Budget Management (Including Budget Review and Fiscal Reporting)   30
                                     Commitment Management  35
                                     Payments Management  35
                                     Receipts Management  38
                                     Cash Management  39
                                     Bank Reconciliation  40
                                     Tax and Customs Receipts and Refunds   40
                                Importance of Commitment Management for Budgetary Control   40
                                     The Commitment Process   41
                                     Commitment Thresholds  43
                                     Multi-year Commitments  43
                                     Commitment Carry Forward   43
                                     Salary and Payroll Commitments   43
                                     Transition to Commitment Accounting   43
                                Systems Deployment Options: Treasury-Based or Spending Unit-Based Systems
                                   Deployment  44
                                Primary Treasury System Interfaces   48
                                     Interface with the Budget Preparation System   48
                                     Interface with the Payroll System   48
                                     Interface with the Debt Management System   49
                                     Interface with Tax and Customs Systems   49
                                     Interface with the Banking system   49
                                     Interface with the Audit Systems   49
                                                                                AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




     Technology Architecture  51
VI.  
       Application-Specific Factors  51
       Systems Topology – Centralized and Distributed Technology Architectures   52
            Centralized Architecture  52
            Distributed Architecture  52
            Partially-Distributed Architectures  52
            Satellite-Based Communications From Remote Sites   54
       Application Software Options   55
            Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) vs. Custom-developed/Bespoke Application
               Software  55                                                                                         v
            Customization, Parameterization, and Reports Development   57

     Systems Implementation  59
VII. 
       Project Management Structures   59
       Implementation Phases  60
            Phase I – Systems Design   60
            Phase II – Procurement and Contracting for the System   61
            Phase III – Systems Implementation   62
       Software Testing and Acceptance  63
            Unit Testing  63
       Internal Control and Systems Security   65
            Indicative Time Schedule  66
       Cost Elements of an IFMIS Project   68
            Investment Costs  68
            Recurrent Costs  68

      Systems Procurement  71
VIII. 
       Consultancies and Contracts Involved in Project Implementation.   71
       Contracting for Consulting Support Required for IFMIS Projects   71
       Options for Procuring the Technology Platform for Systems Implementation   73
            Single Responsibility Contract   73
            Multi Tranche Procurement  73
       Systems Procurement using World Bank Procedures   74
       Some pointers on Designing the International Competitive Bidding (ICB)
          Package  74
            Contract Management  77
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                            Implementation Experience  79
                        IX. 
                               Major Groupings of Projects   79
                                    Transition Economies.  79
                                    Post Conflict Economies   79
                               Implementation of an IFMIS has Resulted in Significant Advantages.   80
                                    Project Completion Times  80
                                    Implementation Costs  81
                                    Recurrent Costs  82
                                    Project Scope  82
vi                                  Technology Choices  82
                                    System Architecture  82
                               Implementation at the Sub-National Level   83
                               Implementation in Low Capacity Settings and in Island Economies   84
                               Island Economy Settings   84

                        X. From Core Treasury Systems to a Broader IFMIS: Some Sequencing Considerations   87
                               Some Considerations for Implementing Advanced Budgeting Methodologies   91
                               Sequencing Reforms  93

                            Lessons learned  95
                        XI. 
                               Hierarchy of Requirements   95
                               Strong Government and MOF Commitment   95
                               Continuity in the Bank’s Project Team   96
                               Project Design  96
                               Business Process Engineering   97
                               Importance of Internal Control Procedures and Information Security   97
                               Complexity of Charts of Accounts   98
                               Implementation Prerequisites  98
                                    A Good Quality Telecommunications Network   98
                                    Availability of Technical Expertise   98
                               Training  100
                               Change Management  101
                                    Plan for Realistic Time Frames for Project Execution   101
                                    Resist the Temptation to Blame the Technology and Start Afresh in Mid-Stream of
                                        an Implementation Effort   101

                             Concluding Remarks  105
                        XII. 

                        References  107
                                                                                   AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Annexes  109
         Annex I  109
         Annex II – Treasury Diagnostic Questionnaire   147
         Annex III – A Questionnaire to Assess the Suitability of Application Software to meet
             Treasury Functional Requirements   153
         Annex IV – Functional Responsibilities of the Technical Organization to support an
             IFMIS  162

List of Figures
         Figure 1: A Frequently-Occurring Treasury Organization Structure   16                                         vii
         Figure 2: TSA Centralized Model (Case I)   17
         Figure 3: TSA Centralized Model (Case 1a)   18
         Figure 4: TSA Decentralized Model Using Commercial Banks as Fiscal Agents   19
         Figure 5: TSA Decentralized Model – Spending Units have Direct Access to
             ZBA  20
         Figure 6: Functional Processes and Information Systems Architecture for Government
             Fiscal Management  26
         Figure 7: Information Systems Architecture (Simplified Version)   27
         Figure 8: Treasury System Core Functional Processes and Information Flows   31
         Figure 9: Treasury System Core Functional Processes and Information Flows, and
             Transaction Types and Systems Modules   32
         Figure 10: Budget Management – Including Budget Reviews and Fiscal
             Reporting  34
         Figure 11: Commitment Management   36
         Figure 12: Payroll and Pensions Systems   37
         Figure 13 Payments Management   39
         Figure 14: Receipts Management   41
         Figure 15 Tax and Customs Receipts and Refunds   42
         Figure 16: Case I – Treasury-Centric Deployment   45
         Figure 17: Treasury-Centric Deployment (Another View)   46
         Figure 18: Case 2 – ‘Spending Unit-Based Deployment   47
         Figure 19: Primary Treasury Systems Interfaces   50
         Figure 20: IFMIS Centralized Architecture   53
         Figure 21: IFMIS Decentralized Architecture   53
         Figure 22: Indicative Time Line for Systems Implementation   68
                    Contracted Systems Implementation Costs Plotted Against Number of
         Figure 23: 
                   Users  81
       A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                                Figure 24: An IFMIS and its Principal Users   88
                                Figure 25: Treasury Systems – A Layered Implementation Approach   89
                                Figure 26: IFMIS Sequencing – One Possible Option   92
                                Figure 27: Treasury Organization Structure – Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine   112
                                Figure 28: Russia Treasury Systems – Functional Processes and Information
                                   Flows  117
                                Figure 29: Russia System to Monitor Key Budget Indicators   120
                                Figure 30: PIFRA FABS Systems Deployment, Information Flows, and Institutional
                                   Relationships, information flows and institutional Relationships   125
viii                            Figure 31: Indonesia Treasury Systems – Core Functional Processes and Information
                                   Flows  129
                                Figure 32: Nepal Treasury Systems – Participants and Information Flows   137
                                Figure 33: Maldives PAS Roll-Out Phases   143
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Foreword
The World Bank projects portfolio contains a large number of projects to set up or modernize
institutional structures to manage public finances in member countries. Among these are the
institutions and systems for budget preparation, budget execution, accounting, fiscal reporting,
customs administration, taxation, debt and cash management, and auditing. From this group,
the systems for budget execution accounting and fiscal reporting which support core budget
execution processes form the backbone of the information systems architecture for recording and
processing all financial transactions related to the budget for any level of government. They are
often referred to as Financial Management Information Systems (FMIS).
                                                                                                                           ix
An FMIS offers several significant benefits in managing public monies more effectively, includ-
ing, greater financial control, improved monitoring of the government’s cash position and better
planning for future requirements, better fiscal reporting, and availability of better data for budget
formulation. The establishment of an effective FMIS system also contributes directly to improving
transparency and accountability of a government. Implementation of FMIS therefore constitutes
a crucial element of many projects designed to improve institutions and systems for economic
management.

This handbook discusses some of the practical and operational issues that arise during the design,
procurement and implementation of FMIS for Government. Such a handbook would be useful to
the staffs of World Bank, IMF and other development institutions supporting these projects, and
the country counterpart teams and their advisors who are engaged in planning and implementing
them. The handbook will also be useful to contractors, consultants and in-house IT staff tasked
with the implementation of the system.

The handbook is based on experience gained by the author while managing, assisting, and advis-
ing on the implementation of over twenty World Bank financed projects for the implementation
of such systems over the last 30 years in countries of the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe,
Africa, the Caribbean, and South and East Asia.


                                                                           Edward Olowo-Okere
                                                                                       Director
                                                            Core Operations Services Department
                                                               Africa Region, World Bank Group
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Acknowledgements
This publication is sponsored by the World Bank’s Africa Region Core Operations Services
(AFTOS) under the direction of Edward Olowo-Okere (Director, AFTOS), as part of the AFTOS
Publication Series coordinated by Sahr Kpundeh, (Governance and Anti-Corruption Adviser,
AFTOS) and Alaba Adebowale (Consultant, AFTOS).

This handbook is based on work carried out as part of World Bank project teams from 1986 to
date. The learning reflected in this paper is the result of contributions of the many World Bank team
members and country counterpart teams with whom I had the opportunity to work over this period.
I acknowledge their contributions. In several projects the work was done in collaboration with the                         xi
IMF – FAD. I would like to acknowledge the contributions of my IMF colleagues. I would like to
acknowledge the contribution of the many consultants and contractors hired by the Bank and the
member countries who worked on these projects and whose work is reflected in this handbook.

Credit is due to a distinguished group of reviewers who provided comments on the final draft
of this handbook, including Gert Van Der Linde (Lead Financial Management Specialist, World
Bank), Parminder P.S. Brar (Lead Financial Management Specialist, World Bank), and Rama K.
Venkateswaran (Lead Financial Management Specialist, World Bank).

I am also particularly grateful to Mr. Eduardo Talero (former Advisor, World Bank) and Mr. Ismaila
Ceesay (Lead Financial Management Specialist, World Bank) who provided detailed comments on
a draft of the handbook. Mr. Cem Dener (Senior Public Sector Specialist, World Bank), and Mr. Irek
Smolewski (former Senior Procurement Specialist, World Bank) reviewed previous versions of the
handbook and provided comments. Mr. Farooq Khan provided comments on the Treasury diag-
nostic questionnaire. Mr. Bernard Myer and his team reviewed and commented on the Indonesia
case study. I am extremely grateful to Mr. John Gray who painstakingly went through the draft and
edited it. All these comments and advice greatly improved the content and clarity of the handbook.

I would like to thank Ms. Leah April (Senior Public Sector Specialist World Bank, Cambodia
Country Office) and Mr. M. Nguyen (Senior Economist, World Bank Vietnam Country Office) for
encouraging me to write this handbook.

I would also like to thank the many World Bank and IMF colleagues with whom I have had the
opportunity to work in World Bank operations—this has been both a pleasure and a tremendous
learning experience. They include Ms. Setsuko Ono, Ms. Rita Pirralli, and Mr. A. Graeme Lee,
who started me off on my operational career at the Bank and Mr. William Allan from the IMF,
with whom I undertook this journey.

I owe a debt to my managers who tolerated a maverick in their departments and supported my
work. I would like to thank the senior professionals in the Poverty Reduction and Economic Man-
agement (PREM) Network and elsewhere who taught a physicist about issues related to public
expenditure management and Government treasuries, how institutions work, and the mysteries
of the political economy. This includes Mr. Anil Sood, Mr. Sanjay Pradhan, Mr. Pradeep Mitra,
Ms. Cheryl Gray, Mr. Ted Ahlers, Ms. Helga Muller, Ms. Debbie Wetzel, Mr. Ron Meyers, Mr.
David Shand, Mr. Malcolm Holmes, Mr. S. Ramamurthy, Mr. Jack Diamond, Mr. Bill Dorotinsky,
Mr. Rino Schiavo Campo, Mr. Piyush Desai, Mr. Allister Moon and Mr. Mike Stevens.

I am particularly grateful to Mr. Pervaiz Rashid who taught me how to navigate the minefields
of a Bank executed Trust Fund and how to write a PAD, an ISR and an ICR. From Mr. Irek
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Smolewski, Mr. Rama Chandran, Mr. Naushad Khan, Mr. Harbaksh Sethi, Mr. Sunil Bhatacharya,
                         Mr. D. Mishra, Mr. S. Qamrul Hasan, Ms. A. Wielogorska, Mr. Shaun Moss, Mr. Gurcharan Singh,
                         I learned about Bank Procurement rules and their signature authority enabled me to progress on
                         my projects. I am grateful to Mr. Eduardo Talero and Mr. Carlos Ferreira who included me in the
                         team of specialists in their sections which provided support to Bank operational projects.

                         In addition I have had the opportunity to work with and benefit from the knowledge and expe-
                         rience of many others including, Mr. Cem Dener, Mr. Irek Smolewski, Mr Khuram Farooq, Mr.
                         Deepak Bhatia, Mr. Craig Neal, Mr. Ron Points, Mr. P.K. Subramanian, Mr. Ismaila Ceesay, Mr.
                         Vijay Ramachandran, Mr. Les Kojima, Mr. Shabih Mohib, Mr. Peter Dean, Mr. Motoo Konishi, Mr.
                         Hiran Herat, Mr. Suhas Joshi, Mr. Bruce Pollock, Mr. Abdul M. Khan , Mr. Manoj Jain, Mr. Yasuhiko
                         Matsuda, Mr. Albert Martinez, Ms. Ilene Photos, Mr, Gaiv Tata, Mr. Hywell Davies, Mr. Bigyan
                         Pradhan, Mr. Tariq Niazi, Mr. Alan Pearson, Mr. Steve Symansky, Mr. Pokar Khemani, the late Mr.
xii
                         Jit Gill, Mr. Asad Alam, , Mr. Samuel Otoo, Mr. Daniel Ritchie, Mr. Daryoush Kianpour, Mr. Sodeth
                         Ly, Ms. Quyen Vu, Ms. Hana Polackova, Mr. Tej Prakash, Mr. Duncan Last, Ms. Galina Kuznetsova,
                         Ms. Ljudmila Poznanskaya, Mr. Parmindar Brar, Mr. Jesse Hughes, Mr. Reginald Miller, Mr. Amit
                         Mukherjee, Mr. Suparno Banerjee, Mr. Ike Ikramullah, Mr. Tony Moussa, Mr. Luis-Jose Mejia, Mr.
                         Naushad Khan, Ms. Lilia Buruncuic, Mr. Reza Ghasimi, Mr. Eivind Tandberg, Mr. Luca Barbone,
                         Mr. Kyle Peters, Mr. John Wall, Mr. Tony Verheijen, Mr. Abid Hasan, Mr. S. Sayanith, Mr. Ramesh
                         Siva, Ms. Kathy Lalazarian, Mr. Richard Allen, Mr. Steve Hallan, Mr. Guy Anderson, Mr. Udhay
                         Pant, Ms. Patricia Palale, Ms. E. Nikulina, Mr. B Myers, Mr. Hisham Waly, Ms. Leah April, Mr.
                         Dominique de Roquefeuil, Mr. M Nguyen, Mr. Fritz Konigshofer, Mr. Mike Jacobs, Mr. John Gray,
                         Mr. Robert Talercio, Mr. Qaiser Khan, Ms. Samia Melhem, Ms. Sabah Rashid, Ms. Jennifer Thom-
                         son, Ms. Svetlana Proskurovska, Ms. S. Pahlavooni, Mr. Ismail Arslan, Mr. Jim Brumby, Mr. Dmitry
                         Petrin, Mr. Riaz Mahmood, Ms. Aman Trana, Ms. Joanna Watkins, Mr. William Hebb, Mr. Anand
                         Rajaram, Mr, Sanjay Vani, Mr. Jim Parks, Mr. Tony Oliffe, Mr. Michael Schaeffer, Mr. Richard
                         Moore, Jens Kristensen, Mr. Chris Willford, Mr. H Mukhtar, Mr. Robert Saum, Ms. Laura Goodin,
                         Mr. Tom Lindsay, Mr. J. Cho, Mr. Frank Jenkins, Mr. Chris Fabling, Mr. Gary Reid, Ms. Maya Gusa-
                         rova, Mr. Hasan Saqib, Mr. Oleg Petrov, Mr. Mathew Verghis, Mr. Michael Schaeffer, Mr. Bisharat
                         Baig, Mr. Maxwell Dapaah, Mr. V. Ramakrishnan, Mr. W Cole, Ms. Ziva Lautar, Mr. Theo Thomas,
                         Mr. Nagy Hanna, Mr. Shambhu Uprety, Mr. Bert Hoffman, Mr. Sati Achath, Mr. William Mayville,
                         Mr. Waleed Malik, Mr. G, Vanderlinde, Mr. Janis Platais, Mr. Than Lwin, Mr. Farooq Khan, Mr. Paul
                         Sisk , Mr. Paul Welton, Ms. Sandra Bloemenkamp and many others.

                         My apologies to anybody whose name I have not listed. This omission is not deliberate but due
                         to aging memory cells. My thanks go out to them anyway.

                         The work reflected in this handbook is mainly the result of the efforts of Country counterpart
                         teams and the managers who doggedly pursued the reform program despite many obstacles. I
                         learned about ground realities and the real world from these people. I mention a few of them. My
                         thanks go out to Mrs. V. Nesterenko, Mr. Arthyukin, Mrs. Malesheva, Mrs. Lopina, Mr. Denis Brill
                         of the Russian Treasury, Mr. Kreyev, Mr Petrashko, Mr. Danyewich, Mrs. Chechulina, Mr. Niko-
                         laev of the Ukrainian Treasury; Mr. Minbaev, Minister of Finance, Kazakhstan and Mrs. Satkalieva
                         and Mrs. Burangalieva of the Kazakhstan Treasury; Mr. Ch. Manzoor Hussain, Mr. Yunus Khan,
                         Mr. Waqar Masood Khan, Mr. Tanwir Ali Agha and the late Mr. Shoaib Ansari, Mr. Sohail Ahmad,
                         Mr. Shezad Hasan, Mr. M. Fahim, Mr. Moin Aftab, Mr. A. Usman, Mr. Nasrul Aziz, Mr. Mohsin
                         Khan, Mr. Tanwir Ahmed, Mr. Azhar Hameed of the Government of Pakistan; Mr. Mohammad
                         Ahmad of the MoFT, Maldives, and the officials of the many Ministries of Finance and Treasuries
                         where I had the opportunity to work.

                         Thanks also to Richard Crabbe (Consultant, AFTOS) who provided editorial advice and helped to
                         shape the content for publication.
                                                                                   AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




About the Author
Ali Hashim is a former World Bank Staff member who retired from the World Bank as Lead Trea-
sury Systems Specialist, Public Financial Management Cluster, Poverty Reduction and Economic
Management Unit (PREM), Europe and Central Asia Region (ECA).

During his tenure at the Bank he has prepared, appraised and supervised World Bank proj-
ects in several member countries including Cambodia, Ghana, Hungary, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Liberia, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Russia, Turkey, and Ukraine Zambia, and involv-
ing the design development and implementation of Government Fiscal Management Information
Systems.                                                                                                               xiii
In these projects, he has been closely associated in the review and the development of proposals
for:

•	   The structure of the Government economic management agencies responsible for govern-
     ment budgeting and accounting and their functional relationships with line ministries /
     agencies;
•	   The legal framework that underpins their functions and provides the legal basis for the
     proper management of public funds;
•	   The budget classification structures and associated charts of accounts required for a modern
     budget system;
•	   Government banking arrangements, including proposals for the consolidation of govern-
     ment accounts into a Treasury Single Account at the Central Bank;
•	   Setting up appropriate institutional arrangements for processing payment and receipt
     transactions;
•	   Setting up appropriate information systems and technology to support these systems.
•	   Coordinating and integrating the functional requirements for treasury systems proposed by
     the IMF/FAD in the project design, and
•	   Coordinating with other donor agencies to secure financing for project components.

He has authored several papers on the design, development and implementation of projects for
setting up institutions and information systems for government fiscal management. These include
The Treasury Reference Model, co-authored with Bill Allan, Senior Economist IMF/FAD, and
The Treasury Diagnostic Tool-kit—co-authored with Allister Moon, World Bank Lead Economist.

Prior to joining the Bank he was a senior manager in Pakistan’s State Owned Enterprise Sector.
He has a Ph.D. and a D.I.C from the Imperial College of Science and Technology, London, U.K.
and completed a post-doctoral fellowship at the National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada.

After retirement from the Bank, he now works as an independent consultant on Treasury/IFMIS
projects, and is based in the Washington, D.C. Metro area. Email: alihashim1941@yahoo.com
                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Abbreviations
ADB	      Asian Development Bank
ADETEF	   Technical assistance agency of the French Government
AGP	      Auditor General Pakistan
AP	       Accounts Payable
BA	       Budget Allocation
BCS	      Budget Classification Structure
BI	       Business Intelligence
BPR	      Business Process Re-Engineering
                                                                                                            xv
CF	       Consolidated Fund
COA	      Chart of Account
COFOG	    Classification of Functions of Government
CoP	      Community of Practice
COTS	     Commercial Of The Shelf Software
CTO	      Chief Technical Officer
DANIDA	   Department of International Development Denmark
DAO	      District Accounting Office (Pakistan)
DDO	      Drawing and Disbursement officer
DG	       Director General
DGST	     Director General State Treasury
DFID	     Department for International Development (UK)
DMD	      Debt Management Department
DRC	      Disaster Recovery Centre
DTCO	     District Treasury Controller’s Office (NEPAL)
EA	       Enterprise Architecture
EBF	      Extra Budgetary Funds
EBS	      Oracle E-business Suite
ERP	      Enterprise Resource Planning
EU	       European Union
FA	       Financial Accounting
FABS	     Financial Accountability and Budget System in Pakistan
FCGO	     Financial Controller General’s Organization (NEPAL)
FMIS	     Financial Management Information System
FTAS	     Federal Treasury Application Software
GDP	      Gross Domestic Product
GFM	      Government Fiscal Management
GFMIS	    Government Fiscal Management Information System
GFMRAP	   Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Program
GFS	      Government Finance Statistics
GL	       General Ledger
GOI	      Government of Indonesia
GOM	      Government of Maldives
GON	      Government of Nepal
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         GOP	      Government of Pakistan
                         HR	       Human Resource
                         IBRD	     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
                         ICB	      International Competitive Bidding
                         ICT	      Information and Communication Technologies
                         IDA	      International Development Association
                         IGF	      Internally Generated Funds
                         IFMIS	    Integrated Financial Management Information System
                         IMF	      International Monetary Fund
                         ICR	      Implementation Completion Report
                         IT	       Information Technology
                         IV&V	     Independent Verification and Validation
xvi
                         KPPN	     Kantor Pelayanan Perbendaharaan Negara-District level Treasury office in Indonesia
                         LAN	      Local Area Network
                         MIS	      Management Information Systems
                         MMA	      Maldives Monetary Authority
                         MOF	      Ministry of Finance
                         MTBF	     Medium Term Budgetary Framework
                         MTEF	     Medium Term Expenditure Framework
                         NRB	      Nepal Reserve Bank
                         OLAP	     Online Analytical Processing
                         PAD	      Project Appraisal Document
                         PEFA	     Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
                         PEM	      Public Expenditure Management
                         PEMNA	    Public Expenditure Management Network in Asia
                         PFM	      Public Financial Management
                         PFMRP	    Public Financial Management Reform Program in Vietnam
                         PHRD	     Policy and Human Resource Development
                         PIFRA	    Project to Improve Financial Reporting in Pakistan
                         PIU	      Project Implementation Unit
                         PM	       Project Management
                         PMO	      Project Management Office
                         PMU	      Project Management Unit
                         SAI	      Supreme Audit Institution
                         SAKTI	    An application to support SPAN(IFMIS) in Indonesia
                         SAL	      Structural Adjustment Lending
                         SDLC	     Software Development Life Cycle
                         SOE	      State Owned Enterprise
                         SPAN	     FMIS in Indonesia
                         SU	       Spending Unit
                         TA	       Technical Assistance
                         TABMIS	   FMIS in Vietnam
                         TLS	      Treasury Ledger System
                         TGL	      Treasury General Ledger
                         TOR	      Terms of Reference
                                                                AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




T-Bills	   Treasury Bills
TSA	       Treasury Single Account
UAT	       User Acceptance Testing
USAID	     United States Agency for International Development
VSAT	      Very Small Aperture Terminal
WAN	       Wide Area Network
WB	        World Bank
ZBA	       Zero Balance Account




                                                                                                    xvii
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




I. Introduction
Over the last two decades, the major multilateral organizations such
as the World Bank, the IMF, the Asian Development Bank, African
Development Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the
European Union (EU) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD), and several Bilateral development organizations
such as the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID), the United States Agency for International Development                                                              1
(USAID), the Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA),
and the German Organization for Technical Cooperation (GTZ, now
GIZ) have been involved in a number of initiatives to modernize the
policies, institutional structures and systems required to manage public
finances in member countries. Automation of Government Financial
Management (GFM) Systems is one of the core elements of the reform
program since ready availability of timely and accurate information is
critical to the management of government finances and public funds;
and it may simply not be possible to obtain the information required
for economic management in a timely manner without some degree of
automation, in view of the large transaction volumes involved and their
dispersal across multiple sites around the country.
These systems are also referred to as Integrated Financial Management Information Systems
(IFMIS). Broadly speaking, they consist of a set of computer programs, databases, associated
processes, procedures and technology platforms that enable government finance and account-
ing staff to carry out their day-to-day operational tasks. These tasks include originating, receiving,
recording, processing transactions related to budget authority, requests for financial resources,
payment of bills, loan and grants, assessments of taxes, duties and other levies, recording receipts
and managing deposits in government bank accounts.

As these transactions are processed, the information collected in the system databases enables
government finance managers to plan, prepare and approve budgets, approve payments, monitor
and report on financial resources collected, available and expended. It also facilitates developing
appropriate resource allocation and borrowing strategies. Government auditors have access to
this transactional data to audit government operations.

As described later in this handbook, IFMIS consists of a number of modules which support the
different functional processes associated with Government Fiscal Management (GFM). These
include modules for macroeconomic forecasting, budget preparation, budget execution (includ-
ing cash management, accounting and fiscal reporting), managing the size of the civil service
establishment and its payroll and pensions, debt management, tax administration and auditing.

In practice, projects for the implementation of such systems focus on a subset of modules from
the above list. This often leads to confusion as to whether a given project can be termed an IFMIS
    A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                       project or a more restrictive term needs to be used to define its scope.1 In order to avoid this con-
                       fusion, this handbook will focus on the systems modules, their functionality and characteristics
                       and interfaces with the other modules instead of debating on the nomenclature to be used for
                       specific combinations of modules. The requirement for integration between modules and what
                       it entails will also be described in greater detail. However, as is the general practice and for
                       simplicity, the term IFMIS would be used to denote the various combinations mentioned above.

                       Successful implementation of IFMIS systems requires a clear understanding of several aspects
                       such as: (i) the basic rationale for implementing such systems, (ii) the policy prerequisites that
                       need to be addressed before systems implementation can commence; (iii) the key characteristics
                       of Government fiscal management processes and transactions, (iv) their scope and functionality,
                       (v) the design considerations that need to be kept in mind to meet to meet diverse stakeholder
                       requirements and (vi) several considerations related to the technology to be employed, its deploy-
2
                       ment, and the expertise and capacity required for its procurement, operation and maintenance.

                       A handbook that could serve as a practitioner’s guide and addresses some of the practical and
                       operational issues that arise during the design, procurement and implementation of IFMIS for
                       governments would be useful to World Bank, IMF and other development institution staff sup-
                       porting these projects as well as the country counterpart teams and their advisors who are
                       engaged in planning and implementing them. The handbook should also be useful to contrac-
                       tors, consultants and in-house IT staff tasked with the implementation of the system.

                       This handbook tries to fulfill this need and to provide information related to the entire systems
                       life cycle, including the setting of reform priorities, designing systems functionality and archi-
                       tecture, and during systems implementation and ongoing operation and maintenance. In doing
                       so, the author draws on his experience gained while managing, assisting, and advising on the
                       implementation of World Bank financed projects for the implementation of such systems over
                       the last 30 years in countries of the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, the Caribbean, South
                       and East Asia, and Africa.

                       The handbook discusses the policy prerequisites, scope and functionality of these systems in
                       detail. It describes the steps and issues involved in systems design, procurement and implemen-
                       tation. This includes project management structures required, the main activities involved in
                       systems implementation, the type of technology architecture that needs to be deployed to imple-
                       ment the systems and what technology choices need to be made, the main cost drivers and how
                       long can systems implementation be expected to take, and the critical success factors that deter-
                       mine successful outcomes. The handbook also highlights key failure points in the design, imple-
                       mentation and maintenance of these systems. Here it discusses issues related to systems design,
                       procurement, choice of technology and architectures, and availability of technical expertise. Any
                       of these can be problematic during project execution and ongoing systems maintenance and
                       operation and the handbook suggests appropriate risk mitigation strategies.

                       One of the many areas which contribute to less than satisfactory outcomes of such projects is
                       that the background and language used by the various participants in the design process is very
                       different. In order for the IT professional who will need to be involved in the IFMIS design and its
                       implementation from a program/project management perspective, it is necessary that the basic
                       business concepts and their rationale be clearly explained for them to be able to accomplish


                       1	   Dener, Dorotinsky and Watkins (2011) use the term FMIS to distinguish projects that focus on budget
                            preparation and core budget execution systems; the term Treasury/FMIS to distinguish Treasury projects
                            which deal primarily with budget execution and restrict the term IFMIS to define those projects that include
                            more than these core modules with the added requirement that the systems modules share databases.
                                                                                              AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




the task at hand. This explanation may be unnecessary for the MOF staff, but it is extremely
important for the systems professional for the accomplishment of his or her task. The econo-
mists, accountants, and financial managers who are the primary users of the system, use textual
information to convey their requirements and ideas. The information systems specialists make
more use of schematic presentations to depict their understanding of the situation. An attempt
has therefore been made in the handbook to illustrate all major concepts by making ample use
of diagrams and schematic presentation so that this language barrier is crossed to facilitate better
understanding of the requirements all around.

The World Bank maintains a database of all IFMIS initiatives in which the Bank has been
involved.2 Dener et al (2011) have used this database to compile very useful statistics on various
aspects of IFMIS projects financed by the Bank, such as cost, time for processing and completion,
and their geographical distribution.
                                                                                                                                  3
This compilation also lists factors which have been cited in Bank project documentation—Project
Appraisal Documents (PADs) and Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs)—as being impor-
tant for project outcomes and the most frequently encountered problems. The handbook uses
and cites the results of the Dener et al. study in support of observations made, as appropriate.

Some important considerations which limit the information presented in the handbook need to
be mentioned at the very outset.

1. First, this is not intended to be a handbook on wider public financial management (PFM)
policy reform and related issues. The discussion of wider PFM policy issues contained in this
handbook is limited to a description of those aspects which are necessary for systems implemen-
tation. The handbook gives a summary of the key features of the most widely practiced public
expenditure management techniques and methodologies which have been recommended for
use by the IMF and the Bank, along with the implementation of these systems and the operational
issues encountered in the implementation of these models. The handbook does not go into a full
discussion of alternative models that may be in use in some countries, or into a discussion of the
pros and cons of the alternatives. A fuller discussion of the wider policy issues can be found in for
example, reports and publications co-authored and edited by Malcolm Holmes,3 Rino Schiavo-
Campo,4 Richard Allen,5 and others.

2. Another important point is that treasury models presented in this handbook are not intended
to be a universal blueprint for treasury development. They are best viewed as a description of the
actual practice in the field in many client countries where the World Bank has assisted in either
setting up treasury systems ab initio, as in the case of transition economies, or in repairing the
institutional structures and systems in other developing economies, where these deficiencies had
resulted in significant leakages in government financial resources.

The handbook presents a model in which an important early step is establishment of a network
of centrally managed treasury offices and the implementation of centralized control over all


2	   As of January 2014, the Bank’s FMIS database contains details of a total of 121 projects with components
     which support such systems in 65 countries. Seventy-six projects have been completed, 34 are currently
     ongoing, and 11 are in the preparation stage. FMIS CoP News and events; January 2014.
3	   Malcolm Holmes. 1998. Public Expenditure Management Handbook. PREM. World Bank Report.
4	   Salvatore Schiavo-Campo and Daniel Tommasi. 1999. Managing Government Expenditure. Asian
     Development Bank Report.
5	   Richard Allen and Daniel Tommasi. 2001, Managing Public Expenditure – A Reference Book for Transition
     Economies. OECD-SIGMA Report..
    A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                       government financial resources and all payments and receipts. In more advanced environments
                       with both advanced telecommunication networks and reasonable high level of management
                       capacity at the line agency level, it may be possible to implement treasury systems with a less
                       extensive treasury network infrastructure and with the payment function delegated to the spend-
                       ing agencies.

                       The scale and type of treasury control required, and its potential for subsequent streamlining
                       in line with the capacity of line agency is an important issue for later stages in the sequence of
                       treasury development. However, for the majority of the Bank’s client countries, the models pre-
                       sented in the handbook have found to be of direct relevance. An attempt to leapfrog prematurely
                       to more advanced models could have adverse effects on the objectives of the treasury develop-
                       ment program.
4
                       3. A traditional cash-based approach underpins the handbook. It needs to be noted that the
                       approach to the topic is from the traditional government (mostly central and regional/ provincial)
                       cash-based budgeting, appropriation, control, accounting and reporting system. This differenti-
                       ates it from alternative views on the IFMIS, its chart of accounts, the required modules, sequenc-
                       ing, integration, etc., when such a system is implemented on an accrual accounting basis.

                       Implementation of accrual based accounting standards (IPSAS) and systems would also serve
                       basic cash-based budgeting, control and reporting requirements, and would also be able to
                       deliver much better information for financial management. The presentation in this handbook is
                       limited to cash-based systems in view of the fact that most client country governments are still
                       struggling with implementing such systems and the corresponding experiences described in this
                       handbook relate to countries where such an approach has been adopted. This also conforms to
                       the advice of experts such as Allen Schick and Jack Diamond—discussed in later chapters of the
                       handbook—who recommend that initial implementation should be kept simple and be designed
                       to solve first order problems. The handbook would perhaps be of more use to countries, of which
                       there are still many in Africa and Asia, who are engaged in the implementation of basic cash
                       based systems.

                       Also, in this context it is important to recognize that the IFMIS as presented in this handbook
                       needs to be viewed as a system that reports on the central or provincial government transactions.
                       It is not intended as the only system for whole of government consolidations. The consolidated
                       financial reporting entity in most countries would consist of data from many systems, including
                       the Treasury core system or IFMIS, and other IFMIS and even manual accounting systems.

                       4. Finally, even though the implementation of IFMIS-type systems is the bedrock of efficient gov-
                       ernment financial operations and an essential prerequisite to ensure success for broader budget
                       reform, this is not a sufficient condition for good financial management. Budget reform and good
                       budget management require several other conditions, mainly related to the prevailing state of
                       governance and the political economy in the country, before an information system can be effec-
                       tive and yield results.

                       In addition to the main text, the handbook contains several annexes with information that could
                       be useful to Government Treasury/Finance managers and project staff engaged in the planning or
                       implementation of such systems.

                       Annex I presents five case studies. These case studies describe the implementation of IFMIS sys-
                       tems in seven countries with varying initial start-off conditions in which the author was person-
                       ally involved in the design and implementation stages as a member of the Bank’s team. The case
                       studies start with a description of the pre-reform situation and go on to describe the diagnosis
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




and design stages through to actual systems procurement and implementation, and give a listing
of the factors that shaped project outcomes, including political economy issues. The cases have
been selected to show how the project design, implementation path, and outcomes depended on
one or more factors and some country specific situations. The IFMIS implementation experience
in these countries, amongst others, has been used to derive the overall lessons that have been
presented in the main text.

Annex II provides a check list of items needed to assess the state of implementation of the trea-
sury function and associated systems in a country before a reform program is initiated. Such
an assessment is necessary to identify any weaknesses in the underlying legal and institutional
arrangements and systems, and to provide a list of areas that need attention, and a road map for
further reform.
                                                                                                                        5
Annex III is intended to assist treasury managers in the process of selecting appropriate applica-
tion software from the wide range of options that are now available in the market. This question-
naire focuses on treasury specific requirements that are not commonly found in a statement of
requirements for commercial accounting systems. It is intended to provide a benchmark to deter-
mine the goodness of fit of the major products on the market with the core treasury functional
processes and requirements. In a software selection process it would be used to supplement the
normal set of requirements used in the selection of accounting systems.

Annex IV gives a short listing of the technical skills that should be available within government
to operate and maintain the systems, and to provide end user support to ensure sustainable
operations.
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




II. Some Basic Concepts
Rationale for Implementing Integrated Government Fiscal6
Management Systems

Before the start of an IFMIS project it is important to determine correctly
the rationale for implementing the systems and to identify the problem
that the proposed project is intended to solve, since the nature and scope
of the solution to be adopted would largely depend on this.                                                                 7

Work on IFMIS projects is often initiated after problems are faced by Government in the area of
budget management. Typical problems are:

•	      Increasing fiscal deficits and lack of any means of exercising fiscal control,
•	      Lack of in-house capacity to determine the fiscal position, and reliance on the books of the
        Central Bank for this information, resulting in an inability to perform the cash management
        function effectively,
•	      Weaknesses in the transaction processing capacities of systems used by operational agen-
        cies such as the Treasury, Tax Administration or line agencies, which result in lack of timely
        information in a form that facilitates effective expenditure control, revenue management,
        and management of agency programs and projects.

Diagnostic Study

To address these problems the government usually commissions a diagnostic study to determine
their underlying causes. This study normally starts with a review of the legal, policy, and institu-
tional framework governing budget management. It then tries to identify any gaps between the
existing arrangements and international practice, and the fiscal problems that these gaps have
created. Such an analysis could also be part of a wider effort at formulation of a PFM reform strat-
egy. The study can result in recommendations for formulation of revised policies, procedures,
institutional structures and functional processes to remedy the problems, including a review of:

•	      The budget management law/decree for management of public funds
•	      The budget classification system and Chart of Accounts consistent with the IMF’s Govern-
        ment Finance Statistics (GFS), and
•	      Institutional arrangements for banking government funds and processing payment
        transactions.

In addition, the study also reviews the existing state of transaction processing systems and avail-
ability of timely information for economic management. It identifies improvements/ redesign or
implementation of new information systems that are needed to ensure adherence to new poli-
cies, procedures and control structures, and remedy problems associated with timely availability
of information for economic management.




6	   The words fiscal and financial are used interchangeably in this handbook.
    A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                       The study also determines the IFMIS strategy for the project—the feasibility and overall scope of
                       the systems to be implemented, and provides a blueprint for systems implementation, including
                       their sequencing, approximate costs and time line for implementation and the project manage-
                       ment and technical capacity and other ancillary requirements needed to enable systems imple-
                       mentation, procurement and satisfactory ongoing operation Implementing a new IFMIS system
                       without putting in place the basic policy architecture that ensures good fiscal control, cash man-
                       agement, and good fiscal reporting would only result in improvements at the margin, and may
                       not address the main problems that confront the government. Furthermore, in the absence of a
                       comprehensive IFMIS strategy, the focus of the design and scope of the new information systems
                       could be misdirected towards areas that are not the primary concern at the time and/or areas in
                       which implementation could run into unanticipated problems.


8
                       Functional Requirements of Agencies Responsible for Economic
                       Management
                       The various agencies responsible for a country’s economic management have different functions
                       and therefore their expectations from such a project also vary. However, since the IFMIS is a tool
                       that would be used across all these agencies in the performance of their day-to-day operations,
                       it will need to meet these diverse expectations. The overall success of implementation of the
                       system would be measured by the degree to which the diverse objectives are met.

                       The MOF has two primary objectives in mind. It would like to have a tool that would:

                       •	   Assist in ensuring better fiscal control and provide up to date information on the ways
                            and means position. It needs a system that enables full integration of the approved budget
                            and budget execution data and ensures that all expenditures are in accordance with bud-
                            get appropriations, commitments and cash allocations. MOF officials need the systems
                            databases to provide information to enable close monitoring of outstanding bills, cash in
                            government bank accounts, arrears, and fiscal deficits.
                       •	   Enable better cash management and give finance mangers complete and up to date data on
                            all unspent Government financial resources to enable them to decide on how to allocate
                            such resources to government programs and projects, to invest these resources to maximize
                            returns, and plan for additional borrowing as requirements arise.

                       For the MOF, implementing such a tool would provide a means for:

                       •	   Monitoring the budget execution process and producing timely and up to date budget
                            execution reports for economic management. For this, it will require up-to-date information
                            on programs and projects executed by a large number of spending units distributed across
                            the country.
                       •	   Improving the quality of baseline data for the previous year to enable accurate budget
                            preparation for the coming year.

                       Operational agencies such as the Treasury, the Revenue Agencies, the Ministries, and their subor-
                       dinate departments need a tool that would enable efficient transaction processing, in accordance
                       with the prescribed controls, for the transactions for which they are responsible. This includes:

                       •	   Approval, processing, and payment of a large number of expenditure requests from spend-
                            ing units (SUs) distributed across the country.
                       •	   Compilation and processing of payrolls and government pensions of large numbers of gov-
                            ernment employees and retirees who need to be paid regularly as scheduled.
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




•	   Recording and classification of a large number of transactions related to government expen-
     ditures and receipts, generated at multiple sites across the country, according to the Chart
     of Accounts in use in a timely and efficient manner, and production of statutory financial
     statements and financial reports.
•	   Recording and classifying the large number of tax and import duty/excise tax collec-
     tions from across the country and establishing whether they are in accordance with the
     assessments.
•	   Recording and maintaining data related to the large number of foreign domestic loans/
     grants/T-bill issues, managing debt servicing, and developing borrowing requirements and
     strategies.

The external and internal audit agencies require ready access to up-to-date, complete, and accu-
rate transaction level data related to all government budget, expenditure, and receipts to carry
                                                                                                                          9
out their fiduciary responsibilities.



Considerations in the Design of an IFMIS

The complex and varying requirements and differing emphases of the various stakeholders,
makes the design and development of such a tool that can satisfy all these requirements in terms
of data/ information availability, timeliness and accuracy, a rather complex affair.

Four sets of considerations need to be kept in mind while designing the tool to satisfy these
diverse requirements.

First, the basic characteristics of the functional processes that govern fiscal management
require that the tool has some degree of automation to ensure timely availability of compre-
hensive data.

The characteristics of these transactions are:

•	   A prescribed set of rules governs the majority of transaction processing involved in govern-
     ment fiscal management. These rules include, budget appropriations control regulations,
     tax and customs tariff, loan terms.
•	   Very large transaction volumes are often involved and these are generated at multiple sites
     spread across the country.
•	   Transaction data pick up needs to be comprehensive and timely to be useful to users for
     decision making. To ensure this it is necessary that each transaction is picked up at the point
     of its origination and that transaction processing is integrated with transaction recording.
     This means that it should not be possible to process the transaction without applying all
     necessary controls and simultaneously recording it.

Computer-based automated systems can respond efficiently to all these requirements:

•	   They can facilitate automation of controls and procedures. As a transaction is processed,
     the system can apply the necessary controls. For example, it can ensure that a proper
     budget allocation exists prior to making a commitment or approving a payment. Manual
     intervention is required only in cases which require an exception to the procedures. In such
     cases, the system would keep an appropriate audit trail that would include details of the
     authorization for the exception.
•	   They enable efficient handling of large transaction volumes and, in a context with a good
     telecommunications network, can enable processing, gathering and reporting of the timely
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                             and accurate information required for decision making and accountability from a network
                             of sites across the country;
                        •	   They make it possible to integrate transaction classification and posting with transaction
                             processing. This means that as a transaction is processed, for example as a payment is
                             made, it can be simultaneously classified and posted to the relevant account. This ensures
                             that all transaction data are promptly and correctly included in system databases.

                        Second, to ensure that the system meets the information requirements of the various stakehold-
                        ers, it is necessary that the systems design is responsive to their diverse functional and data
                        exchange requirements.

                        A number of different functional processes such as budget preparation, budget execution, cash
                        management, revenue administration, auditing are involved in GFM. Several organizational
10
                        units and agencies are associated in carrying out these processes for which they need to share
                        information and to work on a common set of databases. This requires that systems design follows
                        a very structured process.

                        The design of a system or systems that can support all these processes and share information
                        must start by analyzing the functional processes associated with GFM, the overall regulatory
                        framework that underpins these processes, their information requirements, functional respon-
                        sibilities of agencies commonly responsible for the processes, information flows between the
                        agencies, the nature, volume, and frequency of these flows, and the data characteristics of the
                        information used and created by the processes.

                        Such a process, termed an Information Systems Planning (ISP) exercise, results in what is referred
                        to as the information architecture (IA) for the GFM systems landscape. This architecture addresses
                        questions such as:

                        •	   What are the different information systems modules that are required to support GFM func-
                             tional processes?
                        •	   What is the function, scope, scale, and type of a particular systems component?; and
                        •	   What are the primary interfaces of the modules with each other, that is, how do these
                             modules exchange and share information and what are the characteristics of the primary
                             information flows?

                        Third, since several systems modules are used to support fiscal management, it is necessary that
                        these modules are integrated to facilitate data share and exchange.

                        A basic principle for the design of these systems modules to enable integration calls for them to
                        be structured along functional rather than organizational lines.

                        A specific GFM system module should provide support to a functional area and across all orga-
                        nizations involved in the functional processes associated with this area. This approach supports
                        the creation of systems and databases in which the primary responsibility for the timely provision
                        and maintenance of a particular subset of data resides with the organization responsible for that
                        function. However, data in the system databases should be accessible by all other relevant orga-
                        nizations, subject to appropriate security controls. Adherence to this design principle eliminates
                        duplicative investments in systems and data gathering and, more importantly, enables all agen-
                        cies responsible for specific GFM functions to work with the same set of data, thereby eliminat-
                        ing risks of data inconsistencies, which are inevitable in separately gathered data. This criterion
                        can be used to assess whether the various modules are integrated.
                                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Fourth, for practical system implementation, it is necessary that various system modules are
sequenced and developed in a modular way.

Undertaking simultaneous implementation of all systems modules is neither practical nor required
in most cases. Integrated systems are not monolithic. Once the initial GFM systems framework has
been set up and the prerequisites and criteria for integration spelled out and incorporated into the
implementation plan, the actual implementation and integration of systems modules will need
to be sequenced and phased in over time in accordance with requirements. The issue of systems
sequencing is important for a successful outcome of a systems implementation program and is
discussed in greater detail later in this handbook.



What is Involved in Setting up these Systems?                                                                                        11
In view of the above, work on the design and development of IFMIS-type systems and planning
for their satisfactory maintenance and operation need to proceed in the following areas:

•	      Review of the Legal and Institutional framework: Reviewing the current state of the legal
        and institutional framework that underpins the function and defines the roles and responsi-
        bilities of the various organizational entities involved will enable documenting what exists
        and any associated problems. This would be followed by developing a plan for improving
        the legal framework, if needed, to address the identified problems.
•	      Review and Design of Business and Functional Processes7: This includes a review of
        the functional processes and information flows and associated requirements for specific
        functions, and identifying related issues. This would be followed by a redesign of these
        processes, where necessary.
•	      Systems Design: The redesigned processes, information flows, and information require-
        ments would form the basis for the definition of the overall information architecture for
        fiscal management and the actual design of the information systems modules to support the
        functional processes for a specific function.
•	      Systems Procurement and Implementation: It is only after that the above activities have been
        completed or at least are well-advanced that one can proceed with the selection, procure-
        ment, and implementation of appropriate technology to implement or support these systems.
•	      Ongoing Systems Operation and Maintenance: Once operational, an IFMIS becomes a mis-
        sion-critical financial system used by all government accounting and budgeting entities within
        government for the day–to-day performance of their functions. Any disruption in the opera-
        tion of the system can cause significant disruption in the government’s financial operations.
        To mitigate this, it is necessary that governments make adequate provisions for recurring costs
        associated with the operation and maintenance of a system. In addition, setting up and staff-
        ing of a technical organization with sufficient capacity to operate, maintain the system and
        to provide end-user support is critical for the operational sustainability of the system and the
        continuity of the government’s budget management and financial management operations.

In subsequent chapters we will discuss the specific tasks that need to be completed in each of
these areas.




7	   Also see: Khan, A. and Mario Pessoa. 2010. Conceptual Design: A Critical Element of a Successful Government
     Financial Management Information System Project. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                                        Government Financial Information and its Users

                                                     Ministry of Finance


                                                                                 Tax &
                                                    Commit-
                           Treasury     Budgets                   Receipts      Non-tax     Creditors
                                                     ments
                                                                               Revenues



                             Line                    POs &        General       Balances
                                        Warrants                                              Banks
                           Ministries               Contracts     Ledger      in Accounts
12


                           Revenue       Fixed       Bills &      Loans &        Fiscal
                                                                                            Tax Payers
                           Agencies      Assets     Invoices       Grants       Reports



                            Debt        Payrolls                  Financial      Audit
                         Management       and       Payments                                 Donors
                                                                 Statements     Reports
                           Agency       Pensions



                                                    Government Auditors
                                                                                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




III. Policy Framework
      and Institutional
      Reforms
A full discussion of the overall regulatory framework for public expenditure
management is outside the scope of this handbook. However, the
                                                                                                                                 13
handbook will describe the basic elements of this framework to highlight
the functional requirements and controls that need to be incorporated in
the design of component system modules.
The overall regulatory framework for operating the various component modules of the system
network consists of the following elements:

•	      A budget management law that provides the legal basis for financial management.
•	      Financial and fiduciary reporting requirements that the system needs to fulfill.
•	      A budget classification structure and accounts classification that enables consistent record-
        ing and reporting in accordance with these requirements.
•	      The institutional arrangements for banking government funds and processing expenditure
        and receipt transactions as laid out in the budget management law.



Policy Framework

The information systems will need to incorporate features to ensure that they abide by the
requirements of the regulatory framework that underpins financial management processes in
the country. Therefore, the regulatory framework needs to be in place—possibly reviewed and
modified—before productive work can commence on the design of computer systems to support
fiscal management. The main elements of this framework are described below.

Budget Management Law and Associated Regulations

Many of the basic controls that are to be applied to the use of government funds are derived from
a budget management law for management of public funds and property that provides the legal
basis for treasury systems. It specifies the roles and responsibilities of the Treasury, the MOF and
line agencies and the authorities and responsibilities for receipt and custody of public funds. It
details the control processes related to public expenditure management, the management of
public debt and the standards to be used for accounting, financial reporting and audit.8 Very
often the law is based on basic principles laid down in financial provisions in the constitution
and laws related to the management of public finances. Controls are defined at several levels:


8	   Details of the accounting and auditing standards for the different institutional segments of the public
     sector (ministries, SOEs, SAEs, classified entities) are embodied in a public accounting manual and an
     audit manual. While transition towards adoption of specific standards may be a long term effort, the
     implementation of automated information systems to support GFM requires clarity as to which standards
     will be implemented in the current iteration of the system.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        •	      Formal legislation and regulation that control the structure of funds and appropriations, and
                                administrative practices.
                        •	      Financial legislation and administrative regulations that specify the detailed requirements
                                for control to ensure that transactions are properly authorized and documented and that
                                appropriation authority is not exceeded.

                        Within most legislative frameworks, receipts of governments are paid into a fund—referred to
                        here as the consolidated fund9—and any expenditure from this fund must be formally appropri-
                        ated by the legislature. Additional regulations, administrative instructions, and administrative
                        practices specify the standards and procedures to be followed for transaction processing. These
                        include:

                        •	      Document and transaction level controls to ensure correct processing, full and correct
14
                                recording, and audit trails;
                        •	      Access controls to ensure that only authorized personnel can record, change, or report
                                information; and
                        •	      Overall system controls to ensure that the system embodies established processing standards.

                        Budget Classification Structure and Chart of Accounts

                        It is important to adopt a methodology for consistently recording each financial transaction for
                        purposes of expenditure control, costing, and economic and statistical analysis and account-
                        ing. A standard, government-wide classification code structure needs to be set up to provide a
                        consistent basis to:

                        •	      Consolidate government-wide financial information.
                        •	      Integrate planning, budgeting and accounting.
                        •	      Capture data at the point of entry throughout the government.
                        •	      Compile budget allocations and program and project costs within and across various gov-
                                ernment agencies.

                        The design of the budget classification structure (BCS) and chart of accounts (COA) should,
                        therefore, be determined by the information requirements of each of the above objectives.
                        As a minimum the BCS should have the following segments: (i) source of funds; (ii) function,
                        (iii) organization and spending unit, and (iv) object of expenditure (economic) classifications.
                        Function codes and the economic classification codes should be consistent with the IMF GFS.
                        Also, the economic classification codes should be a subset of the account codes used in the COA
                        to ensure integration of budgeting and accounting.

                        Additionally codes such as program and project codes could be added to track expenditures for
                        programs and projects. Normally, it is possible to break down the organization codes to a level
                        where a specific unit is carrying out a specific sub function. If this is done then it may not be
                        necessary to specify the sub-function codes in the BCS and COA but use a cross-reference table
                        to report expenditures/ receipts by function/ sub-function.




                        9	   The fund becomes the basis for accounting and reporting in government. It is common to divide the overall
                             Consolidated Fund into several funds--for example, a fund for current receipts and expenditures, a fund
                             for loan and capital receipts and expenditures, and a fund for receipts and expenditures on behalf of other
                             parties (trust funds). Any fund may have a number of sub-funds.
                                                                                     AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Reporting Requirements

The broad requirements for reporting are specified in the budget legislation and detailed in regu-
lations, instructions, and administrative practice (for example, report formats actually in use) to
cover external reporting to provide information to the legislature and the public as well as other
countries, international organizations, overseas investors, and financial markets; and internal
management reporting for government policy makers and managers.



Institutional Arrangements

Implementation of systems to support GFM requires setting up some institutional arrangements
to fulfill the requirements for the custody and use of these funds laid down in the budget man-                          15
agement law. These include arrangements for: (a) banking government funds and (b) processing
payment transactions discussed below.

Arrangements for Banking Government Funds – The Treasury Single Account (TSA)

In a number of transition and developing economies, the IMF has recommended bringing all gov-
ernment accounts under the control of Treasury and consolidation in a Treasury Single Account
(TSA) or a Consolidated Fund Account. In the absence of this measure, fragmentation of govern-
ment financial resources in multiple Bank accounts outside the control of the Treasury leads to
buildup of idle balances which can become quite significant. Government may need to resort to
additional borrowing, even though these resources are lying idle in Bank accounts outside the
direct control of the Treasury. Consolidation of the financial resources in a TSA under the control
of the Treasury would provide the MOF with accurate and timely information of cash available
and lead to improved cash planning to meet expenditure requirements.

Arrangements for Processing Payment and Receipt Transactions

This requires the setting up of a Treasury organization with a network of offices located country-
wide or locating Treasury staff with SUs, and re-engineering payment processes and routing all
payment transactions through the Treasury or its out-posted staff. This measure would provide a
second check to ensure that all government expenditures are in accordance with budget appro-
priations, and releases. At the stage of issuing of a payment order, many of the control processes
have to be scrutinized again. This may include verifications of:

•	   Identity of the spending officer.
•	   Availability of budget provisions.
•	   Exact budgetary imputation.
•	   Receipt of goods and services.
•	   Observation of financial regularity.

In practice, without such controls, expenditures could be undertaken which do not conform
to these requirements, and these would be detected only at the ex-post audit stage. This would
mean that government resources have been deployed to areas for which they were not appropri-
ated. It could lead to shortages of funds in other areas which were considered more important
at the time the budget was prepared. In addition, all receipt processes need to be re-engineered
to ensure that revenues are directly deposited in Treasury-controlled Bank accounts. This would
ensure that deposits made in bank accounts outside the control of the Treasury would be reduced
and Treasury would get an accurate idea of the resource levels at hand.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Figure 1: A Frequently-Occurring Treasury Organization Structure


                                              A Frequently Occurring Treasury Organization Structure


                                            MOF/Budget                                                           Head ofﬁce
                                                                            Central Treasury
                                           Administrators                                                      Central Bank TSA


                                             Budget                      Sub National Treasury                  Regional Ofﬁce
                                           Administrators                  Provincial Level                    Central Bank TSA

16
                                                           District               District              District
                           Spending Units
                                                          Treasury               Treasury              Treasury




                        A commonly-occurring Treasury organization structure is shown in Figure 1.

                        It should be noted that the coverage of the TSA should include all budget resources, extra budget-
                        ary funds, technical or internally generated revenues/funds. In cases where some of the latter cat-
                        egories are left out of the TSA and are banked separately in private banks, it has been observed:
                        (a) that the amount of financial resources outside the TSA can become very large and constitute a
                        significant portion of the government’s total borrowing requirements; and (b) when Government
                        floats short/medium term instruments such as T-bills to meet these requirements, the banks where
                        these resources are lodged use them to buy the T-bills. Government in effect pays interest on the
                        T-bills which have been purchased from its own resources.

                        Many donor organizations require that funds associated with their programs be deposited in
                        special accounts, sometimes in commercial banks. This requirement is intended to guarantee
                        that funds are not comingled with government budget funds and are used only for the specified
                        programs. The requirement for the use of the funds for specified programs can still be met if the
                        special accounts are set up in the Central Bank and users access them either directly, or through
                        the fiscal agents for the Central Bank. However, this will avoid the situation described above in
                        which commercial banks use these donor funds for the purchase of government securities.

                        Placing all these resources in the Central Bank instead of private banks would also reduce the
                        interest charges that government has to pay the Central Bank in case of an overdraft on the
                        Consolidated Fund account since balances in these accounts, which also constitute government
                        funds, would also be taken into account when calculating the overdraft amount and interest.



                        Alternative Institutional and Banking Arrangements for Setting up
                        a TSA and for Processing Payment Transactions10
                        Several variations are possible to the basic institutional setting and banking arrangements men-
                        tioned above, as long as they preserve the basic requirements for control which are:



                        10	 See Pattanayak, S. and Israel Fainboim. 2010. Treasury Single Account: Concept, Design and Implementation

                          Issues. IMF – FAD Working paper.
                                                                                                AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




•	      All government financial resources should be under the control of the Treasury;
•	      The Treasury should be in a position to determine the magnitude of these resources at any
        given point—i.e. the balances in Government accounts;
•	      All expenditures from the TSA should be subject to budgetary controls;
•	      All government receipts should be deposited in an appropriate sub account of the TSA.

These alternative arrangements are discussed below and shown schematically in Figures 2–5.11

Case 1 (Figure 2) shows the commonly-occurring institutional setting in which: (a) all payments
from line agencies are channeled through an office of the Treasury; (b) the Treasury is responsible
for making payments from the Treasury Single Account (TSA), which is held at the Central Bank;
and (c) the Central Bank is responsible for the retail banking operations associated with gov-
ernment payments. Government receipts are deposited in designated commercial banks which
                                                                                                                                    17
transfer them to the TSA at the Central bank within strictly specified time limits which are moni-
tored closely.



Figure 2: TSA Centralized Model (Case 1)


                               TSA Centralized Model: Case 1:
  Central Bank operates through its Central ofﬁce and makes payments directly to Government
   creditors; SUs send payment requests to Treasury ofﬁce who ensure budgetary compliance

                                                           Central Bank pays
                       Central Bank                        Government creditors
                       informs Treasury                    directly through bank
                       of daily receipts                   transfer to creditor
       Treasury        and payments        Central Bank    bank accounts            Head Qtr of
         HQ                                                                         Commercial
                                               TSA         Commercial bank            Bank
                                                           transfers government
                                                           receipts to TSA

       Treasury
        System
                       Treasury checks for
                       controls through                                             Commercial
                       the systems and instructs
                                                                                       Bank
                       Central Bank to pay
                                                                                      Branch
     Sub-Treasury
        Ofﬁce
                                                                       Tax payer deposits
                                                                         tax at designated
                                                                               branch of a
                  Spending unit sends                                   commercial bank
                  payment request                                 for deposit into the TSA
                  to Treasury ofﬁce

       Spending                                                   Government
                                                                                                Tax Payer
         Units                                                     Creditor




11	 These  figures show the primary flows involved in a TSA operation. They may not show all the details of TSA
     operation, which vary in many countries e.g. the flow of transaction fee payments to commercial banks
     usually associated with zero balance accounts.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Figure 3: TSA Centralized Model (Case 1a)


                                                     TSA Centralized Model: Case 1a:
                            Central Bank makes payments to creditors from its Central ofﬁce and Regional branches
                               SUs send payment requests to Treasury ofﬁce who ensure budgetary compliance


                                           Central Bank                       Central Bank pays
                                           informs Treasury                   Government creditors
                                           of daily receipts                  directly through bank
                                           and payments                       transfer to creditor
                            Treasury                                                                    Head Qtr of
                                                               Central Bank   bank accounts
                              HQ                                                                        Commercial
                                                                   TSA        Commercial bank             Bank
18                                         Treasury checks                    transfers government
                                           for controls                       receipts to TSA
                                           through the
                            Treasury       systems and
                             System        instructs
                                           Central Bank
                                                                                                        Commercial
                                           to pay              Central Bank
                                                                                                           Bank
                                                                   TSA        Bank transfer to            Branch
                                                                              creditor bank account
                          Sub-Treasury
                             Ofﬁce
                                                                              Tax payer deposits tax at designated
                                                                                 branch of a commercial bank for
                                                                                              deposit into the TSA
                                  Spending unit sends payment
                                  request to Treasury ofﬁce

                            Spending                                                 Government
                                                                                                                     Tax Payer
                              Units                                                   Creditor




                        A slight variation to this case occurs where the Central Bank makes payments to government
                        creditors through the Central office and its regional branches. This is shown as Case 1a in Figure 3.

                        Case 2, illustrated in Figure 4 shows an alternative arrangement put in place in cases where
                        the Central Bank does not have an adequate network of provincial/regional branches, or does
                        not have the capacity to handle the large volume of transactions associated with government
                        payments and receipts. In these cases, the Central Bank selects one or more commercial banks
                        to serve as its fiscal agents. The fiscal agent(s) makes payments on behalf of the treasury, and
                        recoups all payments made from the Central Bank. Fiscal agents make daily deposits of all
                        government revenues to the TSA in the Central Bank. The arrangement has the advantage of
                        providing more expeditious payments to government creditors in view of the greater capacity of
                        commercial banks to process these transactions.

                        Two aspects are important for the efficient functioning of this system. First, the float of all pay-
                        ments to be transferred to the TSA should be as small as possible. Second, these accounts should
                        be zero-balance accounts (ZBAs). Their balances should be cleared to the TSA periodically to
                        ensure that Government has an accurate idea of the total amount of cash available in the system
                        to optimize its borrowing strategies.

                        For a system based on the use of commercial banks as fiscal agents to work efficiently, it
                        would be necessary that the fiscal agent bank branches are automated and connected to their
                                                                                         AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Figure 4: TSA Decentralized Model Using Commercial Banks as Fiscal Agents


                              TSA—Zero Balance Accounts Model:
               The Central Bank operates through a Fiscal Agent-Commercial Banks
            Treasury ofﬁce ensures budgetary compliance and makes payments through
                     Zero Balance Accounts (ZBA) held at Commercial Banks


                    Central Bank
                    informs Treasury                   Central Bank recoups
                    of daily receipts                  expenses and transfers   Head Qtr of
       Treasury     and payments        Central Bank   deposits to TSA          Commercial
         HQ                                 TSA
                                                                                 Bank ZBA
                                                                                                                             19
       Treasury
        System
                                                                                Commercial
                       Treasury checks for controls through the systems            Bank
     Sub-Treasury      and then instructs Commercial Bank to pay from ZBA       Branch ZBA
        Ofﬁce

                                                            Tax payer deposits tax at
            Spending unit sends payment                           commercial bank
            request to Treasury ofﬁce

      Spending                                               Government
        Units                                                                            Tax Payer
                                                              Creditor




headquarters, and an automated bank/check clearing system is in place. In the absence of such
a system, the time taken to clear all payments and deposit all receipts in the TSA could be longer
and could lead to significant floats before receipts are deposited in the TSA.

In Case 2a and Figure 5 a variation to this arrangement is shown where the SU have direct access
to ZBAs held at a commercial bank. This arrangement may result in a quicker response time for
payment transactions since the payment authority resides in the agency itself. However, the bank
accounts should continue to be under the control of the Treasury even though SUs may have
access to them to make approved payments. This way, Treasury can obtain data on balances in
these accounts and make transfers from or to them independently of the spending agencies.

In this case, the responsibility for ensuring compliance with budget execution limits and procedures
is delegated to the agency. For this system to be successful, the MOF needs to ensure that the agency
adheres to necessary controls prior to making a payment. This can be achieved in two ways:

•	     First, budget control responsibility can be exercised by officers from the Treasury who are
       out-posted to the line agency.
•	     Second, by connecting the spending units directly to an automated Treasury system used
       for controlling budget execution and for processing payment transactions. Here, the system
       design should incorporate the necessary controls; the location of the payment authority
       is not as important as it would be in a manual system. Prior to allowing a payment, the
       Treasury system software would normally ensure that a budget appropriation exists, a war-
       rant allocation (cash) is available, and a prior commitment has been made—in those cases
       where commitment accounting has been implemented. Manual intervention would nor-
       mally be required only to override some of these restrictions. The system would keep a log
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Figure 5: TSA Decentralized Model – Spending Units have Direct Access to ZBA


                                                     TSA—Zero Balance Accounts Model:
                                    The Central Bank operates through a Fiscal Agent-Commercial Banks
                              Spending Units are directly connected to Treasury System which ensures budgetary
                                                 control and makes payments through—ZBA


                                           Central Bank                         Commercial bank
                                           informs Treasury                     recoups expenses and
                                           of daily receipts                    transfers deposits to
                            Treasury       and payments                         TSA                     Head Qtr of
                                                               Central Bank
                              HQ                                                                        Commercial
20                                                                 TSA
                                                                                                         Bank ZBA




                                                                                                        Commercial
                            Spending                                                                       Bank
                              Unit             Spending unit processes payment request using            Branch ZBA
                                               the system. The system checks for controls. It then
                                               instructs Commercial Bank to pay from ZBA
                        Treasury System                                                 Tax payer deposits tax
                         Spending Units are directly                                      at commercial bank
                         connected to the system and
                         process transactions/payment
                         requests on the system                                       Government
                                                                                                                 Tax Payer
                                                                                       Creditor




                             of the event including the date, time, amount involved, and the name of the authorizing
                             officer. This would ensure adherence to the controls prescribed for budget execution.

                        The ex-ante adherence to these controls would not automatically be possible in a manual sys-
                        tem. Where spending agency finance personnel are functionally and administratively respon-
                        sible to the head of the spending agency, they may be subject to pressures to process payment
                        transactions that do not comply with specified procedures. It may therefore become more dif-
                        ficult to ensure that prescribed controls and procedures are adhered to in a decentralized system
                        as compared to a Treasury-based central system.



                        Other Legislation and Frameworks that Regulate the Operation of
                        Automated Systems
                        As the basic functional processes associated with government fiscal management would be
                        supported by automated information systems, the subject of this handbook, it is necessary to
                        mention that, in addition to the legislation and policy frameworks associated with the func-
                        tional processes, these systems also need to adhere to some further standards and legislation.
                        These are: E-Government National Enterprise Architecture and Interoperability Framework
                        which determines the standards for specification, deployment and operation of Information
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




and Communications Technology (ICT) in the public sector; and governance-related: (i) Right to
information legislation; and (ii) Privacy and confidentiality legislation.



Requirement for Setting up an IT Capability

In addition to the institutional arrangements for banking government funds and for processing
payment transactions discussed above, if an IFMIS type system will be used to support govern-
ment budgeting and accounting processes, the setting up and staffing of a supporting technical
organization with sufficient capacity to operate and maintain a mission-critical, countrywide
system and provide end user support is critical for the operational sustainability of the system
and the continuity of Government’s budget management and financial management operations.
The agency responsible for systems maintenance and operation may need to develop/upgrade/
                                                                                                                        21
augment its in-house data processing staff and facilities to maintain and operate the system. Ade-
quate budget provisions should be made to meet on going expenses. These issues are discussed
in greater detail later in this handbook.
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




IV. Development of
     an Information
     Architecture for
     Government Fiscal
     Management                                                                                                         23



Functional Processes in Government Fiscal Management (GFM)

The main functional processes involved in Government Fiscal Management are:

Macro-Economic Forecasting

This process assists expenditure and resource planning by developing a macroeconomic frame-
work linking the growth of national income, savings, investment, and balance of payments to
public expenditures and revenues. It enables the development of: aggregates of the government
budget, notably revenues, expenditures, and the overall fiscal deficit and its financing; the bal-
ance between the capital and recurrent components of the budget; composition of expendi-
tures by the main sector spending agencies; revenue forecasts consistent with macro-economic
assumptions; forecasts of non-tax revenues based on macroeconomic projections; estimates of
resources available from domestic and external borrowings; projections of current expenditure.

Budget Preparation

Budget preparation starts with the development of a circular indicating economic prospects, broad
policy objectives, how the budget is expected to attain ,them, and sectoral allocations and ceil-
ings consistent with the macroeconomic framework. Next comes the preparation and analysis of
line agency expenditure proposals and revenue forecasts and their consolidation into an annual
budget document after a series of discussions—at cabinet level, between line ministries, the MOF,
the budgetary committees of parliament—and approval by the legislature. These discussions focus
on how the budget proposals would meet the policy objectives outlined in the budget circular,
on priorities among the various proposals, the validity of the resource requirements contained
in these proposals and how they can best be accommodated in the overall budgetary envelope.

Budget Execution, Accounting and Fiscal Reporting

These functions are associated with implementing the budget, and cover the procurement of
goods and services in accordance with budget estimates, the recording and accounting of all
government transactions, and development of periodic reports to monitor the overall flow of
spending or use of appropriations, over the course of the year, highlighting major deviations from
the planned budget and suggesting corrective measures.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Cash Management

                        This entails developing agency and central cash flow forecasts, the release of funds to spending
                        agencies, the monitoring of inward and outward cash flows and expected cash requirements,
                        and the issue and redemption of government securities for financing government programs.

                        Position, Payroll and Benefits/ Pensions Management for Govt. Retirees

                        The activities here are associated with the development and maintenance of government’s
                        human resource policies such as manpower planning, complement control, civil service pay
                        and pension policies, the fiscal impact of these policies and their administration.


24                      Debt Management

                        This defines the tasks associated with maintenance of records on all contracted public debt on
                        an individual loan basis, classified according to source and type of loan. It assists economic and
                        policy analysis by determining, for example, the debt implications of different fiscal and defi-
                        cit financing options by preparing projections of debt service commitments under existing and
                        anticipated contracts.

                        Revenue Administration (Customs, Tax and Excise and Internally Generated Revenues)

                        The formulation and administration of tax policies and covers the actual levy and collection of
                        revenues including taxes and duties as laid down in these policies, and the valuation and collec-
                        tion of non-tax revenues, such as stamp duties, user fees, charges for services etc.

                        Auditing

                        This deals with the analysis and scrutiny of public, financial, and other transactions to ensure
                        compliance with government policies and procedures, and to ensure cost-effective use of public
                        funds in accordance with overall government priorities.



                        Information Systems Architecture for Government Fiscal
                        Management
                        Each of these processes requires specialized systems to support them. As described in Chapter
                        II, the design of a system or systems that can support all these processes and share information
                        must start with an Information Systems Planning (ISP) exercise that results in the information
                        architecture for GFM systems. This architecture would address questions such as:

                        •	   What are the different information systems modules that are required to support GFM func-
                             tional processes?
                        •	   What is the function, scope, scale, and type of a particular systems component?; and
                        •	   What are the primary interfaces of the modules with each other, i.e., how do these modules
                             exchange and share information and what are the characteristics of the primary information
                             flows?

                        The results of such an exercise for GFM systems are shown in Figure 6. The first column shows
                        the main functional processes for GFM in the order in which they occur during the fiscal man-
                        agement cycle. The second column shows the organizational entities involved in these processes
                        and the main body of the diagram shows the systems modules that are required and the primary
                                                                                     AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




data flows and linkages between the various systems modules. A simplified version is shown in
Figure 7.

It is important to note that since the required systems modules and the primary linkages are
based on functional processes rather than specific organization structures, these modules and
their inter linkages —the systems architecture—remain stable even though specific organiza-
tional responsibilities within different government settings may change.

In an actual systems development exercise, each box presented in the information systems archi-
tecture diagram has to be analyzed further in terms of the processes it covers and the information
flows associated with those processes as well as linkages with other systems to determine the
specific requirements of these modules.
                                                                                                                         25
The functionality of the individual modules, the data flows, and inter-relationships between the
various systems modules are described below.



Systems for Government Fiscal Management

Following are descriptions of different types of Systems and how they are related.

Systems for Macro-Economic Forecasting: These provide the information that is required by the
MOF in preparing the budget call circular for the coming fiscal year. Line ministries and spend-
ing units respond with budget proposals formulated in line with the guidance provided in this
circular. The systems then help in the development of budget aggregates, including:

•	   Estimates of revenues, expenditures, and the overall fiscal deficit and its financing.
•	   The balance between the capital and recurrent components of the budget; composition of
     expenditures by the main sector spending agencies.
•	   Revenue forecasts; forecasts of non-tax revenues based on macroeconomic projections.
•	   Estimates of resources available from domestic and external borrowings; projections of cur-
     rent expenditure.

Budget preparation system: The MOF uses the budget preparation system, the previous year’s
data on actuals, and the new funding proposals received to compile the overall draft budget
which, after several iterations between the MOF and the sector ministries and after approval by
Parliament, becomes the annual approved Government budget for the year. The Budget prepara-
tion system transfers data on the approved annual budget for the year to the Treasury system.

Treasury system: This uses data received from the budget preparation system to control budget exe-
cution. It supports the functional processes associated with implementing the budget, for example:

•	   The procurement of goods and services in accordance with budget estimates.
•	   The recording and accounting of all government transactions.
•	   Periodic reports to monitor the overall flow of spending over the course of the year.
•	   Highlight major deviations from the planned budget and suggesting corrective measures.
•	   The release of funds to spending agencies.
•	   The monitoring of cash flows and expected cash requirements.
•	   The issue and redemption of government securities for financing government programs.

All in-year changes to the budget need to be made in the Treasury Budget execution system. If
the budget preparation module forms an integral part of the application software package that is
                                                                                                                               26
Figure 6: Functional Processes and Information Systems Architecture for Government Fiscal Management


                               Functional Processes for Government Fiscal Management and Information Systems Architecture

    GFM Functional                                                                           Information Systems to
                                 Agency Functions                                                                                           External Entities
      Processes                                                   Macro                     support GFM Functions
                                                                Economic
   Macro Economic               MOF issues Budget               Framework                      Systems for Macro
     Forecasting               Guidelines Call circular                                      Economic Forecasting

                                  Line Ministries                                         Budget Preparation Systems                      Vendors Employees
  Budget Preparation
                              submit Budget proposals                              Capital—Recurrent-Personnel Complement                    Pensioners
                             MOF / Line Ministries Enter                Approved                              Treasury System
                                                                         Budget                             Previous years Actuals                    Payments
                             Apportionments Allotments,
                                 Releases Transfers                    Budget Management
                              Monitor Budget Execution                                                       General Ledger                 Central Bank TSA
                                                                        & Fiscal Reporting
                                 Line Ministries/SUs
   Budget Execution             Enter Commitments ,                                                          Payments
                                                                   Procurement          Commitment                                                    Taxes Duties
   Accounting Cash              POs/Contracts Vendor                                                        Management
   Management and             Invoices, Goods Receipts
   Fiscal Reporting               Payment requests                                                                 Receipts
                                                                         Fixed Assets                             Management                   Tax Payers
                            Treasury (CAG) reviews/enters                                    Debt service
                                                                                             payments
                           paymentre quests and releases
                                                                  Debt servicing                  Cash                 Bank
                           for payment, Monitors receipts
                                                                  commitments                  Management          Reconcilliation
                                 Bank reconciliation,                               Payroll
                                 Cash Management                                    Pension payments                                                  Loan/aid
                                                                                                                                                      Receipts
  Payroll and Pensions     Line Ministries/Treasury (CAG)                                                      Loan Receipts
                                                                      Payroll & Pensions Systems                 Information
     Management           enter payroll/pension transactions
                                                                Loan Agreements
                                                                                                                                                                     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                              Debt Management Dept
  Debt Management             enters Loan agreements                 Debt/Aid Management System                                                  Donors
                               Repayment requests                                                                      Tax
                                                                                                                 Assesments          Revenue Receipts Information
                                Revenue Adm. Depts.
 Revenue Administration Assess Tax, Receive Revenue Receipt                                                     Revenue Administration
  (Tax and Customs )       Information from Treasury and                                                      (Taxes and Customs) Systems
                             Reconcile with assessments

                                Audit Organization
        Auditing                 Performs Audit of                                             Auditing Systems
                              Government Transactions
Figure 7: Information Systems Architecture (Simplified Version)


                                      Functional Processes for Government Fiscal Management and Information Systems Architecture

            MOF issues Budget                Macro Economic Framework                    Systems for Macro
          Guidelines, Call Circular                                                    Economic Forecasting                       Previous years Actuals

     Budget Preparation Line Ministries                                             Budget Preparation Systems
      submit Budget proposals MOF                                            Capital—Recurrent-Personnel Complement
       reviews and compiles budget                                                                                                                    Vendors Employees

    MOF/ Treasury uses System for Budget             Treasury System                                    Approved Budget                                          Payments
       Execution, Accounting, Cash
     Management and Fiscal Reporting                    Budget Management
                                                                                                            General Ledger                             Central Bank TSA
                                                         & Fiscal Reporting

      MOF/ Establishment division uses
      systems to manage Establishment;                                                                  Payments                                                 Taxes Duties
       Accountant General uses payroll                  Procurement            Commitment                                      Receipts
                                                                                                       Management             Management
     pension system to calculate payroll
                and pensions                                                                                                                               Tax Payers
                                                                                                  Cash                           Bank
                                                                     Fixed Assets
                                                                                               Management                    Reconciliation
          Debt Management Dept,
      maintains debt records in DMS,                                                       Payroll
                                                                                           Pension                                                               Loan/aid
      enters debt service commitments                                                      payments Debt service                                                 Receipts
                                                          Payroll & Pensions Systems
      & payments in Treasury system.                                                                commitments
                                                                                                    & payments

                                                                  Debt/Aid Management System                                                                Donors
        Revenue Depts. Assess Tax,                                                                         Tax Assessments
                                                Loan Agreements
    Receive Revenue Receipt Information                                                                      Revenue Administration
     from Treasury and Reconcile with                                                                      (Taxes and Customs) Systems
               assessments
                                                                                                                                      Revenue Receipts Information
     Audit Organization Performs Audit
                                                                                    Auditing Systems
       of Government Transactions
                                                                                                                                                                                AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                                    27
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        used to support budget execution, then a separate transfer is not required since the two would
                        share databases. The approved budget data would be available to the Treasury system for budget
                        execution purposes.

                        The Establishment control, payroll and pension systems support the activities associated with
                        government’s human resource management including establishment control; pay and pension
                        administration; and the fiscal impact of these policies.

                        The payroll and pension systems calculate the payroll and pensions for government employees
                        and retirees and pass on the data to the Treasury system to make the payments through the TSA
                        to employee and retiree bank accounts. The payroll system should use the establishment control
                        system to ensure that payments are made only against authorized and budgeted positions.
28
                        The Tax and Customs systems support the activities related to the revenue administration func-
                        tion They cover the actual levy and collection of revenues including taxes and duties; the valu-
                        ation and collection of non-tax revenues, such as stamp duties, user fees, charges for services
                        etc. Tax and customs revenues collected during the year are deposited in the TSA and recorded
                        in the Treasury system.

                        The Debt management system keeps a record of all contracted public debt on an individual
                        loan basis. It provides an input to the Treasury system to execute the debt servicing liability. It
                        assists economic and policy analysis by determining, the debt implications of different fiscal and
                        deficit financing policies by preparing projections of debt service commitments. Loan and Grant
                        Receipts are deposited in the TSA and recorded in the Treasury system.

                        Auditing systems use the transactions gathered by the system databases to carry out their audit
                        functions. They assist in the analysis and scrutiny of public, financial, and other transactions to
                        ensure compliance with government policies and procedures, cost-effective use of public funds
                        in accordance with overall government priorities.

                        While each of these systems perform important functions in a government’s financial management
                        process, the collection of modules that provide support to functional processes associated with bud-
                        get execution, accounting, cash management and fiscal reporting, and referred to as the Treasury
                        system (marked clearly in the architecture shown above) are considered to be the core elements of
                        this architecture in view of their central place in the government’s fiscal management cycle.

                        These systems form the centerpiece of the GFM systems network. They are used to carry out the
                        budget execution process as well as to monitor and evaluate overall budget implementation.
                        They are the primary repository of the financial data that serves as the basis of the government’s
                        economic management. They include information on resource levels expected to be available
                        during the course of the year, how these resources are to be allocated—as specified by the sys-
                        tems for macroeconomic forecasting and budget preparation—and the balances available for use
                        at any time during the course of the fiscal year.

                        Other systems, such as those for debt management, tax and customs administration, payroll and
                        pensions systems, though of vital importance to GFM, support the core system by maintaining
                        detailed data related to specific areas and providing this data to the core in accordance with
                        specified requirements in terms of timeliness and detail.

                        In view of their central place in the fiscal management process, the core elements of the GFM
                        systems network, the Treasury systems, are discussed in greater detail in the next chapter.
                                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




V. Treasury Systems –
    Functional Processes,
    Information Flows and
    Systems Modules
                                                                                                                                     29
Core Functional Processes

Treasury System

As noted previously, this supports the functional processes for budget implementation, account-
ing, and fiscal reporting. This would normally cover the following processes for both the invest-
ment and current budgets.

•	      Budget Management
        •	 Budget Apportionment, Budget Allotment,
        •	 Budget Releases, Budget Transfers
•	      Commitment Management – Recording all commitments relating to intended government
        expenditures
•	      Payment Management – Processing all government payments relating to:
        •	 Procurement of goods and services12 Salary and Pension Payments
        •	 Debt servicing payments
        •	 Fiscal transfers to sub-national level
•	      Fixed Assets Management
•	      Receipts Management – Recording revenues and other receipts
•	      Accounting (posting all transactions as they occur)
•	      Bank Reconciliation, Cash Management, and
•	      Fiscal Reporting




12	 Procurement     is a process that begins with requisition of an item or service by an end user, goes through
     shopping or bidding for selection of a supplier, includes formal evaluation of bids or supplier choices,
     and ends with a contract signature or a purchase order. The procurement process is usually initiated and
     managed by procurement officers in the SUs or a central procurement agency. This is normally done using
     a manual or an automated stand-alone procurement system. However, once the government selects a
     supplier and places a purchase order the process becomes part of the budget execution process. The use
     of the term procurement in this handbook is restricted to denote the stages beginning from placement of
     the purchase order, which results in a commitment and blocks budget funds, and includes the subsequent
     stages such as the receipt of goods and services, and invoice from the supplier. The actual payment made
     against this invoice for the goods purchased is part of the payment management process. The transactions
     associated with the management of fixed assets and control of the inventory of assets acquired are included
     in the fixed assets management and inventory control processes. All these are part of the functional
     processes for budget execution and accounting which are handled by the Treasury system.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Treasury Systems Functionality

                        To perform these functions the Treasury system would need to have the ability to:

                        •	      Record initial budgets and inform spending ministries about their budget appropriations, as
                                approved by the legislature, and keep a record of initial budgets, revised budgets, budget
                                transfers and supplementary budgets for a typical government spending ministry.
                        •	      Inform SUs about appropriation and commitment authorizations and record commitments
                                incurred by a spending unit against the approved limits and the appropriation during the
                                course of a year.
                        •	      Inform Spending units about budget releases / funds releases13 and keep a record of the
                                amounts of funds released against the appropriations and any changes thereto.
30                      •	      Process all expenditure requests e.g. for expenditures arising on account of purchase of
                                goods and services, payroll/pensions payments, debts servicing, fiscal transfers. For pur-
                                chase of goods and services it will record purchase orders, contract details, receipt of goods
                                and services, vendor invoices.
                        •	      Authorize payments after checking for controls including availability of appropriation, com-
                                mitment. and funds allocation prior to payment approval;
                        •	      Give payment instructions to the Bank. If required, print checks against payment instruc-
                                tions and/or make arrangements for the electronic transfer of payment information to an
                                external paying entity (a bank, for example).
                        •	      Create a record of the asset procured (for purchase of fixed assets), its item code and
                                description, cost and details of depreciation to be applied.
                        •	      Record revenue and other receipts information received from the Banks against appropriate
                                account heads.
                        •	      Reconcile payments and receipts with bank records.
                        •	      Enable monitoring of balances in Government accounts.
                        •	      Enable posting of all transactions, enforcement of controls, accounting.
                        •	      Enable comprehensive fiscal reporting.
                        •	      Ensure that these functions are performed by authorized staff only.



                        Budget Execution using the Treasury System

                        A typical scenario that describes the manner in which the main participants in the budget execu-
                        tion process interact with the various systems modules of the Treasury system while carrying out
                        their core functions and the main information flows from the various agencies that use these
                        modules in the course of budget execution is summarized in figures 8 and 9. The information
                        flows are discussed in detail in Figures 10–14.

                        The budget execution processes are discussed in detail below.

                        Budget Management (Including Budget Review and Fiscal Reporting)

                        Apportionment and Allotment: After approval of the annual budget by Parliament it is loaded into
                        the system by the Budget Department of the MOF. The approved budget for spending ministries
                        is then broken down to the detailed level of economic classifications and is apportioned over




                        13	 The  budget release process only specifies a line ministry’s/spending unit’s authority for spending. No cash
                             transfers take place to ministry bank accounts.
Figure 8: Treasury System Core Functional Processes and Information Flows


                                             Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Information Flows


        Agencies                  Functional Processes                                                                               External Entities



          MOF             Enters approved budget/appointments
                                                                                                                                           Vendors Employees
                                                                                                                                               Pensioners
     Line Ministries          Enters Detailed budget for SUs                                                     Payments



  MOF/Line Ministries        Enters Budget releases warrants
                                                                                                                     TSA Bank                            Taxes/Duties
                                 Enters authorized budget
  MOF/Line Ministries        transfers/supplementary allocations
                                                                       TREASURY SYSTEM                                      Loans Grant         Tax Payers
                                                                                                                            Receipt
  MOF/Line Ministries     Produce Fiscal/Budget execution reports
                                                                                                                      Donors
                          Enter Direct commitments contracts,
   Line Ministries/SUs                                                                             Monitor Actual
                                     Purchase Orders
                                                                                                   receipts compare
                                                                                                   with assessments
   Line Ministries/SUs/      Enter vendor Invoices payment
        Teasury                requests payroll transactions                                                          Revenue
                                                                                                                      Agencies
                            Reviews enters payment requests
        Treasury               releases/schedules payment


                             Monitors receipts performs Bank
        Treasury
                             Reconciliation Cash management
                                                                                                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                       31
                                                                                                                   32
Figure 9: Treasury System Core Functional Processes, Information Flows, Transaction Types and Systems Modules


                          Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes. Information ﬂows, Transaction Types and Systems Modules

       Core Functional Processes and Information Flows                  Transaction Types                    Systems Modules          External Agencies

                          MOF Loads Approved Budget by                                                       Treasury System
                            Economic Classiﬁcations                  Budget Apportionments
                             Apportioned over time                                                            Fiscal reporting               Vendors
                                                                                                                                            Employees
                                                                                                                                            Pensioners
                        Line Ministries Specify detailed budget
                           (Allotments) for Spending Units              Budget Allotments
                                                                                                           Budget Management           Payments
       Budget
     Management                  MOF enters Budget                      Warrants/Releases
      and Fiscal                Release/Warrant data                                                         General Ledger                 TSA Bank
      Reporting
                           MOF/Spending Ministries enter                                                                                 Taxes and Duties
                                                                           Transfers/
                            authorized Budget Transfers,
                                                                    Supplementary Allocations
                             Supplementary Allocations
                                                                                                                                            Tax Payers
                            MOF/Line Ministries Monitor                   Fiscal/Budget
                                Budget Execution                        Execution Reports                                              Loans
                                                                                                                                       Grant
                                                                       Direct Commitment                                              Receipts
     Commitment             Line Ministries and Spending
     Management               Units enter Commitments
                                                                    Purchase Orders Contracts        Procurement         Commitment          Donors

                          Line Ministries & Spending Units
                           enter Vendor invoices/Payment             Goods Receipts Invoices
                         Requests Payroll related transactions
                                                                                                                                                            A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




     Payment                                                                                          Payroll/
                                                                   Payroll/Pension Transactions                                              Tax Dept
    Management                                                                                        Pensions
                          Treasury enters Payment requests
                        Reviews Payment Requests & releases                                                               Payments
                                                                         Direct Payments                                 Management
                          for payment Schedules Payments                                                                              Information on
                                                                                                                                       Tax Receipts
                                                                                                                                      Bank balances
 Receipts Management         Treasury monitors Receipts                Receipts and Bank                  Receipts Management
  Bank Reconciliation       Performs Bank Reconciliation            Reconciliation Information             Bank Reconciliation
   Cash Management             and Cash Management                       Bank Balances                      Cash Management
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




time (quarters and months) and is registered in the system by the MOF and communicated to the
spending ministries.

The spending ministries, in turn, register the detailed budget for their subordinate spending units
and communicate the allotments to the spending units. These are the spending limits for the
spending ministries and spending units by quarter/ month for the fiscal year. Spending limits may
be varied during the course of the year in accordance with the results of monthly or quarterly
reviews of budget performance. For example, changes may be caused by variations in the rev-
enue forecasts, commitment and expenditure patterns, etc.

Cash Requirement Forecasts: SUs / Line ministries develop estimates of cash requirements and
receipts and prepare periodic requests for funds by economic category.
                                                                                                                          33
Budget release – Warrant allocation: Each year, expenditure plans detailing projected outlays and
receipts are developed by spending units and ministries. As the year progresses, sector agencies
prepare periodic requests for funds by economic category, which are also captured. The MOF
then issues warrants to ministries for each category of spending. The warrant is an instrument that
specifies a line ministry’s authority for spending. No cash transfers to ministry bank accounts.

From these amounts the ministries issue sub-warrants for their spending units and advise the
appropriate spending units. These processes take place periodically throughout the year. The
warrant and sub-warrant amounts need to be within the amounts specified in the spending limits
for these organizational units. Warrant amounts are determined based on the results of peri-
odic budget reviews, revised revenue forecasts and cash balances. Separate releases are usually
requested and allowed for investment projects after monitoring progress.

Budget Transfers and Virements: Normally the Budget Law permits the MOF, the spending
ministries and the spending units to shift the approved budget between organizational and
object classifications within restrictions set by the relevant laws. Shortfalls identified by spend-
ing units in one or more economic categories may be met from excesses in other economic
categories in their budget. For this, a budget transfer request needs to be processed. For some
items and within certain thresholds, spending units may have the financial powers to make the
transfer themselves. For these cases, they will update the budget data base in the system. For
cases which are beyond their financial powers, they will request the parent ministry or MOF
to process the transfer, depending on the type of transfer. If approved, the Ministry / MOF will
process the transfer and update the data base. The spending unit will be informed of the deci-
sion on the request.

Supplementary Budgets: During the course of the year revisions to the approved budget may be
carried out by the Parliament. These revisions are carried out in accordance with the procedures
for finalizing the original budgets. The process of preparing supplementary budgets covers the
preparation, routing and approvals of requests for a supplementary budget. Supplementary bud-
gets are normally presented to the parliament in mid-year.

Budget Review and Fiscal Reporting: The Treasury System is used to produce periodic fiscal and
budget execution reports that give a consolidated picture of all receipts and expenditures and
progress against budget targets. For these reports to be comprehensive, all items of receipts and
expenditure need to be captured. The Government Chart of Accounts is the basis of the fiscal
reporting process. These include the Fund, organizational, functional and economic classifica-
tions structure of the budget and the classification of account groups, assets and liabilities. As
line ministries and spending agencies carry out their work programs, expenses and receipts are
posted to the GL by the Treasury system by the budget object classification.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Figure 10: Budget Management – Including Budget Reviews and Fiscal Reporting

                                                                     Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and
                                                                                    Systems Modules I

                                                                   Management of Budget Authority Budet Review and
                                                                                 and Fiscal Reporting


                              Apportionment: MOF Loads
                             Approved Budget by Economic                                   Systems Modules
                          Classiﬁcations Apportioned over time


34                          Allotment: Line Ministries Specify                          Budget
                             detailed budget (Allotments) for                         Management
                                     Spending Units

                              Cash Requirements Forecasts:                                                 Fiscal
                               SUs/Line ministries develop                                               Reporting
                           estimates of cash requirements and
                              receipts and prepare periodic
                             requests for funds by economic
                                        category.                                       General
                                                                                        Ledger
                              Cash Requirements Forecasts:
                               SUs/Line ministries develop
                           estimates of cash requirements and
                              receipts and prepare periodic
                             requests for funds by economic
                                        category.

                              Apportionment: MOF Loads
                             Approved Budget by Economic
                          Classiﬁcations Apportioned over time

                            Allotment: Line Ministries Specify
                             detailed budget (Allotments) for
                                     Spending Units




                        Ministry systems record physical progress on programs and projects. This information is for-
                        warded to the MOF. Capital projects: Tracking the implementation of capital projects requires
                        data on both the physical progress of the project and the financial outlays and expenditure.
                        The latter is available from the Treasury system. Data on physical progress is maintained by the
                        agency executing the project. These can be combined to obtain a comprehensive report.

                        The Treasury General ledger records receipts of various types of tax revenues, loan/ aid receipts,
                        and debt servicing expenses. On the basis of this data the MOF can prepare overall fiscal reports
                        that compare actual expenses and receipts with the budget estimates. These reports provide a
                        status report and recommendations and action plans for corrective action during the course of
                        the year. These could include revisions to spending limits, warrants, etc.

                        The interactions are shown schematically in Figure 10.
                                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Commitment Management

•	      Procurement of Goods and Service: As the year progresses, spending units process requests
        for goods and services. After verifying the appropriateness of the expenditure and availabil-
        ity of budget and spending limit, the spending unit will process the procurement request
        according to prescribed procedures and place a purchase order on a vendor for the procure-
        ment of goods and services. The vendor should be registered in the database of vendors.
        The spending unit will then register a commitment in the system. The system will block the
        corresponding amount from the available budget and spending limit. In case the SU does
        not have direct access to the system, the commitment transaction is forwarded to the parent
        ministry and the MOF-Treasury regional office where the transaction will be entered into
        the system.
              A more detailed description of the commitment management process is given later in                                     35
        this chapter.
•	      Commitments for the Investment Component of the Budget: Commitment control for the
        recurrent component of the budget can be operated satisfactorily on a within year basis,
        primarily as an aid to sound cash management activities. However, in the case of the invest-
        ment component, where many projects have a financial life of more than one year, it is
        often useful to maintain an accurate record of the forward expenditure commitments. If this
        is done, Government has a better understanding of the flexibility available to it for future
        investment decisions. This process can be accommodated in the Treasury System by extend-
        ing the commitment control field against each investment appropriation line item to cover
        two years beyond the budget year. As long-term commitments are entered, the financial
        impact is recorded for budget and “later” years.
•	      Direct commitments: Several types of commitments can be registered in the system without
        going through the procurement module. These include commitments for Civil Service salaries.
        Salary commitments may be advised only once a year on an estimated basis and adjusted
        as necessary during the year. MOF Civil Service Agency enters these commitments. Debt
        Management Department enters Debt servicing Commitments. Spending agencies may also
        register direct commitments e.g. those relating to direct payments for utility bills/ rents, etc.

These processes are shown schematically in Figure 11.

Payments Management

•	      Verification of goods and services receipt and payments14: The process starts with the receipt
        of goods and services. Receipts need to be validated against the purchase order and a verifica-
        tion of receipts report is generated and entered into the system. On receipt, of the invoice from
        the vendor the system checks against the receipts report, the purchase order and approves the
        payment. The system examines requests for payment with reference to the available budget
        (spending limits, warrants) and the existence of a prior commitment. After approval, the trans-
        action is forwarded to the Accounts Payable module and scheduled for payment.
•	      For purchase of fixed assets, spending units would need to create a record of the asset pro-
        cured, its item code and description, cost and details of depreciation to be applied. Some


14	 Verification  of receipt of goods and services and verification of vendor invoices against receipts involves
     operational people in the SUs. It is typically done through dedicated inventory control, resource
     management and purchase order processing systems. This could imply that the Treasury system must be
     deployed at all Spending units. This can be very expensive in terms of user license fees for the application
     software. This information can be transferred to the Treasury system via a web portal. These issues are
     discussed later in the handbook. Alternatively, this can be done differently through an interface between
     the SU’s system and the Treasury system at the point where an invoice is ready for payment.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Figure 11: Commitment Management


                                      Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Systems Modules II

                                                           Commitment Management

                         Treasury Enters Direct
                         commitments and POs
                         Contracts on behalf of
                         SUs not directly
                         connected to the system

                         Line Ministries                                               Systems Modules
36                       & Spending Units Enter      Direct Commitments
                         Direct Commitments,
                         Purchase Orders,                                   Commitment           Budget Management
                                                         Purchase
                         Contracts
                                                           Orders
                                                         Contracts
                         Capital projects: Project                          Procurement            General Ledger
                         managing units enter
                         POs Contracts related to
                         capital projects

                         Debt Management
                         Department enters Debt
                         servicing Commitments

                         MOF Civil Service
                         Agency enters
                         Establishment
                         Commitments




                             software packages require that details of the item to be procured be entered in the fixed
                             assets module at the time of signing a purchase order. The cost of the asset is posted after
                             purchase.
                        •	   Payroll and Benefits and Pensions Payments: In the case of a decentralized payroll system,
                             the Spending Unit computes the salary of the employees on its rolls. This involves updat-
                             ing the data base for three types of change: (a) Changes to the employee’s data that would
                             impact the salary. This includes changes such as promotions, addition of new allowances.;
                             (b) Changes to the employee’s general data such as transfers, change of address, account
                             number; and (c) Changes that would impact the employee salary only in the current month.
                             After these updates, the spending unit computes the payroll. This is validated against the
                             authorized position list for the spending unit. The request for payment is then forwarded
                             to the Treasury for approval and payment. The Treasury enters this into the system and
                             which approves this request after checking the available budget (spending limits, warrants)
                             and the authorized position list. The transaction is then forwarded to the Accounts Payable
                             module and a payment order is sent to the TSA Bank to deposit the appropriate amount in
                             the employee’s Bank account. If employees do not have bank accounts, the TSA bank may
                             make the cash available to the spending unit for the payment of salaries.
                                  In the case of a centralized payroll system the spending unit forwards the monthly
                             changes to the agency responsible for computing the central payroll. The central agency,
                                                                                              AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




        often the Accountant General’s office in the case of many South Asian countries, or the
        Office of the Civil service in the case of some African countries updates the central payroll
        file and uses a central payroll system to compute the payroll after checking for available bud-
        get (spending limits, warrants) and the authorized position list. The payroll payments file is
        then forwarded to the Ac Payable module as before and a payment order in the name of indi-
        vidual employees is sent to the TSA Bank to be deposited in the employee Bank accounts.
              Similarly for pension payments the agency responsible for pensions for government
        retires makes changes to the pensioners file and uses the central pensions system to calcu-
        late the monthly pensions and forwards the payment file to the Treasury for payment. These
        systems are shown in Figure 12.15
•	      Small Expenditures: The commitment (and verification) of small expenditures (up to a
        predetermined limit) can be entered into the system simultaneously with the order for pay-
        ment. However, to prevent misuse, the system must know in advance which appropriation
                                                                                                                                  37
        items allow such simplification.



Figure 12: Payroll and Pensions Systems


                Treasury – Specialized Feeder Sub Systems Payroll and Pensions Systems

         Case I: Decentralized                             Systems Modules
  payroll-Spending unit updates the
  spending unit staff ﬁle with payroll             Spending Unit
   transactions – (monthly changes);               Establishment
       Checks against authorized                    Control File
  establishment and prepares payroll
    using a payroll system and sends
       monthly payroll request to                    SU Payroll                                Employee/
          Treasury for payment                        System                                   Pensioners
                                                                                                 Bank
      Case II: Centralized payroll-                                                             Accounts
 Spending unit send monthly payroll
    transactions to Central Agency
  which updates the central payroll                   Central
     ﬁles, checks against approved                                        TREASURY             TSA Bank/
                                                   Establishment                              Fiscal Agent
  establishment for the agency and                                         SYSTEM
                                                   Control System
   processes monthly payroll using
    the central payroll system and
  sends payroll request to Treasury                Central Payroll
       Central Pensions Organization                  System
       sends monthly updates to the
       pensioner ﬁles to the Treasury

      Treasury produces the pensions              Central Penions
     payroll using the central pensions               System
                  system.



15	 The   pension management processes discussed here apply to the case in countries where the monthly
     pension to civil servants is based on a fully non-contributory system and is another line item in the
     recurrent budget. It does not deal with the issues associated with management of a separate Pension Fund
     for civil servants, if one has been set up for the management of pension assets.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        •	   Debt servicing: The debt management department receives the loan agreements form the
                             donor/ lending agencies and registers the loan details in the system, including the dis-
                             bursement and debt servicing schedules. The debt management department also records
                             commitments related to debt servicing as described earlier. On receipt of debt service
                             bills, the department verifies receipts and payments due against the debt portfolio and
                             forwards it the bills to the Treasury for payment. The Treasury processes these payment
                             requests in a similar manner to that for other payment requests. On conclusion of the
                             transaction, the paying bank sends a list of payments to the Treasury which in turn sends
                             the list of debt related payments to the debt management department. These are used for
                             reconciliation purposes. The debt management agency may use an automated debt man-
                             agement system to perform these functions. In this case the DMS would need to interface
                             with the Treasury system and forward payment requests to the Treasury system like any
                             other spending unit.
38
                        •	   Direct payments/payment scheduling: the Treasury would need to have the facility to make
                             direct payments / fiscal transfers and to schedule payment requests in accordance with the
                             due date or in view of other exigencies.

                        These processes are shown schematically in Figure 13.

                        Receipts Management

                        Government receipts are paid through payment orders issued by the payee on his bank. The bank
                        transfers the payment to the appropriate sub-account of the Treasury Single Account at the Cen-
                        tral Bank. The Treasury monitors the deposits of Government receipts through daily statements
                        or received from the Bank or through an online interface. The Treasury implements any revenue-
                        sharing arrangements that are in place between the central government and the sub national
                        governments, posts the detailed revenue category figures accordingly in the General Ledger, and
                        informs the relevant SU or revenue collection department of the receipts.

                        •	   Loan receipts: The Debt management department(DMD) and/or the spending ministry
                             receive information from donor agencies about loans given to government. The DMD reg-
                             isters the loan agreement and the schedule of tranche releases for the loan. The money
                             is deposited by the donor in the TSA Bank. Receipts are recorded by the Treasury in the
                             general ledger. Information on receipts is passed on by Treasury to the Debt management
                             department which in turn passes it on to the concerned ministry/ spending unit.
                        •	   Grant receipts: The DMD and/or the spending ministry receive information from donor
                             agencies about grants given to Government. The ministry forwards the grant agreement
                             to the DMD registers the grant agreement and the schedule of tranche releases for the
                             grant. The money is deposited by the donor in the TSA Bank. Receipts are recorded by
                             the treasury in the general ledger. Information on receipts is passed on by Treasury to
                             the Debt management department which in turn passes it on to the concerned ministry/
                             spending unit.
                                   Receipts: Government receipts (e.g. taxes and duties) are preferably paid by the tax
                             payers through designated commercial banks who act as the fiscal agents of the Central
                             Bank. They are then transferred to the TSA at the Central Bank. A daily file from the Central
                             Bank (or its fiscal agent) to the Treasury informs the Treasury and the appropriate revenue
                             collection agencies of the details of tax and duty collections. Tax and Duty refund requests
                             are made by tax payers to the respective departments. Payments are made by the Trea-
                             sury on the basis of pay orders approved by the tax and customs departments. Sometimes
                             deposit accounts are set up by the revenue administration authorities for receipt of taxes
                             and duties and these deposits are subsequently transferred to the TSA at the Central Bank
                             Cash Management section.
                                                                                     AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Figure 13 Payments Management


              Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Systems Modules III

                                     Payments Management

 Good/service payments:
Line Ministries & Spending
Units enter Goods Receipts,
 Vendor Invoices Payment
         Requests
  Good/service payments:                        Systems Modules                        Vendors/
     Treasury enters enter                                                             Creditors                         39
   Goods Receipts, Vendor
                                 Procurement                                       Payments
 Invoices Payment Requests
                                                                      General
   for Sus not connected to                       Commitment
                                                                      Ledger
          the system                                                                  TSA Bank
                                    Payroll
 Capital projects: Project
   managing units enter                                                              Taxes
payments related to Capital        Pensions                                            and
         projects                                                                    Duties

Payroll/Pension payments:
Line Ministries & Spending                          Budget          Payments
                                                                                      Tax Payers
Units enter Payroll/pensions                      Management       Management
related transactions or send
 them to Treasury for entry
  Debt servicing and other
      payments: Debt
 Management Department
    enters debt servicing
   payments; MOF enters
 ﬁscal transfers; or Treasury
  enters these on behalf of
         the agencies
  Treasury enters Direct
Payment requests, Reviews
   Payment Requests &
   releases for payment,
    Schedules Payments




Cash Management

The cash management section receives expenditure and revenue forecasts from the spending
ministries, and from the debt management department on debt servicing expenditures. The reve-
nue collection agencies prepare revenue forecasts. The cash management department examines
this data with respect to the accounting data booked in the TGL, the debt management database
and the cash balances in the TSA and its component sub-accounts. This enables it to determine
the liquidity position of the government and shortfalls/ surpluses. This information form the basis
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        of the MOF determining the borrowing requirements and the spending limits and warrants for
                        spending ministries and units.

                        Bank Reconciliation

                        The list of completed payments received from the TSA Bank (normally the Central Bank) is used
                        for reconciliation of records at the Treasury and the Spending Unit. Figure 14 illustrates these
                        processes are shown in.

                        Tax and Customs Receipts and Refunds

                        Government receipts (for example, taxes and duties) are preferably paid by the tax payers through
                        designated commercial banks who act as the fiscal agents of the Central Bank. They are then trans-
40
                        ferred to the TSA at the Central Bank. A daily file from the Central Bank (or its fiscal agent) to the
                        Treasury informs the Treasury and the appropriate revenue collection agencies of the details of tax
                        and duty collections. Tax and customs duty refund requests are made by taxpayers to the respective
                        departments. Payments are made by the Treasury on the basis of pay orders approved by the tax
                        and customs departments. Sometimes deposit accounts are set up by the revenue administration
                        authorities for receipt of taxes and duties and these deposits are subsequently transferred to the
                        TSA at the Central Bank. These information flows are shown in Figure 15. After calculating refunds
                        due to a tax payer, the customs and tax departments need to prepare payment requests like any
                        other SU and forward to treasury for payment. These payments should not be netted out against tax
                        receipts even if the latter have been deposited in deposit accounts managed by the tax agencies.



                        Importance of Commitment Management for Budgetary Control

                        Commitment management is an essential element of any sound budget execution system. The
                        commitment management process ensures that spending units do not enter into contractual or
                        other binding liabilities beyond their authorized budget. The implementation of commitment
                        accounting together with the recording of all accounts payable transactions ensures that the
                        Government has complete information on its total expenditure liabilities and on the stock of
                        arrears, if any, built up over time.

                        Commitment management is therefore an essential element of budgetary control. Satisfactory
                        Budgetary control cannot be exercised by only checking for budget availability at the payment
                        stage of an expenditure transaction.

                        If a spending unit enters into a contractual liability without checking for actual budget availability
                        (calculated after taking into account both the commitment liabilities and the expenditure to date),
                        and this liability is beyond the unit’s budgetary authorization then the Government is essentially
                        committed to honoring this liability. When a payment transaction associated with this liability hits
                        the Treasury system, the units will need to make a request to the appropriate authorities for adjust-
                        ment to its budget (either through transferring budget from another category or through a supple-
                        mentary allocation) and will need to make budget available so that the transaction can be processed.

                        Implementation of Commitment control will enable the government to move the “budget check-
                        ing” control from the payment process to the point when goods and services are requested.
                        Adopting commitment control will bring real budget control into the transaction processing
                        cycle. This will establish budget control at the point the transaction is first initiated. Control at the
                        point of payment is too late to be an effective control, since the goods and services would already
                        have been received, and the government would have a legal obligation to pay the vendor.
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Figure 14: Receipts Management


              Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Systems Modules IV

               Receipts Management, Cash Management and Bank Reconciliation

                                                Systems Modules                      Vendors/
                                                                                     Creditors
       MoF Determines
       warrant amounts                   Budget
                                                                                           Payments
      borrowing strategy               Management
                                                                 General
                                                                 Ledger              TSA Bank
       Treasury Monitors                Receipts                                                                          41
            Receipts                   Management        Receipts Information
                                                                                          Taxes
       Treasury Performs                                 from TSA Bank
                                                                                          and
      Bank Reconciliation                 Bank                                            Duties
                                      Reconciliation     Receipts/Payments
      Treasury monitors                                  from TSA
      balances in Bank                    Cash           Balances in
     accounts; compares                                  Government Accounts        Tax Payers
                                       Management
    with requirements and
      and advises MOF




The Commitment Process

As the year progresses, spending units process requests for goods and services. The first step is to
verify the appropriateness of the expenditure and availability of budget and spending limit. The
spending unit processes the procurement request according to related prescribed procedures.
such as competitive procurement, then sends a purchase order to a vendor for the procurement
of goods and services. The vendor should be registered in the database of vendors.

The spending unit will then register a commitment in the system and block the corresponding
amount from the available budget and spending limit. The commitment transaction (purchase
order) is forwarded to the designated Treasury office which will record the commitment transac-
tion in the Treasury system. When the invoice is received by the SU for this purchase, the SU will
verify the receipt of goods and services via a goods receiving note and forward the invoice to the
designated Treasury office for payment. The Treasury office will check the prior commitment and
associated information in the purchase order to establish that the payment is being made to the
correct vendor and is in accordance with the contractual terms of the purchase order. If found
satisfactory, the Treasury office will make the payment, by debiting the corresponding budget line
item and also retire the commitment.

In cases where a partial payment is made against the purchase order, the amount of the com-
mitment will be reduced only by the amount actually paid. In this way the Treasury system will
be able to keep a full record (and inform the SU) of the available budget—the latter being the
difference of the total budget minus the sum of payments made and outstanding commitments.
Further commitment transactions will be checked against this amount before allowing them to
be registered in the system.
                                                                                                                       42
Figure 15 Tax and Customs Receipts and Refunds


                                            Treasury System Information FlowsTax and Customs Receipts and Refunds

                                                                    Request for Tax refund
                                                                                                                                                 Tax payers
                                           Information from Bank on Tax receipts and documents to Tax administration

                    Electronic ﬁle to                                                 Daily ﬁle of tax                          Tax recepts
                   tax admimsitration                                               payments to Treasury                      deposited in TSA

      Tax
  Administration
                    Refund payment                                                    Tax refund order                       Refund Deposit to
                         order                                                         drawn on TSA                          tax payer account

         Conﬁrmation
                                        Treasury Ofﬁces           Treasury System                          Central Bank                          Commercial
         of Export for
         VAT refund Electronic ﬁle                                                  Daily File of Cutoms
                                                                                                              (TSA)           Customs Duties
                                                                                                                                                   Banks
                       to Customs                                                    duties payments                          deposted in TSA


    Customs
  Administration      Duty refund                                                    Duties refnd order                       Refund Credit to
                     payment order                                                    drawn on TSA                             importer’s Ac.
                                                                                                                                                              A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                                        Information from bank on Customs recipts and Document to Customs administraion

                                                                   Request for duties refund
                                                                                                                                                  Importers

          Conﬁrmation of receipt of customs duty                       Customs Bonded                                     Imported goods
                                                                         Warehouse
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Commitment Thresholds

In order to reduce the amount of work involved in related transaction processing, some gov-
ernments institute a policy that only commitments above a certain threshold value would be
recorded in the system. This policy is based on the assumption that the commitment and expen-
diture patterns associated with budget execution follow the 80–20 rule, that is, 20 percent of
the commitments by number (and associated expenditures) would account for 80 percent of the
budget amount. The remaining 80 percent (by number) of the transactions would only total to 20
percent of the budget by amount. This is found to be the case for most commitment and expendi-
ture patterns. In practice, it would be necessary to profile the contractual patterns that exist in a
given environment, and determine the commitment threshold accordingly. The threshold should
ensure that the bulk of the commitments by amount (80–90 percent) are recorded in the system,
and associated expenditure are checked against these commitments prior to payment.                                         43
Multi-year Commitments

Normally, commitments are registered in the system against the budget available for the current
fiscal year. In cases where entering into such liabilities is necessary beyond the time horizon of
the budget authorization (usually a fiscal year), for example, for contracts that will require mul-
tiple years for completion, the system should have an accurate record of such commitments to
facilitate appropriate budget provisions for subsequent years. Since the payment schedule asso-
ciated with these commitments are also recorded, this will also provide information on future
cash flows expected, enabling the budget department to take these into account while issuing
budget releases.

Commitment Carry Forward

For those cases where a commitment has been made for a contract which is normally expected
to be completed within the time horizon of the budget authorization but has not been com-
pleted, the commitment record also provides a list of liabilities that will need to be carried
forward to the next fiscal year and for which appropriate budget provisions needs to be made.
Commitment control will therefore allow the government to close the books at year-end in a
more timely fashion by identifying the outstanding commitments and providing the ability to roll
those commitments to the next fiscal year.

Salary and Payroll Commitments

For salary and payroll expenses, the spending unit calculates the payroll commitments on the
basis of staff on board and the authorized pay and allowances for staff. These are checked against
budget availability and then advised to the spending agency and the MOF. Salary commitments
may be advised only once a year on an estimated basis and adjusted as necessary during the
year. Changes would be necessary if the pay and allowance structures change, staff on board are
promoted, new staff are added or staff reductions occur.

Transition to Commitment Accounting

All full function Treasury systems have the capacity to record all information associated with com-
mitment accounting and the facilities to enforce required controls. In many countries, the imple-
mentation strategy for commitment control is based on a gradual implementation of controls so
as to enable a smooth transition to the new system. The first phase of the systems implementation
focuses on ensuring comprehensiveness of transaction processing, ensuring that all expenditure
and receipt transactions are processed through the system, and a strict implementation of the
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        budget check prior to transaction approval. After this phase has been successfully completed
                        emphasis should next be placed on moving to full commitment management.

                        One way forward is that when the SU sends a purchase order (PO) to the Treasury office, the
                        details of this PO are entered in the system by the Treasury. This will automatically create a com-
                        mitment in the system. However, this will only produce commitment data for POs generated for
                        goods and services purchases for the non-development budget. Separate procedures will need
                        to be implemented to cover the development budget and project-related expenses. For the lat-
                        ter, the Head of the Treasury or the Controller General of Accounts will need to develop a policy
                        and issue instructions so that commitments in respect of capital expenses—often the main source
                        of concern—are recorded. For example, the accounts officer attached to the project would be
                        instructed to send a copy of the work-order to the Treasury office in advance of the initiation of
                        any payment for the project. The Treasury can then set up a commitment in the system, and ensure
44
                        that no payment is made prior to the recording of the corresponding commitment.



                        Systems Deployment Options: Treasury-Based or Spending Unit-
                        Based Systems Deployment
                        As discussed already, it is best to pick up (record) the transaction as close to its point of origina-
                        tion as possible to ensure comprehensiveness and timeliness of transaction capture. Therefore, a
                        spending unit-based deployment option would, in principle, be preferable. However, there can
                        be significant cost implications involved in such a deployment. The number of spending units in
                        a country can be quite large (often in the orders of several thousand) compared to typical sub-
                        Treasury office numbers which would normally be of the order of 100–200. This would mean
                        that the number of end-users connected to the central server and using the application software
                        directly would be correspondingly higher as hardware would be required to provide systems
                        access to all these users across the network. Hardware and software (license) costs for a typical
                        remote use could be about $2,000. If there are 5,000 such users across the network the addi-
                        tional capital cost involved would be $10 million. There would also be a corresponding increase
                        in the recurring cost—for electricity, maintenance, etc.

                        As a compromise, spending units may be required to send their transactions to a designated
                        Treasury office either in hard copy or electronically to be entered in the system. The line ministry
                        head offices could still be connected to the system directly to enable them to monitor the status
                        of their budgets etc.

                        With the advent of web-based technologies alternative means are now being implemented to
                        give spending units access to the system while at the same time ensuring that the Treasury contin-
                        ues to exercise control on payments. SUs can now have access to a web-based portal that would
                        enable them to send a transaction directly to the system. At the time of writing, this transaction
                        would not update the databases and would only create a file that would subsequently be used
                        by the Treasury office to update and process the transaction.

                        Web portals can also be set up to enable budget administrators to have direct access to the sys-
                        tem to carry out their responsibilities and for line ministries to get access to budget execution
                        figures and reports. These deployment options are shown in Figures 16, 17, and 18.

                        It needs to be clarified that the IFMIS is intended to serve the Consolidated Fund and all its bud-
                        get entities, irrespective of the system deployment option adopted. The alternative deployment
                        systems options presented in Figures 16 and 18 merely show how transactions from the spending
                        units would be routed from the spending unit to the system. Treasury-centric deployment could
Figure 16: Case 1 – Treasury-Centric Deployment

                              Case 1-Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Information Flows Treasury Centric Deployment
                               Spending units send transactions to the Treasury as hard copies/on electronic media/or via web portal


                                                           Enter:
                                                           . Approved Budget/Apportionments                                                           Vendors
                  Budget Administrators
                                                           . Detailed Budget for SUs                                                                 Employees
                                                           . Budget releases warrants                                                                Pensioners
                                                           . Authorized budget transfers/
                                                             supplementary allocations
                                                                                                                                                  Payments


                                                                                                                                          TSA Bank
              MOF/Budget Administrators/                           Receives Fiscal and Budget
              Treasury/Line Ministries and                      Execution reports Monitors Budget                                        Loans
                    Spending Units                             Execution Directly or via web portal                                      Grant        Tax Payers
                                                                                                                 TREASURY
                                                                                                                  SYSTEM               Receipts


                                                                                                                                            Donors
                  Sends:                                                    Reviews transactions, enters
                  . Commitments                                                  payment requests
                                                                                                                                  Monitor Actual receipts
                  . Contracts                                               releases/schedules payment                            Compare with Assessments
                  . Purchase Orders
     Line         . Vendor Invoices                      Treasury                                                                          Revenue
 Ministries/SUs   . Payment requests to Treasury                                                                                           Agencies
                                                                          Monitors Receipts Performs Bank
                    via web portal for entry to
                                                                          reconciliation Cash Management
                    the system Reviews
                                                                                                                                                                   AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                      45
                                                                                                                            46
Figure 17: Treasury-Centric Deployment (Another View)

         Budget Administrators                                                          Treasury SystemsTreasury Centric Deployment
           Approved Budget

               Allotments

           Releases/warrants

            In Year Changes

   Budget Administrators obtain budget
 execution and ﬁscal reports from system

   Line Ministries Spending Units                                                                   Treasury System
                                                                                                                                       Vendors Employee
                                                                                  Budget                                                  Pensioners
                                                                                                                  General
                 Purchase Order                                              Management and
                                                                                                                  Ledger
                                                                             Fiscal Reporting                                                 Payments

                     Contract                             WEB
                                                         PORTAL
                                                                             Procurement            Commitment              Payment    Central Bank TSA
 Requisition                               Documents
                  Goods Receipt            to Treasury
                                                                                                                            Receipts
                                                                                                                                              Tax Receipts
                                                                                                                                                             A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                      Invoice                                                                       Bank Recon.         Cash Mgmt.
                                                                                                                                          Tax Payers
    Direct Commitments and                                                  Treasury
        Direct Payments                                      Reviews transactions enters payment
                                                              requests releases/schedules payment
  Line Ministriees and SUs obtain                               Monitors Receipts Performs Bank
budget execution and ﬁscal reports in                           reconciliation Cash Management
    hard copy or via web portal
Figure 18: Case 2 – Spending Unit-Based Deployment

                          Case II-Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Information Flows Spending units based deployment
                                                Spending units enter transactions directly into the Treasury System


                                                         Enter:
                                                         . Approved Budget/Apportionments
               Budget Administrators
                                                         . Detailed Budget for SUs
                                                         . Budget releases warrants
                                                         . Authorized budget transfers/
                                                           supplementary allocations                                                             Vendors
                                                                                                                                                Employees
                                                                                                                                                Pensioners


            MOF/Budget Administrators/                                                                                                       Payments
                                                                  Receives Fiscal and Budget
            Treasury/Line Ministries and                       Execution reports Monitors Budget
                  Spending Units                              Execution Directly or via web portal                                    TSA Bank


                                                                                                                                    Loans
                                                             Sends:                                         TREASURY                Grant        Tax Payers
                                                             . Direct commitments                            SYSTEM               Receipts
                                                             . Contracts
              Line Ministries/SUs                            . Purchase Orders
                                                             . Vendor Invoices                                                         Donors
                                                             . Payment requests Directly in
                                                                                                                               Monitor Actual receipts
                                                               the Treasury system
                                                                                                                               Compare with Assessments

                                                                                                                                      Revenue
                                                                                                                                      Agencies
                                                               Reviews transactions, enters
                                                                    payment requests
                                                               releases/schedules payment
                   Treasury


                                                             Monitors Receipts Performs Bank
                                                             reconciliation Cash Management
                                                                                                                                                              AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                   47
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        be via a web portal. Spending unit-based deployment the transactions would be directly entered
                        in the system. In both cases all SU transactions will be processed by the system.



                        Primary Treasury System Interfaces

                        The primary interfaces between the core Treasury system and other GFM systems modules shown
                        in the information architecture are described below in greater detail and illustrated in Figure 19 in
                        the attached diagram. These interfaces specify the information that flows between these modules.

                        Generally, it is better to have modules such as budget preparation and payroll as an integral
                        part of the suite of modules used for systems implementation. This means that they would share
48                      databases—including those for the Charter of Accounts (COA)—with the other modules which
                        deal with budget execution.

                        Currently, the payroll module is available as an integral part of the suite of modules in an ERP
                        system with several packages, (for example, Oracle Financials and SAP software) and several
                        countries use this module for payroll management and this would be the recommended position.

                        The availability of an integrated budget preparation module is more of an issue on two counts:
                        First, several commonly-used packages (for example, Oracle Financials and Free Balance) have
                        recently, either introduced new modules—Hyperion in the case of Oracle EBS, or an integrated
                        version of the module—as in the case of Free Balance version 7. Second, MOF budget division
                        staff generally are less familiar with the functionality of budget preparation packages than their
                        colleagues in the budget execution division due to the shorter exposure of budget division staff
                        to budget preparation systems. In view of this many governments are still using separate modules
                        for budget preparation and budget execution.

                        This section of the handbook therefore discusses some of the issues involved while interfacing a
                        separate budget preparation module with the budget execution modules in some detail. It also
                        examines the issues that need to be considered should separate payroll module be used and
                        interfaced rather than integrated.

                        Interface with the Budget Preparation System

                        If the budget module forms an integrated part of the application software package used for bud-
                        get execution, then the two would share databases and no separate interface would be necessary.
                        However, if the budget is prepared using a separate module which is not integrated with the Trea-
                        sury system a facility is required to upload the approved budget after it has been finalized by the
                        Parliament to the Treasury System. Further, the budget preparation module should use the same
                        chart of accounts as the Treasury budget execution modules. All in-year changes to the budget
                        need to be made directly by Budget department in the Treasury system, and all budget execution
                        reports obtained directly from the Treasury system.

                        Interface with the Payroll System

                        As mentioned above it would be preferable to use an integrated payroll module which shares
                        databases with the rest of the financials modules. Nevertheless some governments do use a sepa-
                        rate payroll module for payroll calculations.

                        If the Payroll is calculated separately, either through a separate computer-based system or manu-
                        ally, then this interface enables the amount of the payroll for each SU to be entered as a payment
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




request in the system. In the case of a separate automated payroll module, this interface enables
a list of individual payments to employees to be transferred to the Treasury system as separate
payment requests, with the payment being deposited directly into the individual’s bank account.

In the case of a separate payroll system, it needs to ensure that the COA used by the two systems
are identical and changes are synchronized. This would require additional processes and con-
trols to ensure that transactions are not rejected at the time of posting. Given the size of payroll
systems this could result in additional processing and controls to resubmit rejected transactions
and it may also influence the accuracy of expenditure data at any given cut-off point.

Similar interfaces will need to be set up between any subsidiary specialized systems that manage
employee benefits such as the General Provident Fund or staff loans and advances, etc.
                                                                                                                          49
Interface with the Debt Management System

The Debt Management System maintains a record of all loans and related details such as name
of lender, amortization schedules, etc. Loan receipts, debt service commitments and payment
transactions with respect to these loans need to be entered in the Treasury system. This could
be done manually by the debt management unit or electronically by an interface with the debt
management system. It is important to note that the payments need to be made from the Treasury
system and not directly by transactions generated outside the system.

Interface with Tax and Customs Systems

Customs and Tax systems calculate and record the tax and duty assessments made. The actual pay-
ment is made by the tax payer to a Bank account controlled by the Treasury (TSA/ sub account).
The Central Bank periodically informs the Treasury about tax/customs receipts for that period. A
copy of the payment receipt is also given to the Tax/Customs departments and recorded in the tax/
customs systems. This enables the tax/customs departments to determine whether the tax or duty
assessed has been paid in full or not. The actual amount of the deposits of taxes and or duties
as recorded in the Treasury system is the official government record of receipts. The tax/customs
departments need to reconcile receipts recorded in their systems with this record. In order to
facilitate reconciliation between what the Treasury has actually received from the Bank as deposit
and what the tax/customs departments have recorded in their systems as receipts, it is necessary
that the tax payer uses a special deposit slip for such deposits which shows the details of the tax
payer, such as Tax Identification number, and gives the detailed budget code that identifies the
type of duty/tax collected. In the absence of this, the deposits by the tax payer may not be identi-
fied correctly and the amounts can be posted incorrectly, making reconciliation very difficult.

Interface with the Banking system

This facility enables the Treasury system to pass information electronically to the Central Bank to
make payments from the TSA. A facility is also required to enable reconciliation of transactions
entered in the treasury system with bank records and receiving information from the Bank of all
receipts into the TSA for taxes and customs and other miscellaneous receipts.

Interface with the Audit Systems

This enables the internal and external audit agencies to access Treasury system databases, review/
select, and down load transactions to their systems for further examination/scrutiny.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Figure 19: Primary Treasury Systems Interfaces

                                                        Primary Treasury Systems Interfaces

                              Budget System                                                       Banking Interface
                         Facility to upload Approved                                                A. Facility to make
                          budget to Treasury System                                                    payments from TSA
                          (IF the Budget is prepared                                                   electronically.
                         using a separate system, all                                               B. Facility to enable
                          in year changes are made                     Treasury                        reconciliation of
                               directly by Budget                       System                         transactions entered
                             department in the TS                                                      in the treasury system
                                                                                                       with bank records.
                                                                                                    C. Facility to record
50                            Payroll System
                                                                                                       payments made
                             Payroll is calculated
                                                                                                       directly into the TSA
                         separately either through a
                                                                                                       for taxes and customs
                          computer based system or
                                                              Interface with Tax and                   and miscellaneous
                           manually The interface
                         requires that the amount of
                                                                 Customs Systems                       receipts.
                                                         Customs and Tax systems Record the
                          the payroll for each SU is
                                                          tax and duty assessments made. The
                            entered as a payment
                                                            actual payment is made by the tax
                            request in the system
                                                          payer in a Bank account controlled
                                                         by the Treasury (TSA/ sub account). A
                                    Debt                   copy of the payment receipt is also
                         Debt Management Systems                                                      Audit Interface
                                                         given to the Tax/customs departments      This enables the Internal
                          maintain record of Loans             and recorded in the system.
                         amortization schedules etc.                                              and External audit agencies
                                                          A reconciliation is required of what    to review/select and down
                         Debt service commitments           the Treasury has actually received     load transactions to their
                         and payment transactions          from the Bank as deposit and what           systems for further
                         need to be entered in the          the tax/customs departments have         examination/scrutiny
                                   System                recorded in their systems as receipts.
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




VI.                  Technology
                      Architecture
Technology architecture defines the nature of the hardware, software, and
communications technology required to support the information systems
architecture. The process of specifying, procuring and implementing
appropriate technology to support IFMIS systems would include detailing
the requirements for:                                                                                                   51

•	   The nature, size, and distribution of the computer-processing facilities and associated hard-
     ware, including servers located at various processing centers, Work stations, and peripheral
     hardware.
•	   The nature of the communications interconnections between the computer processing
     facilities, including; Telecommunications Infra structure, Wide Area Network (WAN) links
     between various Treasury offices via telecommunications network—public switched net-
     work, leased lines, dial up lines; LAN connections between work stations at a particular
     site, and Network management systems.
•	   The nature and type of applications development and systems software, Application
     Software—to support functional processes; Middle ware-Operating systems, database man-
     agement systems (DBMSs), Application development tools, systems management tools;
     office support systems software.
•	   Back up/Disaster Recovery arrangements, Business Continuity Strategy; Power backup systems.
•	   Information security systems and the security architecture for the system.
•	   The business intelligence platform including Data ware housing and special purpose
     software to support analytical capabilities, Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) tools, doc-
     ument management systems, etc.

Definition of the technology platform provides the basis to:

•	   Select appropriate technology to support the systems architecture.
•	   Guide acquisition of hardware, software, and communication facilities.
•	   Ensure integration and compatibility of component elements of the architecture.

The different elements of the technology architecture will be country- and application-specific.
Country specific factors include the size of the country, the state of the telecommunications net-
work and other infra-structure, the availability of technology and facilities for its maintenance.
The Application factors are discussed below.



Application-Specific Factors

Technological requirements for the various systems modules described in the foregoing sections
could vary quite significantly. Some of the application-specific factors that determine the choice
of information technology are the:

•	   Volume of data to be handled and the sizes of the databases required to be maintained.
•	   Volumes and rates of transactions that take place against the databases and the numbers of
     concurrent users of the system.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        •	   Volumes and frequency of information flows between component parts of the system or
                             with other systems.
                        •	   Information processing requirements – whether they are centralized to a single location or
                             are distributed to a number of widely-separated locations. If it is the latter, how frequently
                             the information maintained by the system is required to be aggregated at the center or
                             referred to by other agencies of government.
                        •	   Type of data handled by the system: whether it is primarily alphanumeric or textual; and
                             whether it pertains to a given time slice or, requires time series.
                        •	   Nature of output facilities required by the system: graphics, report writing, desktop publish-
                             ing and imaging.
                        •	   Nature of analytical facilities required, for example, modeling, statistical analysis tools,
                             data warehousing, data mining, etc.
                        •	   Data distribution profiles and the nature and frequency of information flows between com-
52
                             ponent modules of the system or with other modules of the GFM network, which determine
                             the nature of the telecommunications facilities that will be required.



                        Systems Topology – Centralized and Distributed Technology
                        Architectures

                        The available choices are as follows:

                        Centralized Architecture

                        Here, the application software runs on a central server and all Treasury/MOF offices connect to
                        this server in an online mode to process their transactions

                        Distributed Architecture

                        In this case, copies of the software run on multiple servers across the network. Work stations at
                        a site connect to the local/designated server to process transactions.

                        These architectures are shown schematically in Figures 20 and 21.

                        In practice, it is found that centralized architectures are easier to maintain and operate since they
                        enable all changes to the software to be managed centrally. Consequently, such a deployment
                        would need a less intensive technical capacity at each node of the network. This topology also
                        results in better synchronization of databases since there is a single repository of most data on
                        the central set of servers. Similarly, since there is only one copy of the application software run-
                        ning, network-wide this leads to uniformity of systems across the network. Implementation of a
                        centralized architecture requires a good country wide WAN to enable real time online connec-
                        tions from all remote offices.

                        Distributed architectures are adopted when the telecommunications infra-structure in the coun-
                        try is not well developed and it is not possible to connect all Treasury/Spending unit offices in an
                        online mode to the central server. Most distributed deployments are converting to a centralized
                        deployment as the telecommunications networks improve.

                        Partially-Distributed Architectures

                        Sometimes for administrative and other reasons a hybrid topology—called a partially-distributed
                        architecture—is used. This is done in cases where separate but identical systems are required
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Figure 20: IFMIS Centralized Architecture

           Treasury Systems—Centralized Architecture—All Transaction processing
   carried out at the Center. Remote ofﬁces are linked to canter via a direct communication
                                link or via a web based interface

    MOF/Budget
   Administrators                        Central Treasury
                                                                                    TSA Bank
     Spending
    Ministry HQ                          Treasury System



                                                                  Internet
                              Direct Access
                                                                   Access
                                                                                                                        53


      Spending                   Remote                     Remote                Spending
        Unit                 Treasury Ofﬁce             Treasury Ofﬁce              Unit




for the provincial level and housing all these systems on one central server, could create capac-
ity problems. However the system is logically centralized (through replication or duplication)
since there is only one General Ledger (GL) database for country wide reporting, while it may
be physically distributed for performance reasons. In this setup local transactions are visible to
the center (according to centrally specified access rights) even if they originate locally against
distributed versions of the database. Such a deployment has been used in Russia, where a prov-
ince/oblast-based deployment has been implemented with an additional system at the center.
Here the main consideration was the sheer size of the system, which extended across 83 prov-
inces and nine time zones.




Figure 21: IFMIS Decentralized Architecture

                         Treasury Systems—Distributed Architecture.
          Transaction Processing carried out at Regional and District Treasury ofﬁces

      MOF/Budget                              Central Treasury
     Administrators                                                                 TSA Bank
  Spending Ministry HQ                        Treasury System



     Regional Budget                          Regional Treasury                      Regional
      Administrators                                Ofﬁce                             Branch
      Spending Unit                            Treasury System                     of TSA Bank



                                              District Treasury
         Spending                                  Ofﬁce                            Local Bank
           Unit                               Treasury System
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        The advantage of such a deployment is that for very large systems, where the total number of
                        users across all provinces is very large, a partially-distributed architecture has proved techni-
                        cally more feasible. It has been reported that for some projects—for example, the Vietnam TAB-
                        MIS—where all transactions are processed on a central server in Hanoi and Oracle Financials
                        is the chosen application software, when the number of concurrent users reached 7000–8000,
                        the granularity of the locking mechanism in the application software during the funds checking
                        process, prior to posting an expenditure, caused a transaction lockout across all other provinces
                        while a transaction was being approved for one province. Long queues built up and this resulted
                        in very low transaction throughput.

                        In this case, part of the problem was the low capacity of the central server, and this was recti-
                        fied by increasing its size. The contractor also needed to modify (customize) the software to get
                        around the granularity of the locking problem.
54
                        In the case of Russia, which also uses the same software as Vietnam (Oracle Financials), the
                        queuing problem encountered in Vietnam did not arise since the project uses a partially-dis-
                        tributed architecture, with each oblast having a separate server and the 40,000 or more users
                        distributed over several servers.

                        In view of this, the size of the system in terms of the maximum number of concurrent users
                        expected on the system could be a consideration when choosing between a fully centralized and
                        a partially distributed architecture.

                        Satellite-Based Communications From Remote Sites

                        Web-based technologies have simplified the technological requirements at remote sites, since a
                        work station at these sites would in principle require only access to a WAN via a web browser.
                        Communications from remote sites could be via a landline-based WAN or a satellite based
                        network.

                        The use of centralized web based systems via a satellite-based telecommunications network has
                        proved difficult to implement in some cases. This is so, since: (i) the significant latency delays
                        involved in satellite based networks (about 250 milliseconds) can cause lock out problems in
                        the data base; and (ii) in web-based systems the application software and all databases includ-
                        ing reference files reside on the central server, it may require multiple passes across the network
                        for validating and processing a single transaction. These two factors taken together have often
                        resulted in unacceptably high response times.

                        These issues can be partly overcome by using Citrix type terminal servers at remote sites that
                        would enable block transmission across the network. However, this would increase the invest-
                        ment cost at the remote sites and may also require that some reference files are available for
                        editing a transaction at these sites prior to their transmission to the central server. These problems
                        are less intensive in land based telecommunication networks, since the latency delays involved
                        in such networks are much smaller.

                        It needs to be noted that some countries have had to change from satellite-based communica-
                        tions from remote sites to a landline-based system to overcome unacceptably long response
                        times. Examples are Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan. Russia was initially planning a satellite-based
                        implementation but switched to a landline-based system, after tests using a satellite based con-
                        nection resulted in in very long response times.
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Application Software Options

Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) vs. Custom-developed/Bespoke Application
Software

It is important to choose appropriate software strategy for project implementation. The, choices
derive from a strategy based on in-house or bespoke development of application software, or use
of commercially available off-the-shelf software (COTS) packages.

In-house development of application software is often stated as being most attractive in terms
of the time and resources required for developing a core or prototype application quickly. Also,
with custom-developed software implementation can be done incrementally, with only a subset
of core features being implemented initially and other features being added later. Such applica-                          55
tions will generally provide a better fit with requirements in the short term. The downside is that
incremental development generally tends to continue for long periods of time, with the core
application being re-developed each time a new feature is added. Generally, such systems can
provide only the most basic functionality, and efforts at enhancing them to a full functionality
system usually turn out to be very time-consuming and expensive. The flexibility to replicate
non-standard business processes is also not a good thing since it allows those processes to be
incorporated in the software whereas they should be replaced anyway.

However, in situations where the business processes and application requirements have not been
firmed up, the initial use of bespoke development for a core prototype application helps in firm-
ing up application software requirements. Once this is done, these requirements can be used to
procure a full function COTS package that meets those needs. It is in these situations that the use
of bespoke development is most useful, specifically as the first of a two-step transition where the
eventual goal is to implement a full function COTS package. For example, bespoke software was
first used to implement core Treasury functionality in Kazakhstan, Russia, and Ukraine, but it has
now been replaced by COTS Software (Oracle Financials) in Kazakhstan and Russia. The new
project in Ukraine envisages use of COTS Software.

In a situation where good software development expertise is available locally, such as in India,
Brazil and China, bespoke software could offer a medium term option. Ironically, these middle
income countries could also afford the more expensive COTS solutions.

In lesser developed countries, where generally software development expertise is not available,
it would be more practical, cost-effective, and less risky to use a COTS solution as the basis of
an IFMIS type of project. The expertise required to operate such a solution can be developed
relatively easily through specific in-country training programs. Maintenance of the software is
the responsibility of the supplier, and is available by purchasing the annual license agreement.

In general, it is advisable to research availability of a packaged software solution for all or core
elements of the system before embarking on an exercise of in-house development. Packaged
software can be acquired for systems with relatively standardized requirements. Off-the-shelf
application software packages originally designed for the corporate environment are now com-
monplace in the public sector in areas such as financial management, accounting and person-
nel management. Some packages are available for use in more specialized areas such as tax
and customs administration, and debt management. In some cases, the COTS application may
need to be enhanced by custom addition of some elements of the system with country-specific
requirements.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Factors that discourage the use of COTS packages are cost of the package, recurrent license fees
                        and the costs associated with parameterization, which constitute major cost elements of a systems
                        implementation project. Also, though they may initially appear to be more expensive when com-
                        pared to a modest in-house prototype, such packages can result in significant savings of both time
                        and money in the long term. It is important when comparing costs to compare “like with like.”

                        Custom developed solutions normally have a limited set of features available. Building in all
                        COTS features—functionality, controls and integration—in a custom-developed package will
                        require extensive software development, and can be very costly and time consuming. In short,
                        you get what you pay for. In addition, without extensive technical and project management
                        expertise, custom development can be very risky.

                        Generally, the use of off-the-shelf software facilitates faster implementation of a full-function
56
                        system, continuing software support with periodic upgrades, good documentation and training.

                        In summary, a decision regarding the choice of application software needs to be made in the
                        context of (i) requirements for professional software engineering capabilities in the country;
                        (ii) trade-offs between costs and risks; (iii) speed of implementation; and (iv) long-term sustain-
                        ability of technical capacity for system evolution.

                        It would be advisable to first explore the availability and fit of available COTs solutions before
                        embarking on a customized development exercise. While conducting a review of available
                        COTS packages, the project team will need to ensure the following:

                        •	   The software package provides the required functionality and a local language version is
                             available where required.
                        •	   Access to technical support is available locally for the package, and it is possible to obtain
                             and install upgrades and/or changes to the packages as they become available in that par-
                             ticular country.
                        •	   The package vendor provides configuration/ parameterization assistance as may be required;
                        •	   No major customization is required and the costs associated with any customization are
                             identified clearly in the total price. The following section defines what constituted custom-
                             ization of the package and why this practice should be avoided.
                        •	   The package runs on a range of hardware and operating software which is compliant with
                             the technology architecture proposed for the systems;
                        •	   Adequate documentation is available to support package installation and use, and
                        •	   Licensing arrangements that can accommodate the use of the package at multiple sites in
                             the country are available.

                        Several packages are now available on the market that can support most of the functionality
                        requirements of a Treasury system after parameterization. Examples are SAP, Oracle Financials,
                        Free Balance, Epicor, Serenic Navigator (Navision), Smart stream, Agresso, Technology-1 etc.
                        Some packages may require development of specific modules to fulfill all functionality require-
                        ments. Most of these packages are based on accounting systems developed for the private sector.
                        The better known packages have incorporated functionality required for the public sector related
                        to budget management and commitment control. COTS packages have been developed after
                        studying international best practices; they embed best practice business processes and conform
                        to Internationally-Accepted Accounting Standards

                        The better known enterprise resource planning (ERP) software packages offer full-function func-
                        tionality and include modules that can record and process all transactions related to the budget
                        compilation and budget execution Processes, namely: initial (draft) budgets, budget revisions/
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




transfers, commitments, purchase orders, goods receiving reports, invoices, payments; tax and
non-tax receipts; journal vouchers, interfaces with banking systems, etc. They can offer a migra-
tion path from cash to accruals.

COTS packages offer built-in controls and audit trails; (for example, ensure the integrity of vendor
file, personnel file, etc.), offer good security features and better integration—all modules work
against a common data base ensuring data sharing and data integrity. They provide rich end-user
features, good documentation, availability of technical support, and regular software updates.
COTS packages also provide tools to accommodate front end processing and report writing.

Customization, Parameterization, and Reports Development

These three areas are frequently confused and bundled together as customization. The differ-
                                                                                                                            57
ences are clarified in the following.

In parameterization, COTS packages offer facilities to parameterize the software to country spe-
cific requirements. This includes facilities to configure Charts of Accounts, business process work
flows, configure controls, and select from Cash or Accrual basis of accounting. This requires no
changes in the source code of the package.

Customization involves changing the source code of the package to accommodate a specific
system requirement. This changed source code will not normally be supported by the vendor and
may even invalidate the software warranties and maintenance agreement, and should therefore
be avoided. This change would need to be implemented again as each new version of the soft-
ware s introduced if it has not been adopted as a standard feature in the software.

In the case of Vietnam’s TABMIS system, the implementing contractor customized the Oracle EBS
software to reduce the granularity of the locking mechanism for some transactions to shorten the
wait time between transactions). In other projects, workarounds can be done to the functionality
available in the existing software to meet specific functional requirements. This is not customization
of the code since these workarounds would be available in the new version of the software also.

Report writing
Sometimes the development of reporting capabilities using the tools provided by the vendor
is also confused with customization, which it is not. Custom report development is a normal
activity with any software and the tools available with most packages including data warehous-
ing tools enable the users to develop reports in accordance with their requirements. This is not
customization, but it does require good training for the users regarding these tools provided by
the vendor and in facilities to down load the data to EXCEL type of files so that other tools such
as Crystal Reports can be used to produce the reports.

Public Sector Versions of the Application Software
Only better-known packages have transitioned to and incorporated public sector requirements
related to budget control, budget releases, etc. (for example, SAP, Oracle Financials, Free Bal-
ance). COTS packages will only incorporate standard core functions. Ancillary front end features
that support various country specific administrative/procedural requirements such as those sup-
porting pre-audit may need to be programmed separately using tools available with the package.
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




VII. Systems
      Implementation
As discussed in Chapter II, work on IFMIS systems implementation is usually initiated after a
review of the fiscal management framework, associated policies, procedures and institutional
structures and the existing state of the transaction processing systems supporting fiscal manage-
ment processes. These reviews result in:

•	   An overall PFM reform strategy that includes recommendations for formulation of revised                            59
     policies procedures, institutional structures and functional processes to remedy the under-
     lying issues in the policy architecture that have caused problems in the area of fiscal
     management.
•	   An IFMIS strategy that identifies improvements/ redesign or implementation of new Infor-
     mation systems that are needed to ensure adherence to new policies, procedures and
     control structures; and remedy problems associated with timely availability of information
     for economic management.

The IFMIS strategy provides a blueprint for systems implementation and determines the feasibil-
ity and overall scope of the systems to be implemented, their sequencing, approximate costs and
timeline for implementation, project management and technical capacity, and other ancillary
requirements needed to enable systems implementation, procurement and overall satisfactory
ongoing operation.

This chapter discusses the issues that need to be addressed during actual systems implementa-
tion. This includes setting up project management structures; a listing of activities and tasks
involved in implementing the system; an indicative timeline for implementation, and a list of the
main cost elements for the project.



Project Management Structures

Actual project implementation requires setting up appropriate management structures for pro-
viding policy guidance and project implementation. These include:

•	   Identification of a Project Sponsor: This needs to be a high level Government official such
     as the Minister of Finance/Permanent Secretary/Controller General of Accounts. As men-
     tioned earlier implementation of such systems requires arriving at a consensus on various
     issues across a broad spectrum of stakeholders. It may also involve changing the underlying
     policy, legal and institutional framework. All of this requires a considerable amount of gov-
     ernment commitment. The appointment of a senior level project sponsor shows that such
     commitment is present.
•	   Appointment of a Steering Committee with representatives of all major stakeholders: MOF,
     Treasury, Budget, Central Bank, line Ministries, revenue collection agencies, to provide
     policy guidance and ensuring consensus across all stakeholders. This committee should
     have the authority and responsibility for resolution of conflicts, between various stakehold-
     ers and for inter institutional agreements—with the Central Bank, for example.
•	   Selection of a Project Manager: A common mistake is to consider IFMIS projects as IT proj-
     ects. While significant investments are often required in setting up the technology platform
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                             required to support the system, the primary emphasis of the project needs to be on the func-
                             tional objectives like fiscal control, cash management, etc. Ensuring that the system can
                             address these issues requires that the management of the project is competent in these areas
                             rather than technology. The project manager needs to be a senior official from the functional
                             side with stature within the bureaucracy as well as adequate financial and administrative
                             powers to cater to day-to-day operational administrative and financial requirements.
                                   Usually, the project manager should have the authority and responsibility for day to
                             day operational decisions regarding the project. This could include approval of the speci-
                             fications, acceptance of deliverables and for final overall system performance. He may
                             however, refer some issues to the steering committee for final decision and to obtain wider
                             buy in amongst all the stakeholders.
                        •	   Selection of a Core team/Working group from the stakeholder agencies, but with expert
                             knowledge of their functional areas. This group will be tasked to ensure that the new sys-
60
                             tem design is responsive to functional requirements. They will help document the “as-is”
                             business processes and assist in the design of new functional processes. After the system
                             has been completed they will serve as change agents during systems implementation.
                             This group will have a detailed involvement in resolution of design and implementation
                             issues.
                        •	   Setting up a Project Secretariat to handle daily administrative aspects, including procure-
                             ment of consultants and of the hardware and software necessary to implement the system.
                             This secretariat should include specialist staff/consultants with experience in the installation
                             of large scale IT systems and IT procurement.



                        Implementation Phases

                        Systems implementation can broadly be divided into three phases:

                        •	   The Design Phase
                        •	   The Procurement and Contracting Phase, and
                        •	   The Implementation Phase.

                        The Activities and tasks in each of these phases are discussed below.

                        Phase I – Systems Design

                        The tasks associated with this phase are:

                        •	   Definition of the business processes, functional requirements and functional design of the
                             new system that will need to be put in place to support the new policies, processes and
                             procedures. The tasks involved in this activity include:
                             1.	 Studying and documenting existing functional processes, administrative procedures,
                                 transaction documents, forms and information flows—including data flow statistics—
                                 covering all organizations involved in the functional area for which the system is being
                                 designed. For example, in the case of budget execution this would include the MOF,
                                 the Treasury, the Central Bank and the budgetary institutions, the revenue agencies, etc.
                             2.	 Developing and re-defining, where necessary, a new set of g functional processes,
                                 information flows, operating procedures, transaction types and associated documents
                                 and forms, and related organizational arrangements required to operate the proposed
                                 new systems.
                             3.	 Defining and drafting the format of major statements and reports to be produced by the
                                 new system to satisfy users’ needs and formal requirements.
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




     4.	  Developing functional requirements and systems specifications for the application soft-
          ware required to support the functional processes and their interfaces with any external
          systems, such as those of the Central Bank. It is important to ensure that the systems
          specifications capture the essential characteristics of the “to be” functional processes
          and list them as specific requirements for the application software. In addition they
          would include a list of features required to ensure systems security and ensure user
          friendly access. Features will need to be divided into mandatory and desirable catego-
          ries to enable comparison of different software options, packages offered, etc.
          The functional analysis and design of the various systems is normally conducted by
     a team of experts including one or more functional specialists, including PFM/accounting
     specialists, who will develop the functional design and define the overall system from the
     functional point of view, and systems development specialists, who will develop the appli-
     cation software specifications for the necessary application software required to automate
                                                                                                                            61
     the systems and the specification of the technical interfaces between the system under
     development and other external systems modules with which this system interfaces.
•	   Development of design, topology, and architecture for the technology platform required
     for implementing the new system (including the specifications of the individual elements
     of this platform—i.e. the hardware, the systems software, the telecommunications network
     (LANS/ WANs), the information security and network management systems, power sup-
     plies, disaster recovery arrangements etc.
          This activity would include developing the technical design for the technology plat-
     form required for the operation of the system, specification of the hardware, the networking
     and the topology of deployment. It normally involves:
     1.	 Surveying central, provincial/district offices of the agency responsible for the process, e.g.
          Treasury offices, for budget execution and those of any related agency such as the central
          bank, the budgetary institutions that are expected to transmit or receive data to the agency
          to determine the locations where the computer systems would need to be implemented;
          the associated transaction volumes (current and projected) and data requirements. Deter-
          mine sizes and configurations of the hardware and software to be installed at these nodes
          and the mode and characteristics (e.g. bandwidth) of the interconnection of the nodes to
          ensure accurate and timely data transfer between nodes (LAN/LAN).
     2.	 Preparing the specifications for the hardware and systems software required at the vari-
          ous sites and those required for a disaster recovery center.
     3.	 Defining the information security requirements to ensure secure access to the sys-
          tem functions and databases for authorized staff and secure transfer of information
          between various nodes of the network.
     4.	 Drawing up specifications for associated facilities required for the installation of the
          system, such as power stabilizers, Uninterrupted Power Supplies (UPSs), redundant
          power supply, telecommunication interfaces and environmental computer site require-
          ments (air conditioning, dust protection, physical access security).

Phase II – Procurement and Contracting for the System

This includes the development of tender documents for the various components, the associated
implementation services and the evaluation methodology for the bids receives in response to this
tender. This would require:

•	   Incorporating the hardware, applications software, WAN/LAN and information security
     specifications prepared as part of earlier tasks into a Standard bidding document to be used
     for the acquisition of the hardware and software. The specifications for procurement must
     include provision for maintenance and support of the hardware, software, and consum-
     ables. Hardware requirements should also include associated facilities, such as UPSs, etc.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        •	   Developing criteria for the evaluation of vendor proposals. These include specification of
                             mandatory and desirable features, technical scoring schemes for desirable features, weight
                             of technical and price scores.
                        •	   Evaluating vendor proposals and selecting a contractor or contractors for, Application Soft-
                             ware, Hardware/ telecommunications/networking, Implementation services, and
                        •	   Contracting for hardware, software, telecommunications/ networking and implementation
                             services.

                        Setting up arrangements to monitor and supervise contract implementation by the contractor
                        selected to ensure that it conforms to the design set out initially.

                        In view of rapid technological advances, the performance of hardware available in the market
                        continues to increase very rapidly while prices continue to fall. To take advantage of these fac-
62
                        tors, hardware procurement should therefore be phased so that it is procured as close as possible
                        to the time when it will be installed.

                        Phase III – Systems Implementation

                        The activities and tasks associated with systems implementation are:

                        •	   Application Software configuration/ parameterization and testing and integration of all
                             components
                                  The tasks included in this activity are:
                             1.	 Setting up test site
                             2.	 Plan and prepare for data conversion, user training and systems acceptance testing.
                             3.	 Building up a team of technical and end user specialists for system testing/
                                  acceptance
                             4.	 Drawing up specifications for testing of the hardware and software procured for the
                                  project.
                             5.	 Development of test scripts to ensure S/W compliance with requirements,
                             6.	 In the case of procurement of software packages the project team would be required to
                                  ensure that the software meets the functional requirements. In case the software pack-
                                  age requires customization to meet specified functional requirements, the team will
                                  specify the changes required and arrange for the changes to be implemented.
                             7.	 Parameterization / customization of the application S/W as required. This would
                                  include setting up any code structures, files and databases that may be required by the
                                  software package.
                             8.	 Testing the application S/W for required functionality, and;
                             9.	 Adjustment and acceptance.
                        •	   Pilot systems implementation
                                  Normally it is best to install the selected hardware and software at a set of pilot sites to
                             ensure that the system meets user requirements in an operational environment before it is
                             extended to other sites. The tasks associated with pilot systems installation are:
                             1.	 Install hardware/networks at pilot sites
                             2.	 Install application software for pilot sites
                             3.	 Train end user and technical staff. The team will need to ensure that necessary docu-
                                  mentation exists for the application systems modules and for training end-users. A
                                  sufficient number of local staff will need to be trained to a level sufficient to operate
                                  and maintain the systems, and to provide necessary end-user support.
                             4.	 Set up end user help line
                             5.	 Institute change management procedures
                             6.	 Migrate data as required
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




     7.	 Implement systems at pilot sites
     8.	 Review and adjust
•	   Replication of the systems across other sites
           After a successful pilot, the system will need to be replicated across all other agency
     sites. This phase will cover the replication of the system to other designated provincial and
     town sites. The process of replication across all sites may take considerable time, depend-
     ing upon the number of sites involved and the number of users requiring training. It is best
     to first develop a replication plan for the system for all designated sites. This is a document
     (checklist) detailing all tasks—including training of end-user and technical staff—that need
     to be undertaken for system replication at a typical provincial or town site and a schedule
     of when each site will be implemented.
•	   On-going systems maintenance and operations.
           This requires that a technical and end-user support organization exists with sufficient
                                                                                                                          63
     capacity to operate and maintain the system. The agency responsible for systems imple-
     mentation may have to develop or upgrade its in-house data processing staff and facilities
     to maintain and operate the Treasury and associated systems developed as part of the
     project.
           Project consultants should analyze the existing agency Data Processing (DP) staff
     resources and develop a plan to upgrade the DP organization. This would include assisting
     the agency to develop a training program for its staff, including specialized training in the
     use of the various tools such as operating systems, DBMSs application development facili-
     ties, etc. It would also include more general training in EDP project management, mainte-
     nance and provision of end-user support and training for a country-wide treasury system,
     etc. The consultants should also assist the government to procure training services from
     specialized vendors, and in setting up appropriate schedules to train end-user department
     staff in the use of the system.



Software Testing and Acceptance

The process of application software testing and acceptance that needs to be carried out in the
various systems implementation phases described above is well documented in the literature. A
summary of the application software testing and acceptance process, and methodologies used to
classify and remove systems defects is given in Box 1.

Unit Testing

This is the most elemental scale of testing. A unit is the smallest testable software component.
Unit Testing is done by the developer as each module is coded; a tester can help. This requires
detailed knowledge of the internal program design and code. The units are tested in isolation.
Ensures the component is working according to the detailed design/build specifications of the
module. Not to be confused with debugging, this is also known as component, module, or pro-
gram testing.

Integration Testing (also called Interface Testing or Assembly Testing)
In this phase, individual software modules that have been unit tested are combined and tested
as a group. It involves testing of more than one (tested) unit together to determine if they func-
tion correctly. The focus is on interfaces and communication between units. It is done using
the integration test design prepared during the architecture design phase. Integration testing
is done by developers/designers and testers working in collaboration and helps to assemble
incrementally a whole system and ensure the correct ‘flow’ of data from the first through the
final component.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                          Box 1: Application Software Testing and Acceptance

                          The various stages involved in the application software testing and acceptance are shown
                          in a “V” diagram which specifies a structured approach to testing. Each phase must be
                          completed before the next phase begins.

                                  Systems Pilot              Provides a                       Rollout-Release Testing
                                                              basis for:
                                 User Requirements                                        User Acceptance Testing


                                    System Speciﬁcations                                   System Testing
64
                                       Technical Architecture                         Integration Testing


                                               Detailed Design                       Unit Testing

                                                              System Conﬁguration




                        System Testing
                        System Testing is conducted on the complete, integrated system to evaluate the system’s compli-
                        ance with the systems specified requirements. It also includes load testing and should test the
                        network’s capability to support the application as well as the application software. As the name
                        implies, this testing covers all combined parts of a system, and ensures that the system meets all
                        functional and business requirements. The focus is on verifying that specifications are met and
                        validating that the system can be used for the intended purpose. The system test design is derived
                        from the system design documents, and should be done by an independent testing group. It can
                        involve a number of specialized types of tests to check performance, stress, documentation, etc.
                        Sometimes testing is automated using testing tools.

                        Acceptance Testing
                        Also called User Acceptance Test (UAT), Beta Testing, Application Testing or End User Testing,
                        this is conducted by real business users after system testing is completed, to determine whether
                        a system satisfies its acceptance criteria and business requirements or not. It is similar to system
                        testing in that the whole system is checked, but the important difference is the change in focus.
                        Acceptance testing should be performed in the real operating environment to allow the customer
                        to perform any test based on their business processes prior to final customer sign-off, when the
                        customer determines whether to accept the system or not. .

                        Release Testing
                        The stage begins when system is rolled out to the first department end users—when reality
                        meets theory and the actual users input real data in parallel with the current process. If the
                        testing described earlier has been comprehensive, most of the major issues would already
                        have been resolved. However, other bugs or unanticipated issues usually begin to surface in
                        this phase. Therefore, it is important to choose beta sites that have end users who are tolerant
                        of minor problems, as their positive acceptance will influence the rest of the users during the
                        rollout.
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Defects found in testing will need to be scored. The measures must be understandable but rea-
sonably precise, as end users who are not experienced testers will likely be required to record
defects in the system as they are found. The following is a typical classification, adapted from the
International Software Testing Qualifications Board (ISTQB) certification, internationally-recog-
nized software testing certification organization.

The actual terminologies, and their meaning, can vary depending on people, projects, organiza-
tions, or defect tracking tools, but the following is normally accepted classification.16

A threshold for defects must be defined to determine whether a tested unit or system passes or fails.

The table represents a typical color-coding scheme used to classify defects, with red meaning it
should fail the test, orange being possible acceptance, and blue being acceptance.
                                                                                                                           65
Ideally, all critical and major defects in the high and medium categories should be fixed before
rollout. The majority (80–90 percent) of the rest should be addressed before rollout, and the rest
should be fixed during the warranty period after system acceptance.



Internal Control and Systems Security

Two types of controls are required. First, an authorized user must be prevented from perform-
ing improper or unauthorized actions within the system. These controls limit access of staff to
specific types of transactions and specific segments of the database. These types of controls are
usually defined as part of internal control procedures.

In addition, the entire system needs to be secured from unauthorized access through the use of
password controls and other appropriate information security protocols. These controls relate to
IT security and IT management procedures. The internal audit department should be involved
in system design to ensure that appropriate internal control strategy is embedded in the sys-
tems design including appropriate controls and reports. This department should audit the IFMIS
internal control and security features and use of the system regularly over its life. The IT security
specialists should formulate an IFMIS internal control policy principles and standards document
which presents a risk-based approach for defining internal control. They also need to draft an
information technology security policy which addresses IT security aspects such as physical and
logical security.

These controls and related risks are outlined in a standardized approach (COBIT17) and address top-
ics such as IT strategy and planning, changes performed on IT systems, physical security (hardware
and server rooms security), logical security (network and user security) and on-going monitoring of
IT systems. This set of rules should rely on dedicated procedures, applied by the IT department, and
regularly controlled and audited by IT auditors. For example, the IA department should regularly
conduct a review of a user’s access to the IFMIS in order to ensure proper segregation of duties.

Strict adherence to these controls is necessary to mitigate fraudulent and unauthorized
transactions.
The staff complement managing the system needs to be trained in the use of the information
security protocols and products that are used to data and systems ensure security. Annex I details


16	 Source:   International Software Testing Qualifications Board (ISTQB).
            an acronym for “Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology,” COBIT is a
17	 Originally

  framework for developing, implementing, and monitoring IT practices.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                          Box 2: Terminologies for Defects

                          Severity: It is the extent to which the defect can affect the software. In other words it defines
                          the impact that a given defect has on the system. For example: If an application or web page
                          crashes when a remote link is clicked, in this case clicking the remote link by an user is rare
                          but the impact of application crashing is severe. So the severity is high but priority is low.
                          Critical: The defect that results in the termination of the complete system or one or more
                          component of the system and causes extensive corruption of the data. The failed function is
                          unusable and there is no acceptable alternative method to achieve the required results then
                          the severity will be stated as critical.
                          Major: The defect that results in the termination of the complete system or one or more
66                        component of the system and causes extensive corruption of the data. The failed function is
                          unusable but there exists an acceptable alternative method to achieve the required results
                          then the severity will be stated as major.
                          Moderate: The defect that does not result in the termination, but causes the system to
                          produce incorrect, incomplete or inconsistent results then the severity will be stated as
                          moderate.
                          Minor: The defect that does not result in the termination and does not damage the usability
                          of the system and the desired results can be easily obtained by working around the defects
                          then the severity is stated as minor.
                          Cosmetic: The defect that is related to the enhancement of the system where the changes are
                          related to the look and field of the application, then the severity is stated as cosmetic.
                          Priority: Priority defines the order in which we should resolve a defect. Should we fix it
                          now, or can it wait? This priority status is set by the tester to the developer mentioning the
                          time frame to fix the defect. If high priority is mentioned then the developer has to fix it at
                          the earliest. The priority status is set based on the customer requirements. For example: If the
                          company name is misspelled in the home page of the website, then the priority is high and
                          severity is low to fix it.
                          High: The defect must be resolved as soon as possible because the defect is affecting the
                          application or the product severely. The system cannot be used until the repair has been done.
                          Medium: The defect should be resolved in the normal course of development activities. It
                          can wait until a new build or version is created.
                          Low: The defect is an irritant which should be repaired, but repair can be deferred until after
                          more serious defects have been fixed.




                        the skills required in the technical team to ensure         Typical Defect Severity Matrix
                        information security.
                                                                                                  High     Medium Low
                        Indicative Time Schedule                                     Critical    1,2      1,2
                                                                                     Major       1,2      1,2
                        Figure 22 shows the sequencing of the various
                        implementation phases and activities given earlier           Moderate             3,4,5
                        and an indicative timeline for the implementation            Minor                5            7,8
                        of such systems.                                             Cosmetic             5
Figure 22: Indicative Time Line for Systems Implementation

           Diagnosis of the problems
                                                                                                          IFMIS Implementation Phases
                                                                                                             and indicative time line
  Diagnostic of the existing problems associated with
  budget management and development of a revised
 policy framework and feasibility, scope of new system

                                                                     Phase II: Systems Procurement
                         Phase I : Systems Design

                                                                 Procurement: Development of the World
  Functional Design: Deﬁnition of Budget execution processes,
                                                                    Bank RFP for Application Software,
  Chart of Accounts, Information Flows, Reporting Requirements
                                                                    Hardware and Services, Tendering,
         Inter-linkages between MOF and other agencies
                                                                     Evaluation and Contract Award               Phase III : Systems Implementation

  Technical Systems Design: Technical Architecture, Software                 Software ﬁt/Gap analysis Application Software Parametrization and Customization
                        requirements
                                                                                               Systems integration and testing
        Component Sizing and Hardware Speciﬁcations
                                                                                 Development of detailed operating manuals, procedures and instructions

                                                                                                         Change management and end user training

                                                                                          Pilot Systems Implementation                    Replication


                                                                                                                       Phase IV: On going Maintenance

                           12–18 months                                  12–24 months                          24–48 months
                                                                                                                                                               AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                    67
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Cost Elements of an IFMIS Project

                        It is important to recognize that in addition to the investment costs that are incurred in first set-
                        ting up the IFMIS a provision also needs to be made to cover some recurring costs that will be
                        required to be incurred on an on-going basis each year to keep the system operational. It is often
                        seen that while Government make adequate provisions for the first category of costs, mainly
                        because this is often financed by external donors, they fail to recognize the importance of the
                        second category related to recurring cost elements and fail to make adequate budget provisions
                        in the country’s budget to finance these costs. This could lead to degrading systems performance
                        over the medium term and in extreme cases to suspension of system operations with disastrous
                        consequences for the day to day financial operations that the system supports. Each of these
                        categories of costs is discussed below.
68
                        Investment Costs

                        These include:

                        •	   Policy and Design consultancies required to define the legal and policy framework (the
                             Budget law, institutional arrangements, COA, accounting policies), the functional design
                             of the system (functional processes, information flows, documents, procedures) and the
                             technical design and Architecture (S/W, H/W and Communications Specifications) of the
                             system.
                        •	   Project management support. This should cover the costs associated with maintain-
                             ing the project secretariat, project monitoring and evaluation, and other administrative
                             costs associated with the project. Procurement of the technology platform to operate
                             the system. This includes costs associated with the procurement of servers, workstations,
                             printers, office and systems software, Networking (LAN and WAN), Information security
                             systems, Application software and tools (+ DBMS, application development tools) etc.
                             and for Site preparation
                        •	   Implementation services include costs associated with procuring the Implementation ser-
                             vices required for systems parameterization/ customization, and implementation.
                        •	   Training, change, and systems transition costs include expenses for End User training in
                             the day-to-day use of systems and troubleshooting; technical training for technical staff in
                             the use and maintenance of specific tools used; management level training in the use of the
                             systems; and training for financial managers to use the information that will become avail-
                             able from the system databases. They cover costs associated with change management, and
                             costs incurred as the system transitions from a manual system to an automated system. They
                             also cater for costs involved in getting the end-user community and managers to familiar-
                             ize themselves with systems capabilities and the advantages that the new system will offer
                             them, and assuring them that adequate training and “handholding” resources would be
                             made available during the transition period.

                        Recurrent Costs

                        The main recurring cost elements are costs associated with:

                        •	   Hardware Maintenance / Replacement: Maintenance can be estimated to cost between
                             10–15 percent of the installed hardware costs per annum. Hardware life cycles vary
                             between 3–5 years.
                        •	   Application Software and DBMS/ Tools License Fees: This is a very significant element and
                             could easily be between 20–22 percent of the initial license fees per annum.
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




•	   Telecommunications Costs: These are associated with use of the wide area network (WAN)
     for communicating between the remote and central sites. These costs vary with the telecom
     tariff operational in various countries but can be a significant amount.
•	   Stationary, Utilities including POL for generators etc. Office Premises.
•	   Staff Costs: Specific provision should be made for the costs of specialist technical posi-
     tions that need to be staffed to ensure systems operation and maintenance. This is a critical
     cost element. In many countries, these positions are filled by contract staff hired directly
     from outside the normal civil service structure, since the remuneration required cannot be
     accommodated within government pay scales.
•	   On Going Training costs: These continue throughout the life of the system as trained end-
     users rotate out of their positions in most governments after a few years and these positions
     are filled up with new, untrained staff. Technical skills may also need upgrading as new
     versions of the application software and hardware are implemented.
                                                                                                                        69
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




VIII. Systems
       Procurement
Procurement of information systems has often posed problems in World Bank projects and
caused major delays. While a full discussion on contracting for consultancies and contracts
involved in an IFMIS implementation is beyond the scope of this handbook we will discuss some
commonly occurring situations associated with systems procurement in this section and try to
provide some pointers on how to resolve the associated issues.
                                                                                                                            71
Consultancies and Contracts Involved in Project Implementation

The two main contracting assignments that are normally involved in project implementation are:
a diagnostic and design consultancy and a contract for actual system implementation.

The work associated with the diagnosis of the existing situation and the development of the
design of the new system and its specifications is normally conducted by a consulting assign-
ment with a firm with the required experience and expertise. This assignment also includes the
development of the tender documents for the system components and helping the government
during the tender evaluation process. The actual systems implementation work is done by the
main contractor or contractors selected as a result of an international tendering process.

Several supplementary and specialized consulting assignments could also be given for areas
such as training, change management, and re-structuring the technical organization required to
support system implementation.



Contracting for Consulting Support Required for IFMIS Projects
Bank projects normally include financing for the consultancies that are required for systems
implementation. These consultancies are normally contracted after a competitive selection pro-
cess specified by the Bank for hiring consultants. The rules and guidelines specified for consul-
tant’s selection are detailed in several World Bank documents.18

The major consultancy prescribed for the design, procurement and implementation phases is a
diagnostic, design and project implementation /contract management consultancy.

Several models are used to design this consultancy package. The one that has found to be the
most practical is one in which the same consultant was employed for all three phases—design,
procurement and implementation phases. It is best to retain the services of this firm to also
supervise systems implementation by the selected contractor since they would be in the best
position to do so having developed the design. Assigning this task to a new firm would incur the
risk associated with disagreements on the basic design formulated earlier.




             Selection and Employment of Consultants under IBRD Loans & IDA Credits & Grants by World
18	 Guidelines:

  Bank Borrowers January 2011 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        The work of this consultant in the design phase is to review the existing business processes,
                        recommend changes and develop functional requirements and systems specifications for the
                        system to be procured.

                        In the procurement phase, the consultant is charged to assist the government in the execu-
                        tion of the complex World Bank procurement processes. Finally, in the implementation phase
                        the task of the consultant is to help the government manage and supervise the work of the
                        contractor hired through the procurement process, and ensure that the system that is imple-
                        mented follows the design specified and approved earlier and help the government in contract
                        management.

                        In order to do this in accordance with World Bank guidelines for procurement of consultants, the
                        initial Terms of Reference (TORs) for these consultants need to detail all three phases. It needs
72
                        to be stated clearly that each phase is separate, and the consultant contract will be extended to
                        this phase only if the work of the consultant is found to be satisfactory in the preceding phase.
                        Other subsidiary consultancies, for example, for change management and training, could be
                        contracted separately).

                        In several Bank projects known to the author, the main consultancy was split into two or more
                        and contracted separately. In addition, the consultancy for the supervision/implementation phase
                        was called an Independent Validation and Verification (INV&V) consultancy. These consultants
                        often misread the purpose of the hiring and saw it as an audit type of exercise where they were to
                        critique the initial design and the implementation work, instead of actually helping the govern-
                        ment to ensure that the contractor implements the system in accordance with the design which
                        had been specified and approved earlier.

                        In some cases, the INV&V consultants thought their role to be partially to report to the Bank team
                        supervising the project on any deficiencies in the design and implementation process instead of
                        helping the government to manage the contract. This caused major difficulties, and these consul-
                        tancies often did not achieve the purpose for which they were intended. The government was left
                        with little or no consultant help in the contract management/ supervision implementation phase.

                        Normally the INV&V process is carried out by the government with the help of Bank support
                        where the consultant’s design is evaluated by the government and Bank team to ensure that
                        it makes sense in the country specific circumstance. A consultant could also be hired for this
                        process.

                        In the case of Russia and some other projects, the Government hired a separate INV & V consul-
                        tant. This assignment, whose primary purpose was to review the design, was in addition to the
                        main consultant’s work, which continued throughout the various stages of the project. The latter
                        consultant (INV&V) did not have any responsibilities for supervising the systems implementation
                        or interfacing between the main contractor and the government and help the government in con-
                        tract management/supervision of implementation. They merely advised the government about
                        initial design, the systems specifications and implementation plan how it could be changed. It
                        was up to the government, with Bank advice, whether to accept or reject the consultant’s recom-
                        mendations. If the INV&V consultant’s advice was accepted, the government advised the main
                        consultant to incorporate these suggestions in the design.

                        Since configuring the main consultancy assignments has proved to be a significant bottleneck
                        for systems implementation in some countries, the consultancy package should be designed to
                        mitigate these problems and ensure that appropriate consulting help is available throughout the
                        various stages of the project and the TORs defined accordingly to make the tasks very clear.
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Options for Procuring the Technology Platform for Systems
Implementation

Procurement of the technology platform required for systems implementation—the application
software, the hardware and networking and associated integration services could be done in one
of two ways. Each of these options is discussed below.

Single Responsibility Contract

In this case all elements of the technology platform including the application software, the hard-
ware and the networking, the implementation and integration services are bundled into one con-
tract. Under this option, it is normal to define requirements in functional terms and volumetrics of
various transactions and size of databases and the supplier is required to propose the appropriate                         73
software and hardware technology platform. In a single responsibility contract, systems integra-
tion is the responsibility of the supplier. Since it is easier to manage one contract, this option is
recommended in cases where the government has limited contract management capacity.

It is necessary that during contract definition the government’s and the contractor’s responsi-
bilities are clearly defined. In these cases, Government may need expert assistance for contract
management. Here, it is especially important that the contract specifies clearly that it is the
contractor’s responsibility to size the hardware and other elements of the technology platform so
that they meet the system’s requirements and deliver the required performance. This is so since it
would otherwise be in the interest of the contractor to undersize the hardware, etc. to come up
with a low-priced bid.

Multi Tranche Procurement

Under this option, the different elements of the technology platform are procured separately.
Generally, the application software and implementation and integration services are procured
first, and the contractor supplying the application software is required to define the hardware
requirements. The hardware and technology platform are then procured separately in one or
more tranches. The advantage here is that procurement packages are more specialized and can
attract better responses for each area.

In such cases, since the first contract for software and implementation services also includes sys-
tems integration, it is the integrator’s responsibility that the application software works with the
hardware they have specified. The procurement of the first tranche of hardware would normally
cover the test site and pilot sites hardware, and can commence once the application software
choice has been firmed up. The integrator will also need to ensure that the various elements of
the technology platform that have been procured separately work together smoothly and the sys-
tem delivers its intended throughput as specified in the design. Further, since the hardware—for
example, the servers—could be procured in several tranches it will be necessary to ensure that
the application software (as finally configured for this particular application) works for example
the various versions of the UNIX operating system that is available from the different suppliers.

It has been found in practice that porting the hardware to a different vendor’s operating sys-
tem could become a nontrivial task, especially if the application software has been customized
extensively. This has important procurement implications since this would imply that further
procurement of the servers in subsequent tranches, or for subsequent upgrades, would need to
be restricted to the same brand as purchased in the first tranche. This would require an exception
to the World Bank’s International Competitive Bidding (ICB) procedures.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        One way around this is to try to use operating systems like LINUX and versions of the application
                        software that can operate under LINUX. Since all major hardware vendors provide hardware that
                        can operate under LINUX, changing the hardware platform, or using a mix of hardware from
                        different vendors for different sites, would be less difficult in this case. These systems are also a
                        less expensive option than the proprietary operating systems marketed by the hardware vendors.



                        Systems Procurement using World Bank Procedures19

                        The systems procurement process under World Bank procurement rules have suffered from
                        major delays in several projects. The reasons for these delays are complex and some delays may
                        be due to country specific reasons. Generally, World Bank procurement processes are designed
                        to ensure completely transparent procurement practices and could be complex.
74
                        The prescribed World Bank process for complex systems procurement is the two-stage ICB pro-
                        cess. The time taken to execute the various steps prescribed in this process even if everything
                        goes like clockwork is between 12–18 months.

                        Bank approvals are required at various stages of the process and these approvals are given only if
                        the rules are followed meticulously. In addition, the vendors have recourse to redress/complaint
                        facilities available to them to complain to the Bank and/or their own Executive Directors on the
                        Bank’s Board whenever they perceive a violation of the fair procurement process.

                        The rules and procedures accompanying this process need to be understood very well by the
                        government and the consultants tasked with designing the procurement package and tender
                        documents for the system and who would be responsible for the actual procurement. This is
                        seldom the case and many times the bidding process, or parts of it, have to be re-done before
                        approval is obtained.

                        It is therefore essential that (i) adequate training in the process and the accompanying rules
                        framework, etc. be given to the government team who will be responsible for this process, and
                        that the same government team is maintained throughout the procurement phase and during
                        contract implementation; (ii) Experience with the Bank’s procurement process should be men-
                        tioned as a specific requirement for the consultants hired to assist the government in the design,
                        procurement and implementation phases. Sometimes a procurement agent is hired for this work.
                        Adequately fulfilling these responsibilities helps to mitigate delays



                        Some pointers on Designing the International Competitive
                        Bidding (ICB) Package
                        As mentioned, systems procurement in World Bank-financed projects is normally done through
                        a two-stage ICB. While a full discussion of the 2-stage ICB process is beyond the scope of this
                        book, this section gives some pointers on how to design a two-stage ICB package for systems
                        procurement which can mitigate some commonly-occurring problems.


                                procedures are described in the following publications. Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works;
                        19	 These

                          and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants, January 2011 The International
                          Bank for Reconstruction and Development/THE World Bank, 1818 H Street, N.W. Washington, D.C.
                          20433, U.S.A. Both publications are available on the World Bank website: (http://go.worldbank.
                          org/1KKD1KNT40).
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




First, the functional specification document should specify the overall business objectives of the
purchaser. The specification should primarily adopt a process-based approach, instead of a fea-
ture based approach. The specification should focus on the processes which the system will sup-
port and derive the functionality required from them The bid documents should clearly specify
core functional processes and information flows to be covered and which departments/entities
will be connected online and how many users in each; what transactions will be recorded;
which departments will send transactions off-line and how these will be captured in the system.
The bid should clearly document estimated volume of the transactions and high volume sites.

The government should use stringent screening criteria in the first stage to avoid spurious bids—
for example firms with insufficient relevant experience in the public sector and software pack-
ages which have not been used successfully for similar systems (both in terms of functionality
and scale size). The screening criteria would accordingly be designed to: (i) Screen firms on the
                                                                                                                          75
basis of financial viability and previous relevant experience in the public sector; (ii) screen pro-
posals on the basis of whether the Application Software proposed has been used successfully for
implementation of Treasury/IFMIS systems and whether the firm has proposed staff with experi-
ence in the implementation of this software.

System specifications should be defined in terms of clear mandatory requirements which demand
that the system meets the needs the key functional processes used by government for budget exe-
cution, specific features that would be required in the software for carrying out these processes,
the performance requirements of the system in terms of the response times of transactions, the
number of users, requirements for the hardware, the firm’s experience and staff. This ensures that
the evaluation of the bid proposals would be mainly price-based.

The following points should be kept in mind while designing the package:

•	   The scoring scheme should clearly identify quantifiable factors to avoid subjectivity in
     scoring. Divide requirements into Mandatory and Desirable (M and D). If a bid fails on
     any M requirement it is rejected. Normally, only desirable requirements are scored in
     technical scoring. The desirable requirements can be scored as present or not present
     as indicated by supplier in the bid. Subjective scoring schemes in which different scores
     are given for fully compliant, partially compliant, etc. are not recommended. The weight
     of technical score should be low (< 30 percent). High weights for technical scores will
     drive the bid price upwards. It has been observed in several ICBs that after bids have been
     screened with a robust set of mandatory criteria, the technical scores for the remaining
     packages are not very different. This means that the final evaluation is mainly price-based.
     A high weight for technical score would therefore only be inviting suppliers to quote
     premium prices for a few desirable features. If such a bid wins the contract, the govern-
     ment could be paying out large amounts for a few features that are not critical for systems
     performance.
•	   A test script of basic transactions should be a part of the bid and the bid should require the
     suppliers to demonstrate how the software proposed will meet these requirements (in stage
     I). During these presentations and bid examination the government should try to determine
     how much of the core functionality can be met out of the box with parameterization of the
     software—not customization.
•	   The functional specifications should specify which external systems will need to be inter-
     faced and what is the exact nature of information that will be transferred/exchanged (Tax
     and Customs/Debt, for example). It should state the nature of the Banking interface: Will
     payment be electronic or manual/ check based? How will bank reconciliation be done?
•	   For application software, the government can ask the bidder to state how the specified
     requirements will be met. Out-of-the-box purchases (only with parameterization) require
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                             some customization, such as development of specific functionality within the package, or
                             requirements cannot be met. The items that can be met out-of-the-box can be tested and
                             confirmed during the package demonstrations in stage I of a two stage ICB.
                        •	   The government should investigate costs associated with Named User vs. Concurrent user
                             licensing for application software and explore site license options.
                        •	   In a single responsibility contract, the government should state its requirements in func-
                             tional terms and specify key performance requirements and volumetric of transactions.
                             The contractor should have the responsibility to size the equipment and propose all com-
                             ponents to cater to the specified functional requirements and projected transaction load.
                             Additionally, the supplier should be required to deliver all necessary licenses configured as
                             needed for proper operation of the system for the requested duration. It is also important
                             to check whether technical support for standard software is indeed needed and its costs,
                             and if so, how application software modifications which may need to be carried out would
76
                             affect this.
                        •	   Supplier’s key staff should not be scored but instead included in the Technical Requirements
                             under team composition—it is then a contractual mandatory requirement. A General Con-
                             ditions of Contract (GCC) clause in the standard bidding document defines the suppliers’
                             responsibilities: The Supplier shall provide and employ only technical personnel who are
                             skilled and experienced in their respective callings and supervisory staff who are competent
                             to adequately supervise the work at hand.
                        •	   Under Bank Contracts the supplier has the responsibility to provide the latest version of the
                             equipment and pass on any financial savings to the government. Since this type of proj-
                             ects can extend over several years, and both hardware models and software versions can
                             change quite significantly over this period, a clear understanding of any limitations on the
                             applicability of this clause is very important—for example, whether the supplier will supply
                             an entirely new version of the software if it is released during contract execution. All such
                             limitations should be clearly specified in the Standard Conditions of Contract.
                        •	   The government should state its requirements in terms of concurrent and named users, and
                             give its preference.
                        •	   Care should be taken that there is a performance security and that all advances are
                             secured by a Bank guarantee. Warranty Clauses should be comprehensive and ensure
                             that warranty coverage continues until a defined time after the entire system is operation-
                             ally accepted.
                        •	   Generally, it is best to minimize changes in scope after contract signature—the supplier will
                             always come out ahead in such a transaction.
                        •	   The government/consultants should develop broad cost estimates for the systems procure-
                             ment package which can be used as a guideline for assessing bid received.
                        •	   The bid should specify the total amount of resources available under the loan to restrict spu-
                             rious and very high priced bids. This has proved very useful in restricting offered bid prices.
                        •	   The procurement plan should be prepared carefully and made available to the public.
                        •	   It would be best to bundle only those elements in the bid which are closely coupled, can
                             be specified clearly and whose delivery can be verified, for example, application software,
                             main and DRC servers, WAN/LAN networks and Implementation services. Elements like
                             change management which are more difficult to measure are best left out of this procure-
                             ment and contracted for separately.
                        •	   It needs to be noted that a lot of the training will need to be done separately. The govern-
                             ment can obtain unit prices for the training of staff in key areas such as certification in the
                             use of the package/DBMS /Systems/Network administration, etc. and costs for training a
                             clearly specified number of staff in each area.
                                                                                   AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Contract Management

•	   For large turnkey contracts, it is essential that Government has the capacity to manage con-
     tract implementation. Governments often use international consulting companies to assist
     them in managing contract implementation.
•	   In a single responsibility contract, the government states its requirements in functional
     terms. The contractor then has the responsibility to size the equipment and to propose all
     components to meet the specified functional requirements and projected transaction load.
•	   In Bank contracts, the supplier has the responsibility to provide the latest version of the
     equipment and pass on any financial savings to the Government.
•	   Payment schedule should be linked to specific milestones and not be front loaded.
•	   Care should be taken that that there is a performance security and all advances are secured
     by a Bank guarantee.                                                                                              77
•	   Provide for liquidated damages clauses. However, the government should ensure that it
     fulfills the responsibilities that it has assumed in a timely manner.
•	   Warranty Clauses should be comprehensive.
•	   Minimize changes in scope after contract signature—the supplier will always come out
     ahead in such a transaction.
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




IX. Implementation
     Experience
Major Groupings of Projects

Broadly speaking, reform projects involving implementation of IFMIS type systems can be
divided into two major groups. First, projects in transition economies, such as countries of the
Former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and countries which transitioned from centrally planned to
a market economy post-1990 and second, projects in other countries where the basic principles                             79
and institutional structures required for expenditure management in a market economy were
already present but required repair and modernization.

In general, it has been found that reform and associated systems implementation has been easier
at the “green field” sites in the first group as compared to those in the second. In both cases Gov-
ernment commitment and support of the MOF has been critical for progress of reform initiatives.

We will discuss the characteristics of each of these situations further in the following paragraphs.

Transition Economies.

The pre-reform situation in transition economies was characterized by a lack of an appropriate legal
framework, institutional structures and accompanying systems required for management of Govern-
ment finances. Spending units were allowed to open up Bank accounts outside the control of the
MOF and the MOF transferred money to these accounts periodically. As a result sizable idle bal-
ances could build up in spending unit bank accounts while the MOF was in deficit in overall terms.
MOF had no means to exercise control to ensure that expenditures are in accordance with budget
appropriations. This resulted in other problems, like lack of timely information on expenditures
and revenues required for economic management, statutory reporting, base line data for budget. In
these economies, Treasury projects required setting up institutional structures and accompanying
systems, ab initio, as these countries moved from centrally planned to market economies

In other countries the legal and institutional structures for management of Government finances
did exist but were in need of repair since they were frequently by-passed. The pre-reform situ-
ation in these countries is characterized by an erosion of controls (e.g. appropriation control),
blurring of the roles and responsibilities of participants (SU – Treasury), and multiplication of
bank accounts outside the control of the Treasury—for example, personal ledger accounts. This
resulted in essentially the same situation as that in transition economies with regard to lack of
MOF control over government finances, expenditures and availability of timely information for
economic management. In these countries reform projects tried to build on and repair existing
financial management arrangements and systems—plugging the leaks.

Post Conflict Economies

A set of post-conflict countries such as Afghanistan, East Timor, and Kosovo, in which implemen-
tation of systems had also to be done ab initio, can be considered as a subset of the first group.
The experience of this group is similar to that of the transition economies in so far as policy
structures and systems had to be set up afresh but with the added complication that a new set
of systems had to start functioning quickly so that donor aid and contributions are tracked and
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        accounted for as soon as possible. This required that some systems support became available
                        very quickly and in some cases this meant that tried and tested solutions were installed without
                        carrying out a country specific full functional requirements analysis. The results of these cases are
                        mixed, with some countries such as East Timor and Kosovo being quite satisfied with the chosen
                        system, and others such as Afghanistan and Iraq discovering that the fit between the chosen sys-
                        tem and the requirements was not as good as required.



                        Implementation of an IFMIS has Resulted in Significant Advantages

                        The implementation of IFMIS type systems, along with the appropriate policy and institutional
                        reforms has resulted in significant advantages such as:
80
                        •	   Rigorous application of appropriation controls thereby enabling good fiscal controls
                        •	   Better cash management and reduction in idle balances/borrowing requirements
                        •	   Ready availability of financial information for economic management
                        •	   Up to date and comprehensive fiscal reporting for MOF
                        •	   Regular budget execution reports for spending units
                        •	   Increased efficiencies in bill tracking and payment processing (vendor bills/civil service
                             payrolls/retiree pensions)
                        •	   Better management of Government programs and delivery of government services; Better
                             management of Capital Projects
                        •	   Increased accountability and transparency
                        •	   Ready availability of financial information to public
                        •	   Efficiencies in auditing-less time required for transaction audits giving more time for per-
                             formance audits
                        •	   Earlier production of certified annual accounts and placement before legislature
                        •	   Reliance on Country Systems by Donor and/or Rating agencies

                        Some examples which show the order of magnitudes of the savings involved are given below:

                        •	   Implementation of the TSA and bringing all Bank accounts under Treasury control in
                             Ukraine resulted in a very significant reduction of idle balances’ borrowing costs. In addi-
                             tion, the ready availability of information on the total financial resources available to
                             Government enabled it to allocate them efficiently. This contrasts with the pre-reform
                             situation where health workers and other government employees often stayed unpaid for
                             several months, and Government had to resort to serious cash rationing to meet its day-
                             to-day obligations.
                        •	   The implementation of the Project for the Improvement of Financial Reporting and Audit-
                             ing (PIFRA) system in Pakistan resulted in improved and timely access of actual transition
                             data to the Auditor General of Pakistan. In one year, the audit process uncovered financial
                             irregularities to the tune of Pak Rs.19 billion, which was recovered. This would pay for the
                             total costs of the entire PIFRA reform program spread over ten years.

                        Some other significant observations are given below.

                        Project Completion Times

                        A recent study conducted by Dener et al. (2011) covering about 60 World Bank-financed
                        projects, has shown that project completion times range from 7–14 years to finish (from Board
                        approval to completion) with an average completion time of approximately 7.5 years. Many
                        ongoing projects are expected to take similar times for completion. Obtaining consensus
                                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




within government and implementing the policy reforms that are required has been a major
factor contributing to long implementation times (especially at green field sites). Systems pro-
curement, using international competitive bidding procedures has also contributed to long
gestation periods. The time taken for actual systems implementation for a COTS solution
from contract award to completion is between 3–6 years, depending on scale size of the
implementation.

Implementation Costs

Implementation costs vary with the scope and scale size of the implementation. However, it is
possible to get an approximate idea of the costs to be expected for implementing a system with
a given scope, from existing data on completed projects, by plotting the contracted cost of actual
systems implementation against the number of end-users (used as a proxy for scale size of the
                                                                                                                                            81
system) that are connected to the system. (Figure 23).In this exercise it is necessary to use com-
parable numbers. Thus, the cost elements should cover the same elements for all projects, and if
this expense has been incurred in various phases of the project, say for pilot implementation and
rollout, then these costs should be summed.

We have done this for 10 World Bank financed IFMIS projects that involve implementation of
a COTS package and the results are shown in the attached diagram. Here we have plotted the
contracted costs covering the H/W, S/W, Implementation services, WAN/LAN networking and
training against number of COTS user licenses acquired (used as a proxy for end users).

It is possible to use this data to predict approximate costs for, say a 1000 User COTS implemen-
tation. For example, since the costs are represented by Y = 0.0096x + 4.74; if x = 1000, then
y = US $ 14.34 million (+ ∕ –) 20 percent.

Therefore, as a broad parameter it is safe to assume that implementation costs for a COTS imple-
mentation would be about $15,000 per user.




           Contracted Systems Implementation Costs Plotted Against Number of Users
Figure 23: 

                                  60
                                                                          y = 0.0096x + 4.7422
                                                                          R² = 0.9752                    Vietnam
Implementation Costs-$ millions




                                  50

                                  40
                                                                                 Pakistan
                                  30                     Indonesia


                                  20
                                      Azerbaijan          Kazakhstan
                                      Moldova
                                  10         Mongolia
                                  Albania
                                              Maldives
                                      Kyrgyz
                                   0
                                       0          1000      2000        3000          4000       5000         6000
                                                           Number of Users ( COTS licenses)

                                                              Series1        Linear (Series1)
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        The results of a comparable exercise for custom-developed implementations may not be as reli-
                        able, since the software development is often done by a combination of local government staff
                        and consultants, and the associated costs are not captured accurately over the long systems
                        development life cycle. In these cases, the implementation is often incremental and constantly
                        changing, with many iterations done over period of several years, with each iteration yielding a
                        slightly better functionality, eventually leading up to a working solution.

                        Recurrent Costs

                        Comparable data across several countries is not available for actual recurrent costs associated
                        with ongoing system operation and maintenance. An indication of the magnitude of the typical
                        recurrent costs that would be involved is given in Box 3. for the PIFRA project in Pakistan.
82
                        Project Scope

                        Initial projects in the centrally planned economies have focused on the implementation of Core
                        Treasury Reform and Functionality. As new institutional structures and reform measures have sta-
                        bilized newer projects have had a wider scope and include systems features to support upstream
                        and downstream features, such as budget preparation, human resource management, debt man-
                        agement, and auditing.

                        Technology Choices

                        In the 1990s, Treasury processes were still in transition. The major COTS packages had not tran-
                        sitioned to the public sector. There was a need to develop core functionality so that the reform
                        could start yielding results. Many countries therefore started out with the implementation of
                        interim custom developed systems. These were used as a means of firming up requirements—a
                        first step of a two-step transition. These have been or are now being replaced by COTS applica-
                        tions. New projects are mostly starting off with COTS software.

                        System Architecture

                        Telecommunications infrastructure was
                        not well developed in many countries in
                        the early nineties. Interim systems were        Box 3: Recurrent Costs – Actuals
                        first implemented on a distributed archi-
                        tecture, and then migrated to central-          Pakistan PIFRA – Approximate numbers
                        ized architecture as telecommunications         Item per annum	            US $ millions
                        infrastructure improved. All new systems
                                                                        Software license Costs 	       1.50
                        are being implemented on a centralized
                        architecture. New systems use web-based         Hardware replacement Costs	 1.00
                        versions of the application software.           POL/ Stationary 	              0.75
                                                                        Telecommunications	0.75
                        The increasing availability of open
                                                                        Specialist Staff costs	        0.75
                        source software has opened up another
                        set of possibilities. Open source software      Misc.	0.25
                        is widely used for middleware—operat-           Total	5.00
                        ing systems, application development            Investment Costs	          Approx. 35
                        tools—Linux, Java, etc. Application soft-
                                                                        million
                        ware built using these tools needs to be
                        investigated further for Treasury system        Recurrent costs are about 15% per annum
                        use.                                            of investment costs in this case.
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Implementation at the Sub-National Level

Implementation of IFMIS type systems has posed problems in many countries. There are signifi-
cant issues that impact the design and implementation of IFMIS at the subnational level that need
to be considered before making a recommendation.

The intergovernmental fiscal systems architecture of a country, especially in large federal countries
such as India or Brazil, determines the roles and responsibilities of the central, provincial and local
governments which, in turn, is relevant to decide on the relevance and design of an IFMIS.

Then there are technical issues such as – if the IFMIS is designed from a Central Government
perspective to aggregate expenditure figures, how useful is it for a local government’s fiscal man-
agement, since the functional requirements may be quite different?                                                          83
Finally, for some countries there are significant logistical issues. For example, how will an IFMIS
be implemented in a complex country such as India with 24 or 25 State Governments and more
than 10,000 local governments? Therefore issues relating to subnational governments need more
research and analysis.

Nevertheless, at there are some generic issues which can be discussed here.

•	   Sub-national levels of government normally like to be able to control payments without
     reference to a functionary of the center.
•	   Lower capacity for systems implementation exist at the sub-national level

The first set of issues needs to be addressed in the context of the intergovernmental fiscal sys-
tems architecture in place, as mentioned above. The solution to this problem has to be found in
the context of the local political economy and the relationships between the central and sub-
national governments.

The capacity problem can be encountered at both the second tier and lower levels of govern-
ment. Use of the Central System and Central Government Treasury offices for payment process-
ing can alleviate capacity constraints at sub-national level. However, care should be taken to
ensure that this system use is provided as a service rather than an attempt to control local govern-
ment budget execution by the center.

Two types of solutions are possible. First, it is possible to use of the same system across mul-
tiple levels of government. An alternative is to use common standards, COA and data exchange
protocols and different systems from those used at the national level. The advantages in using a
simpler solution at the lower levels of government will need to be balanced against the attendant
issues that come up with the use of multiple packages—especially in low capacity environments.
Some examples are:

Russia: The regional (oblast) treasuries are required to use the central system for payment pro-
cessing, but control is exercised by Local Governments. Moneys are banked in the central bank
but money is not co-mingled.

Ukraine and Kazakhstan: Central and Regional Governments use the Central Treasury system.
Moneys are banked in the Central Bank.

Pakistan: Central and Provincial governments are required to use the same system. Moneys are
banked at the Central bank/ National bank in separate accounts.
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        Implementation in Low Capacity Settings and in Island Economies

                        These projects often have the following characteristics:

                        •	   Basic institutions, systems and procedures do exist but are in need of repair.
                        •	   Small numbers of qualified staff in functional and technical areas—especially in government.
                        •	   Under-developed telecommunications infrastructure—low bandwidth
                        •	   Low capacity to sustain expensive projects

                        Often multiple donors/development partners are active and involved in implementing several
                        projects with different goals and objectives. It has been observed that in these settings emphasis
                        on policy reform issues is still paramount. In these settings also some of the institutions and struc-
84                      tures for budget execution may need to be set up afresh or repaired to remove aberrations that
                        may have crept in over time. But a more incremental approach may be called for while designing
                        both the policy framework and systems.

                        Keep it simple – Implement the basics first – Allen Schick
                        It should be noted that even in several major countries, the reform started with implementation
                        of software for core budget control and payment/receipt processing before moving on to support
                        line item budgeting.

                        The design lessons given above apply here also.

                        •	   Systems should be designed along functional and not organizational lines
                        •	   Define the contours of the system clearly to avoid duplicative investments—resist disparate
                             efforts to set up multiple systems along organizational lines

                        It is preferable to look for simpler off the shelf packages. Several are available on the market:
                        Free-Balance, Agresso, Navision, Technology-1, etc.

                        In the past many of these vendors have not responded to major ICB notices. It may be necessary
                        to try a Limited International Bidding notice. However, it should be assured that selected vendor
                        has or is willing to establish required support capability in-country or within easy access.

                        Systems implementation could start with a basic bespoke system that could be used to firm up
                        requirements. Centralized architecture is still the architecture of choice to the extent it is pos-
                        sible—but a country could start with a distributed architecture.

                        In most countries the telecommunications network has improved significantly over the last few
                        years and further improvements are planned over the next few years.



                        Island Economy Settings

                        In this case, normally a major part of the transactions in terms of volume and amounts of money
                        are carried out at the center with a smaller number of transactions at other sites. Therefore it is
                        preferable to set up a central system for the bulk of the transactions and locate it at the center
                        and set up off-line processing arrangements for remote sites if good telecommunications are
                        not available. Imprest accounts can be set up for these remote sites. Transactions from remote
                        stations will be entered in the system ex post at the time of recoupment of imprest. The Imprest
                        accounts could be managed manually or by a simpler/bespoke application.
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




The advantage of a centralized operation is that the numbers of technically trained staff is smaller
for a centralized architecture setting. Thus e.g. a core team is required at the center for software
maintenance.

It is advantageous to train a group of power users to act as change agents/ experts. As mentioned
earlier, most staff need to know only specific features of the system. Since more expertise is often
available in the private sector, it would be best to hire specialist IT staff on contract at private
sector salaries and hire international experts to work alongside local teams. One should try to
ensure that transfer of knowledge to local staff does take place, and gradually transfer responsi-
bilities to local staff.

Note: Several island economies in the Caribbean and South Pacific have made significant prog-
ress in implementing small off-the-shelf packages for core treasury functions and some fairly
                                                                                                                          85
complex systems have been successfully implemented in some low capacity environments. The
Smart Stream package, for example, is in use in the Caribbean while a number of similar small
packages are in use in the South Pacific Island Economies.
                                                                                          AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




X. From Core Treasury
    Systems to a
    Broader IFMIS:
    Some Sequencing
    Considerations                                                                                                            87


The basic elements of Treasury Reform are in place in many countries,
with a functioning Treasury Organization and a TSA. At least a basic,
interim Treasury System has been set up that enables the MOF to
exercise some degree to control on government financial resources.
In some countries, these arrangements are comprehensive; in others
their coverage is incomplete. In some countries, the interim systems
are proving inadequate in terms of capacity and functionality. They do
provide basic transaction processing and control facilities, but lack the
full functionality required for budget execution, including the capacity
to provide overall information required for economic management.
Some Governments feel that the scope and coverage of the systems needs to be is extended to
upstream and downstream areas of the GFM cycle such as Budget Preparation, Payroll and Posi-
tion Management, Debt Management, Auditing. There is also a desire to introduce performance
criteria in budgeting and to move from accounting on a purely cash basis to more advanced
standards, including elements of accrual accounting. This could entail significant changes in the
systems. Figure 24 illustrates a full IFMIS and its principal users.

In this section we will discuss possible sequencing options for further reform and related issues.

The diagram in Figure 25 shows that IFMIS implementation can be viewed as a set of layers with
the basic transaction data and the systems modules that are used to process this data, as compo-
nents of the first layer. On top of this layer there is a financial operations layer that enables produc-
tion of budget execution reports, determination of the cash position in Government bank accounts,
the ways and means position, and production of monthly financial statements. Finally, on top of
the financial operations layer is the management and statutory reporting layer, which enables pro-
duction of overall fiscal reports, audited financial statements and statutory financial reports.

In practice, it is necessary to first have the transaction processing layer in place to be able to get
good and credible information to be used for financial operations and for management reporting.
Other layers would be built on top of this layer.

The implementation of the transaction processing layer is the most difficult and time consum-
ing and the quality of information available from the financial operations and the management
                                                                                                                             88
Figure 24: An IFMIS and its Principal Users


                                      Functional Processes for Government Fiscal Management and Information Systems Architecture


                                                                                         IFMIS

        MOF-Line Ministries                Macro Economic Framework                                                                Previous
                                                                              Systems for Macro Economic Forecasting
        Budget Preparation                                                                                                         years
                                                                                                                                   Actuals
                                                                                    Budget Preparation Systems                                       Vendors/
  MOF —Treasury-Line Ministries                                                                                                                     Employees
                                                                             Capital—Recurrent-Personnel Complement
  Budget Execution, Accounting,
     Cash Management and                     Treasury System                                       Approved Budget                                           Payments
         Fiscal Reporting
                                               Budget Management & Fiscal Reporting                     General Ledger                             Central Bank
                                                                                                                                                       TSA
     MOF—Establishment Dept.-
  Accountant General Establishment,                                                                                                           Taxes Duties
                                                                                             Payments                   Receipts
    Payroll, Pensions Management                Procurement            Commitment
                                                                                            Management                 Management
                                                                                                                                                    Tax Payers
                                                                                               Cash                        Bank
                                                                    Fixed Assets
                                                                                            Management                 Reconciliation

                                                              Payroll Pension payments                               Debt commitments           Loan/aid
                                                                                                                                                                        A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




     Debt Management Agency                                                                                          and payments               Receipts
     Debt and Aid Management                       Position/Payroll/Pensions Systems               Debt/Aid Management System
                                                                                                                                                      Donors
                                           Loan Agreements
         Tax-Customs and
        Excise Departments                                                                            Revenue Administration                        Tax Assessments
      Revenue Administration                                                                        (Taxes and Customs) Systems
                                                                                                                           Revenue Receipts
                                                                                     Auditing Systems                        Information
     Auditor General Auditing
Figure 25: Treasury Systems – A Layered Implementation Approach

   Government Budget Execution/Treasury Systems
        A Layered Implementation Approach




       Economic Management/Statutory                            Overall Fiscal Reports and Audited                           Management/Statutory
            Reporting/Auditing                                    Statutory Financial Statement                                Reporting Layer



      Budgetary Control                                          Budget Execution Reports Cash
                                                                                                                                          Financial
      Accounting, Cash                                          Position, Ways and means position
                                                                                                                                       Operations Layer
        Management                                                 Monthly Financial statement


                               Budget   Commitment  Payments   Receipts                    General       Cash        Bank                   Transaction
      Systems Modules        Management Management Management Management                   Ledger     Management Reconciliation           Processing Layer


                       Budget Apportionments                                    Vendor Invoices, Goods Receipts,
                                                       Commitments,             Payment requests Debt servicing         Tax and non tax
     Transaction        Allotments, Releases
                                                      Purchase Orders              payments Payroll, pension             Receipts, Bank
        Data          Transfers, Supplementary
                                                         Contracts                    payments, Subsidies                  balances
                               Budget

     Systems Users/Data Providers

       Ministry of
     Finance Budget            Treasury          Line Ministries and    Debt Management       Revenue Agencies       External and             TSA Bank
       Department                                  Spending Units         Department                               Internal Auditors
                                                                                                                                                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                      89
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        reporting layer will depend on the quality, timeliness and comprehensiveness of the transaction
                        data that is captured by the transaction processing layer. Once a comprehensive transaction pro-
                        cessing layer has been set up the implementation of the other layers is relatively quicker and easier.

                        Systems Module Sequencing

                        The information architecture for GFM described in chapter II specifies the overall systems
                        framework and the information flows between the modules. As mentioned earlier for practical
                        system implementation, it is essential that various system elements be developed in a modular
                        way and are integrated in the sense that they can share and exchange data, For this it is nec-
                        essary that there is a clear understanding of which functional organizations have the primary
                        responsibility for collecting and maintaining the databases related to specific data entities.
90                      Other participants need to share this data according to specified security protocols for data
                        access and exchange.

                        Systems sequencing is important for a successful outcome of a systems implementation program.
                        This is discussed below.

                        In order to achieve significant outcomes such as good budgetary control and cash management,
                        it is necessary to first implement modules to cater to Core Budget Execution Processes, that is, to
                        capture payments and receipts transactions, across government, before going on to other non-
                        core elements, like fixed assets management, HR management.

                        In this stage one has to ensure comprehensiveness of transaction capture. Transactions related to
                        all budgetary, extra-budgetary and internally generated revenues are routed through the system
                        in ex-ante mode and no payment can be made outside the system. Individual line ministries
                        should not develop separate payment systems and should use the central Treasury system for all
                        payments and receipts.

                        It is most effective to first implement the core system in Treasury-centric mode in which spend-
                        ing units are required to bring/transmit via a web portal expenditure and receipts transactions
                        to designated treasury offices, and subsequently to decentralize transaction entry to spending
                        units—if necessary and/or possible.

                        Non-Core systems modules should be built around this Treasury system and should share data-
                        bases with it and not duplicate the functionality of the core system. Thus, to start with, budget
                        preparation can be done outside the system or by another system. The final approved budget can
                        then be loaded in the system and used to control expenditure.

                        An important point to be understood here is that ideally there should be a seamless interface
                        between the budget preparation module and the budget execution modules, which means that
                        they should share the system databases. However, if these two modules need to have data
                        transfer between them, then there are a few prerequisites for these two modules. First, the two
                        should use the same budget classification structure and COA Second, after the budget has been
                        finalized in the budget preparation module, it should be loaded into the budget execution mod-
                        ule and all in-year changes to the budget, including budget releases, virements, and changes
                        need to be made directly in the budget execution module. Third, the databases of the budget
                        execution module are the primary databases of the IFMIS; all reporting should be done from
                        these databases.

                        Payroll and pension management systems should be interfaced with the Treasury system. The
                        payroll and pension systems can calculate the individual salary and allowance and pension
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




payments for employees and retirees. But all payments should be routed through the Treasury
system, which should perform a budget check before releasing a unit’s payroll for payment. The
payroll system should use the position management system as a control system to ensure that
payments are made only against authorized and budgeted positions so that the payroll does not
fail the budget check at the time of payment.

Debt service payments can be calculated by the debt management system. All debt/grant receipts
should be recorded in the Treasury system at the time of receipt. All debt service payments
should also be routed though the Treasury system, and not made directly by the MOF through
separate instructions to the TSA Bank.

Revenue receipts need to be deposited directly to the TSA Bank account and recorded in the
appropriate sub account of the TSA. The amounts recorded in the TSA represent the official
                                                                                                                          91
receipt figure. Revenue agencies need to reconcile the amounts with the figures from taxes and
duties that their systems show as assessments.



Some Considerations for Implementing Advanced Budgeting
Methodologies
The implementation of Medium Term Budgetary Framework (MTBF) and Medium Term Expendi-
ture Framework (MTEF) requires that the Treasury system provide access to budget and expendi-
ture data for more than one year and that some controls and reporting is done against the three
year totals rather than individual years. The Treasury system’s horizon can be expanded to a
multi-year time frame to accommodate this.

Program budgeting requires that budget resources are allocated to Government programs which
can span many departments. This can again be accommodated by including program codes in
the Budget classification structure.

While implementing such a system, one must specify the part of the program resources that are
allocated to the participating departments and the economic items on which these resources
will be spent. If this is not done, and control is exercised only by program, then during the year
a first–come, first-served situation will develop. The departments that are the first to draw down
these resources would be able to get more than their anticipated share, while those trying to do
so later in the year would face shortages as program budget limits are reached.

On the other hand, if resources are allocated at too detailed a level such as activities and tasks,
this increases the volume of the transactions associated with budget apportionment and allot-
ment, and raises budget releases and transfers to unmanageable levels. In these cases, it may be
best to allocate resources at a higher level such as for a program or sub program, but track the
costs at a more detailed level such as activities and tasks. This too will require that the activity
and task code are correctly coded on each transaction and recorded, since the transactions are
posted by the system.

Performance budgeting requires that budget formulation also specifies performance indicators
and that costs incurred are allocated to these indicators. It is obvious that such a system can only
work if accurate cost data has been booked in the General Ledger. Implementing a performance
based budgeting system without having the capacity in place to book accurate cost data is there-
fore quite meaningless.

A possible IFMIS sequencing scenario is shown in Figure 26.
                                                                                                           92
Figure 26: IFMIS Sequencing – One Possible Option


                                                          IFMIS—Sequencing


  Set up Policy Framework                                      Budget management law/Treasury decree that provides a legal Basis for Operation


                                                               Banking arrangements: Consolidation of bank accounts in a Treasury Single
                                                               Account (TSA) at the central bank

                                                               Institutional Arrangements: Treasury organization; Re-engineered Payment and
                                                               Receipt processes

                                                               Chart of Accounts and Budget Classiﬁcation structure (BCS) conformant with GFS;
                                                               Uniformity between CoA and BCS

  IFMIS Phase I:                                               Includes: Budget Management; Commitment Management Recoding all
  . Implement Core Functionality for Budget Execution          commitments relating to intended government expenditures, Payment
                                                               Management-Processing all government expenditures relating to: Procurement of
                                                               goods and services from current/capital budgets; Salary and Pension Payments;
                                                               Debt servicing payments; Subsidies/Fiscal transfers to sub-national levels or SOEs;
                                                               Receipts Management; Accounting; Cash Management; Fiscal Reporting

                                                               Load Budget from Legacy system; Apply Budget and commitment control;
                                                               Comprehensive transaction entry on ex-ante basis; First Centralize then
                                                               de-centralize

  IFMIS Phase II:
                                                                                                                                                     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




  . Implement Payroll/Pensions Systems;                        Includes: Position management, Employee records, Calculation of Spending Unit
  .                                                            Payrolls, Employee entilements, Provident Fund Accounting; Calculation of
    Interface with Dept Management and Revenue Systems;        pension entilements for Government retirees
  . Assets Management Systems

  IFMIS Phase III:                                             Calculation of program and project costs; Compilation od budget proposals from
  . Implement Budget Preparation Systems                       Spending agencies; Printing Budget Documents

  IFMIS Phase IV:
  .                                                            Auditing—Use of Transaction data in IFMIS data bases for auditing
    Implement Systems to support Auditing
                                                                                            AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Sequencing Reforms

The following extract from a presentation by Mr. Jack Diamond of the IMF and some advice by
Professor Allen Schick of the University of Maryland, lays out a possible set of practical sequenc-
ing scenarios.

If we look at advanced countries we see a progression in objectives:

•	    First, financial compliance = emphasis on inputs
•	    Second, aggregate fiscal discipline = emphasis on fiscal aggregates over time.
•	    Third, efficiency/effectiveness = emphasis on outputs and outcomes

It is also observed that as each new objective was added, it did not replace the previous one and                               93
the reform process took time

The first priority is to create a PFM system that delivers financial compliance/fiscal discipline e.g.
Comprehensive input-based budget, delivered as approved, a TSA, commitment control, regular
calendar, timely year-end accounts etc. Once achieved, the PFM system is developed further to
adjust fiscal aggregates to ensure macroeconomic stability/sustainability—the ability to do mac-
roeconomic forecasting, monitor and adjust fiscal aggregates, set fiscal policy in medium term
budget framework, etc. Having achieved this, a move can be made to getting better value for
money spent, for example, by introducing strategic planning, program budgeting, performance
indicators to monitor and evaluate, and more decentralized management.

What not to do in the early stages – Allen Schick20
According to Professor Allen Schick areas that should be left until later in the reform process are:
program budgeting, accrual accounting, and decentralization.

It has been observed in many developing countries, mainly in Africa, that foreign consultants
have in the 1990s and 2000s recommended the implementation of advanced models for budget
preparation, management and accounting, such as performance based budgeting and accrual
accounting.

This was so, despite the non-existence at the time of a basic budget execution system which
could capture costs by line item and organization unit. Such recommendations have led to
wasteful investments that have had very limited outcomes and which should be avoided. This
situation has improved as basic transaction processing systems are being progressively imple-
mented in African countries.




20	 Schick,   A., 1998. Why Most Developing Countries Should Not Try New Zealand Reforms.
                                                                                     AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




XI. Lessons learned
The following important lessons can be derived from previous systems
implementation experiences.

Hierarchy of Requirements

In order of importance for successful Treasury reform, requirements can be listed as follows:

•	   Political will to implement sound PFM policies and procedures, and support within govern-                           95
     ment—the MOF and others—for reform measures
•	   Realistic Budget Formulation
•	   Institutional arrangements to implement Fiscal Control
•	   Control of Treasury over all Government Financial Resources – Consolidation of Bank
     Accounts in a TSA
•	   Routing of Transactions through a Treasury office/ Treasury staff
•	   HR Capacity within implementing agencies to implement reform measures and associated
     systems
•	   Appropriate Technology to support transaction processing and data management
•	   Application Software which can reflect functional processes
•	   Technology Platform to implement Software, Hardware, Networking, Middleware

It is important to note that emphasis on policy reform issues is paramount. Some of the institu-
tions and structures for budget execution may need to be set up afresh or repaired to remove
aberrations that may have crept in over time. If deficiencies in the basic legal and institutional
framework are not repaired, even very large investments in systems may not yield desired results.
The technical aspects figure lower down in his hierarchy, whereas sometimes, much more time
and effort is spent on arguing about the technology choices than those elements in the hierarchy
that are more important.

As is described in the case studies in Annex I and mentioned previously, the setting up of the
Treasury organization and introduction of a TSA has had a very significant impact on the effec-
tiveness of fiscal control and cash management in many countries, even with the quite rudimen-
tary systems that were implemented in the initial stages to kickstart the reform program. Ukraine,
Russia, Kazakhstan and Nepal are good examples.

On the other hand, in some countries very significant investments in modern technology have not
been able to tackle the basic fiscal problems confronting Government, since the policy frame-
work and institutional structures required for effective fiscal control have not been reformed. In
fact, setting up such a system without adjusting the policy and institutional architecture may well
result in a situation where the system increases the speed of the hemorrhage on government fis-
cal resources instead of controlling it.


Strong Government and MOF Commitment

This has been a key factor for the success of Reform Projects. Since these projects can take over
7–8 years or longer for completion, it is necessary to maintain this commitment over a long
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        period which can extend beyond one country election cycle. It has been found that this com-
                        mitment can be achieved better if projects are framed as public expenditure management (PEM)
                        systems reform, which is normally high on the agenda of most politicians and governments rather
                        than just accounting systems reform, which has a more specialized and limited focus and may
                        not figure as prominently on the agenda of political leaders.

                        Senior level policy makers in MOF and donor organizations also relate to this better. Linkages
                        can then be established between project and requirements under policy based lending to ensure
                        that senior government functionaries continue to take interest in ensuring that project milestones
                        are met.



96                      Continuity in the Bank’s Project Team

                        In many countries, Government functionaries are transferred and/or replaced quite frequently,
                        and the membership of the Government’s counterpart team changes several times during the
                        course of the project. The adverse effect of this change is compounded if the Bank team’s com-
                        position also changes simultaneously. It has been observed that when some key members of the
                        Bank team who were involved in the design of a project continue on the team until the project’s
                        completion, this contributes significantly to achievement of project development objectives.



                        Project Design

                        It is important that project design be driven by functional rather than technical considerations.
                        It is necessary to focus priorities on reforming the budget execution processes, setting up the
                        appropriate institutions and their associated systems and procedures.

                        Some key implementation pointers regarding systems design are:

                        •	   Systems should be designed along functional and not organizational lines.
                        •	   Define the contours of the system clearly to avoid duplicative investments
                        •	   The Budget Department, Treasury, and Line Ministries should use the same system to pro-
                             cess their transactions, and should share databases
                        •	   Budget Preparation and Budget Execution should use the same Chart of Accounts. The eco-
                             nomic classification segment should be a subset of the Accounts line item segment.
                        •	   Transactions should be captured in real time as they occur.
                        •	   Financial controls should be applied in ex-ante mode to all transactions processed by the
                             system. For example, checking on availability of funds for budgeted expenditures prior to
                             committing funds or making payment.
                        •	   Ex-post transaction posting should be avoided.
                        •	   No expenditure transaction should be processed outside the system. Data is captured only
                             once as an accounting transaction progresses through the system. The scope of the sys-
                             tem should include: Budget Funds – Payroll, Debt, Subsidies, Fiscal transfers, EBFs, Donor
                             Funds and technical revenues
                        •	   To reinforce the requirement of comprehensiveness of transaction processing, it may be use-
                             ful to mention here that there have been cases where very significant investments have been
                             made in a system which also works quite well for a subset of the total government financial
                             resources—the budget resources. However transactions related to all or many extra-budget-
                             ary funds (EBFs) and internally-generated funds/technical revenues are processed outside
                             the system and lodged in bank accounts outside the TSA. Since these funds constitute a
                             major chunk of the government’s resources, the basic objectives of fiscal control and good
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




     cash management have not been fully realized. In effect, a $50 million modern system is
     being used to control 40% or less of the of the total government resources. This expenditure
     could be considered at least a partially wasted investment unless these gaps are filled.
•	   The IFMIS databases should be treated as the primary source for financial reporting within
     Government – There should be no second set of books.



Business Process Engineering

It needs to be recognized that the primary processes that need to be reengineered before systems
implementation are the processes related to ensure good fiscal control and cash management.

For this, the roles and responsibilities of the department of budget and that of the Treasury need
                                                                                                                          97
to be defined and a treasury organization with branches across the country, needs to be set up.

All spending unit bank accounts need to be closed and all government financial resources
brought under the control of the Treasury and placed in a TSA at the Central Bank.

The major business process re-engineering required is that the transaction now needs to be
routed from the spending units to the Treasury office instead of directly from the SU to the Bank.

Secondly all stages of the transaction needs to be recorded in the system in ex-ante mode, as
mentioned above.

Streamlining of all other processes, e.g. for transaction approval within a SU, or subsequently
within the treasury would improve efficiency but are not really pre-requisites of systems
implementation.

In fact most COTS packages already provide for standard best practice processes and it may not
be a bad idea to actually use these as a starting point unless there is a specific legal requirement
that needs to be fulfilled.

In the case of several projects it was found after embarking on a costly and time consuming
detailed BPR exercise that 90% of the business processes offered by the COTS solution were in
accordance with the results of the detailed BP engineering exercise which took a very long time
and significant costs to complete.

A lesson from this experience is the need to distinguish clearly between which part of the busi-
ness process re-engineering is actually required prior to systems implementation, and which part
can be best addressed by using the processes incorporated in the COTS system in use and which
can be adjusted as systems implementation proceeds.



Importance of Internal Control Procedures and Information Security

It is important to note that adhering to prescribed internal control procedures normally specified
for financial transactions continues to be critically important as these systems transition from a
manual to an automated platform.

As countries started implementing these systems, there have been cases where lax internal con-
trols have led to significant fraudulent activity. There was nothing wrong with the application
software or other elements of the technology platform in use; the fraudulent activity was simply
     A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                        the result of breach of internal control procedures. Strict adherence to these controls is necessary
                        to mitigate fraudulent and unauthorized transactions.


                        Complexity of Charts of Accounts

                        As mentioned earlier, the design of the Budget classification structure is determined by the infor-
                        mation requirements. In principle, this structure should at least have the following elements:
                        Function, Organization and spending unit, object of expenditure (economic) classifications.
                        Function codes and the economic classification codes should be consistent with the IMF GFS.
                        Also the economic classification codes should be a subset of the account codes used in the Chart
                        of Accounts (COA) to ensure integration of budgeting and accounting.
98
                        Additionally, codes such as source of funds, program and project codes could be added to track
                        expenditures by source of fund and for specific programs and projects. Normally it is possible to
                        breakdown the organization codes to a level where a specific unit is carrying out a specific sub
                        function. If this is done then it may not be necessary to specify the function sub function codes
                        in the BCS and COA but use a cross walk table to report on expenditures/ receipts by function/
                        sub-function.

                        The temptation to have an overly complex COA/BCS, which enables allocating every transaction
                        to the lowest level, needs to be balanced by the fact that the complete COA/BCS will need to be
                        coded on every transaction. This is cumbersome and can lead to allocation errors. Therefore, a
                        balance needs to be struck between the level of detail required on the transaction and the qual-
                        ity of the data entry that is possible in a given circumstance. It has been observed that an overly
                        complex COA could also increase transition processing times on the server, especially when the
                        number of active users is also large.



                        Implementation Prerequisites

                        A Good Quality Telecommunications Network

                        Minimum bandwidth of 128kbs is an important prerequisite for IFMIS implementations to enable
                        remote sites to connect directly to the central server. Many countries now have implemented
                        or are in the process of implementing good wide area telecommunications networks covering
                        the major cities, town and districts where the remote IFMIS sites would likely be located. This is
                        therefore becoming less of a constraint to system implementation.

                        Availability of Technical Expertise

                        An IFMIS type system is an integrated government-wide system with multiple users. The Trea-
                        sury and its subordinate offices are responsible for the bulk of the transaction processing that is
                        carried out through the system. End-user groups upstream and outside the Treasury such as the
                        MOF and the Budget administrators, Line Departments/Ministries also use the system for the
                        performance of their day to day financial operations.

                        Usually, a central organization is responsible for maintenance of the integrity of the databases
                        and for ensuring smooth and uninterrupted operation of the systems network. End-user techni-
                        cal support is also provided through this organization. The functional responsibilities of such a
                        central technical organization are detailed in Annex IV.
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




This central organization is required to be staffed largely by technical experts. It has been
observed that in many countries the technical skills required for these jobs are not ordinarily
available within government at present and are unlikely to be available in the future at the nor-
mal government salary scales. Pay and remuneration in Government for technical staff for such
an organization, coupled with the lack of career prospects for technical IT staff within Govern-
ment, has been a major area of concern for sustainability of IFMIS projects. Examples are, Paki-
stan, Maldives, Nepal and others.

The IFMIS is an operational mission-critical financial system used by all government account-
ing and budgeting entities within government for the day-to-day performance of their func-
tions. Therefore, any disruption in the operation of the system can cause significant disruption
in the Government’s financial operations. The setting up and staffing of the supporting orga-
nization is therefore critical for the long term operational sustainability of the system and the
                                                                                                                          99
continuity of the Government’s budget management and financial management operations
and reporting.

It is therefore necessary that Government plans and decides on the organizational structure of the
central institution to be set up to perform the key technical tasks associated with the operation
and maintenance of the IFMIS system and develop strategies to attract and retain the technical
skills required in this unit.

Retention of highly skilled technical personnel within Government is a common problem faced
by many governments and options chosen by countries include:

•	   Option A: Set up an organizational unit within Government, staffed with employees paid
     at special market-based salary scales (for external personnel as well as qualified civil ser-
     vants), designed to attract professionals on long term contracts.
•	   Option B: Hire the technical skills directly from the market on year to year contracts and
     manage them through regular mainstreamed civil servants. This is essentially a short term
     measure usually adopted in development phases of some projects such as during the Paki-
     stan PIFRA FABS implementation, but may not be suitable as a long term solution. Without
     good in-house technical management expertise, the tendency may be to hire short term
     consultants to fulfill immediate needs, limiting the development of a long term vision/plans
     for systems and technology platform and requirements. This can leave serious gaps in the
     skills/expertise required to run a mission critical system in a stable mode and plan for its
     future growth and enhancement.
•	   Option C: Outsource the technical maintenance and operation of the systems to specialized
     firms. Used mainly by countries such as the USA who have a developed market for such
     services and firms who regularly cater to these needs. This option may be the easiest to imple-
     ment but could be the most expensive since firms charge a significant overhead for providing
     the technical skills and expertise required. This option also requires good in-house technical
     contract management capacity and consideration of issues such as information security.
           In this context another option that reduces the need for technical staff within the gov-
     ernment agency is now becoming commonly available. With the advent of cloud technol-
     ogy it is now possible to house the primary and / or Disaster recovery servers on external
     sites. Many firms host such “cloud services”. However, application development and main-
     tenance continue to be the agency’s responsibility. This option has the additional advantage
     that the government agency is freed from the responsibility of periodically upgrading or
     replacing the technology in response to changing needs or outdated technology since such
     firms offering such services can supply the necessary computing power, memory and disk
     storage and bandwidth on an as required basis.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Option A would be the preferred option for many developing countries since it would build per-
                         manent in-house capacity within government and provide a career path for government employ-
                         ees appointed to the organization. Government should develop job descriptions for the positions
                         listed in the chart and, more importantly, specify the technical qualifications and experience that
                         are required for the positions. Officers within the government who fulfill these technical quali-
                         fication and experience criteria could be selected for these positions. The key requirement is to
                         match the skills of individuals with the required skills and experience profile of the positions.

                         It would be highly desirable for Government to have the organization structure reviewed by an
                         external consultant (engaged on a short term local consultancy). The review would validate the
                         requirements for the central technical organization, ensure that it caters for all aspects and tech-
                         nical requirements for setting up the organization to run the mission-critical systems and help
                         Government in obtaining the necessary endorsements from the MOF.
100

                         Training

                         Training needs can be divided in to several categories:

                         •	   Technical training in the application software, system software databases, networking sys-
                              tems LAN/WAN, information security systems, selected for systems implementation.
                         •	   End user training in the use of systems,
                         •	   Training of managers in the use of information available from the systems databases.

                         Arrangements need to be made for imparting training to staff in each of these categories. Tech-
                         nical training will need to be provided for a select group of technical staff who are or will be
                         responsible for the maintenance and operation of the technical aspects of the system. This
                         training is usually available through courses offered by the vendor of the hardware and software
                         tools that are acquired for system implementation. Training could be expensive but is readily
                         available.

                         Under the second category needs the most attention, because large numbers of staff will need
                         to be trained to operate and manage the new system. It is this category of training that needs
                         the most attention. The large numbers involved can appear be overwhelming, and needs to be
                         properly planned so as not to seriously disrupt ongoing regular activities handled by staff. Many
                         governments have training institutions which have been used successfully to impart training. It is
                         important that the training program is matched to requirements.

                         It should be noted that most staff need to know only specific features of the system, and training,
                         at least in the initial tranche, can be limited to those features. Training should be coordinated
                         closely with implementation plans and focused to specific requirements of a given site and
                         should be imparted just before site implementation. The greater majority of staff need to know
                         only specific features of the system and training, at least in the initial tranche, can be limited to
                         these features. It is important to set up a help desk, hand holding clinics, and to train a group
                         of power users thoroughly who can be used subsequently be deployed as trainers or technical
                         resource persons for other staff.

                         Experience has shown that that even in situations where staff have had little or no previous
                         exposure to computer-based systems, operational end-user staff have readily transitioned to the
                         use of these systems. In Pakistan, for example, it was observed that during the initial stages of the
                         FABS implementation under the PIFRA program, staff who had spent all their lives using manual
                         systems for accounting in the office of the Accountant General, adapted to the use of the new
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




SAP system easily and quickly progressed to the power user stage where they could impart train-
ing to other staff.

Further, use of a centralized architecture ensured that the most specialized technical staff such
as database administrators, and systems programmers need only be stationed at the center where
the server was located.



Change Management

Several types of change management initiatives may be necessary. First, implementation of such
systems is often resisted by staff who considers them to be a threat to their jobs. This resistance
often comes from staff responsible for operating the legacy systems. To overcome such opposi-
                                                                                                                            101
tion from vested interests, MOF Management must be fully convinced of the advantages of the
new system. They will then have to assure the affected staff that their jobs will change but not be
eliminated, and explain as well as lead the transition process.

The second type of resistance comes from staff who are used to doing their regular work in a
given way and are reluctant to change. This resistance can be overcome by good training and
some handholding during the transition phase. An important aspect here is to ensure that that
staff in the implementing agencies recognize the inevitability of this change. The MOF manage-
ment has a major role to play here. For example, for salaries, it should be emphasized that the
only way a payment will be processed is through the system, and only those staff will be paid
whose data is on the payroll file. Similarly, all transactions from revenue agencies would hence-
forth be processed through the system.

Despite initial resistance, it is often surprising to see how quickly staff adapt to the changed
environment once the rationale and inevitability are clarified. In order to reduce the pain of the
change, governments need to take special measures that as the system roll out occurs handhold-
ing support from super users, “cheat sheets” and more formal training are available to staff as
they transition to the new system.

Resistance could also come from areas where corruption thrives, such as under chaotic systems.
This needs to be met with resolve and a firm hand from the MOF management. We should also
note that sometimes there is lack of incentive for change in a civil service setting. Bureaucracies
are normally risk averse. It is therefore necessary to share with senior staff as well as rank and file
examples about where new systems have successfully been installed and operated.

Plan for Realistic Time Frames for Project Execution

The whole process of setting up the legal and institutional framework, systems design, procure-
ment and implementation can easily take 8–10 years as mentioned earlier. Sustaining manage-
ment support over long periods can be a problem. Sometimes a linkage to IMF program and/ or
SAL operations has often been used to reinforce commitment. Adopting a two-step implementa-
tion strategy, in which interim technical solutions have been implemented to support the reforms,
followed by full function systems, has proved useful in some cases.

Resist the Temptation to Blame the Technology and Start Afresh in Mid-Stream of an
Implementation Effort

In several Bank projects, unsatisfactory or partially satisfactory outcomes are often blamed com-
pletely on technical failures of the system. The most commonly identified culprits are choice of
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         technology or faulty design. Recommendations are then made to change the technology plat-
                         form underlying the system or to embark on a complete redesign to solve the problems being
                         encountered. Such recommendations are often made after a very significant amount of time,
                         effort and financial resources have already been spent on installing and operating the system.
                         Cases in point are:

                         •	   The Pakistan PIFRA system, where a recommendation was made by external advisors that
                              the systems implementation effort, which had already been completed in two out of four
                              provinces, and was ongoing in the remaining two should be stopped midway, a complete
                              redesign be undertaken, and the software platform changed from SAP to a local custom
                              developed package.
                         •	   A second example is that of Zambia, where external advisors recommended that a systems
                              implementation exercise which had run into contractual problems with the contractor, be
102
                              stopped and a review be conducted, including a review of the application software plat-
                              form (SAP) which was deemed to be too complicated for implementation in Zambia
                                   This recommendation was made notwithstanding the fact that SAP was already in use
                              in Zambia for running the Government’s payroll system, and was the software platform
                              being used by the Revenue Administration Agency for the Tax system.

                         In these cases, such a course of action is incorrect and, if adopted, highly wasteful. Such recom-
                         mendations are often the result of a lack of understanding of systems-related issues by the staff
                         carrying out the evaluation or are motivated by political rather than technical reasons.

                         It must be understood that the Government/MOF and related agencies spend a very significant
                         amount of political capital to embark on a reform of the public expenditure management system
                         after overcoming resistance from vested interests who are benefitting from the current situation.
                         The process of diagnosing the problems that reform would deal with, and systems design are com-
                         plex. After completion a consensus needs to be reached amongst all stakeholders before systems
                         procurement and implementation can commence. The next stage, systems selection and procure-
                         ment of the contractor and the technology platform, are by themselves a time-consuming task
                         that often takes 1–2 years, if everything goes well. At the completion of each stage the Govern-
                         ment and its donor partners review and sign off on the results. The first 9–12 months of the actual
                         implementation stage are spent on configuring the application software and testing it to ensure a
                         match with functional requirements. It is only after a pilot site implementation is complete and
                         signed off that systems rollout can commence. This last process can take several iterations, where
                         corrections are made to the systems configuration, before the pilot is declared successful.

                         Therefore, it is highly unlikely that the choice of the technology would be grossly inappropriate in
                         terms of a complete mismatch between the sizing required and chosen, or in terms of the ability
                         of the application software to replicate functional processes, at this stage of the implementation.

                         Technology choices are often not the primary problem. This is so since in most professionally-
                         managed World Bank financed projects, technology choices are made by professional technical
                         staff or consultants. Technology choices consist of scalable hardware and software technology
                         platforms. The application software is normally chosen after a careful evaluation process where
                         both scale size of the system required and its functionality are matched with available options by
                         qualified consultants and government staff.

                         Faulty design can occur as a result of an incorrect or incomplete understanding of functional
                         processes by the computer professionals configuring the application software and this can lead
                         to problems. This can be resolved by involving staff from the functional areas in the design
                         team who are familiar with the full scope and purpose of functional procedures that are being
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




automated. In any case, these types of errors can be corrected easily without changing the tech-
nology platform or embarking on a complete redesign. This even includes situations when a
complete reconfiguration of the application software is required.

In cases where the system is already in the rollout stage, implementing a recommendation to start
afresh with a new technology platform would therefore be highly wasteful in terms of time and
resources. It could well mean losing several years of effort and several million dollars of invest-
ment and the results after implementing this recommendation would be unpredictable. In fact,
technical failures of systems implementation initiatives are more often than not due to a combina-
tion of failures of relationships between participating institutions and technical reasons. Therefore,
it is necessary to diagnose causes of systems failures objectively—whether they are technical or
institutional and take appropriate remedial actions instead of blaming it on a failure of technology.
This is important since merely carrying out a technical fix will, in these circumstances, not solve
                                                                                                                            103
the problem unless accompanying institutional issues are also analyzed and corrected.
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




XII. Concluding
      Remarks
In conclusion, it is important to realize that an IFMIS type system is not a panacea to all of
Government’s financial problems. These problems are often a result of the prevailing state of
governance and the political economy which constrains corrective action even after the issues
have been clearly identified.

Setting up PFM information systems is a necessary pre-requisite, even essential, for improving                             105
budget management, but is not sufficient. For significant outcomes to be achieved many other
areas of governance need to be addressed in addition to PFM system issues.

Resolution of governance, political economy and institutional issues requires strong Govern-
ment commitment and a will to reform. Technical inputs such as introduction of a state of the art
IFMIS system only provides government with a set of tools to manage its financial resources. The
outcomes will ultimately depend on whether and how well the tool is used.

In practice, it is found that these tools are often used quite effectively by agencies responsible
for the day-to-day transaction processing and other routine financial operations of government
simply because it is not possible to perform these functions without some degree of automation,
in view of the large transition volumes involved and dispersed nature of the sites where these
operations are carried out. At this level, the systems are in effect integrated with the day to day
operations and these operations can be disrupted severely if there is a disruption in the systems
operation. Therefore most governments quickly recognize that it is critical to keep the systems
operational.

Such systems are often less effectively integrated in the performance of higher level strategic
functions—budget policy formulation and other related functions—where decisions are not just
based on cost effectiveness and efficiency, but are also determined by the political mandate of
the government and the needs of the country. The information provided by the systems is just one
of many inputs that finance managers require to formulate policy and make strategic resource
allocation decisions. This, by itself, is not disruptive to system implementation. It just determines
the limits on the scope of operation of the system.

However, it is disruptive when government agencies try to bypass normal systems operations
to cater to special situations dictated by the political economy. These need to be identified and
corrected immediately since they would otherwise limit the comprehensiveness of and disrupt
the basic integrity of the systems databases. Issues such as these are more difficult to resolve than
technical issues.
                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




References
Allen, Richard and Tommasi, D. (eds.) 2001. Managing Public Expenditure:– A Reference Book
    for Transition Countries. OECD-SIGMA Report. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Dener, C., J. A.Watkins and W. L. Dorotinsky. 2011. Financial Management Information Systems:
   25 Years of World Bank Experience on What Works and What Doesn’t. Washington, DC:
   World Bank.
Diamond, J. 2013. Background Paper 1: Sequencing PFM Reforms. Retrieved November 11,
   2013,     from   https://pefa.org/sites/pefa.org/files/v13-Sequencing_PFM_Reforms_-Back-
   ground_Paper_1_(Jack_Diamond__Jan__2013)__1.pdf                                                                   107
Diamond, J. 2010. Presentation on Sequencing PFM Reforms; delivered at OECD seminar.
Diamond, J., and Pokar Khemani, 2005. Introducing Financial Management Information systems
   in Developing countries. OECD Journal on Budgeting, 5(3), 97.
Hashim, A. and Bill Allan. 1999. Information Systems for Government Fiscal Management.
   World Bank Discussion Paper.: Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hashim A. and Bill Allan. 2001. Treasury Reference Model. World Bank Technical Paper No.
   505. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hashim A. and Allister Moon 2004, Treasury Diagnostic Tool Kit. World Bank Working Paper No.
   19. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Holmes, M. A Handbook on Public Finance Management. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Khan, A. and Mario Pessoa 2010. Conceptual Design: A Critical Element of a Successful Gov-
   ernment Financial Management Information System Project. Washington, DC: International
   Monetary Fund.
Pattanayak, S. and Israel Fainboim. 2010 Treasury Single Account: Concept, Design and Imple-
     mentation Issues. IMF – FAD Working paper. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
PEMNA – FMIS Study of selected PEMNA members: Lessons for other countries (In preparation
   2014).
Schiavo-Campo, S. and DanielTommasi (eds.).1999. Managing Government Expenditure. Manila:Asian
    Development Bank. (http://www.adb.org/publications/managing-government-expenditure).
Schick, A. 1998. Why Most Developing Countries Should Not Try New Zealand Reforms. Wash-
    ington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2011. Procurement Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consult-
   ing Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants. Washington, D.C: World Bank.
   (http://go.worldbank.org/1KKD1KNT40).
______. 2011. Procurement Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants under IBRD
    Loans & IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers. Washington, D.C: World Bank.
______. Project Appraisal Document: Indonesia Govt. Financial Management and Revenue
    Administration Project (P085133).
______. Project appraisal document: Ukraine Treasury Systems Project – Loan No. 4285 UA.
______. Project Appraisal Document: Kazakhstan Treasury Modernization Project – Ln. No.
4077 KZ.

______. Project Appraisal Document: Russia Treasury Development Project – (P064508).
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         ______. Maldives: Post Tsunami Recovery and Reconstruction Project. EU Trust Fund No. 070379.

                         ______. Project Appraisal Document: – PIFRA II Second Improvement to Financial Reporting and
                         Auditing Project. IDA Credits 4109PK and 4864 PK.

                         ______. Nepal: Public Finance Management. Multi donor Trust Fund – Strengthening PFM Sys-
                         tems project. Trust Fund No. TF010452.




108
                                                                                   AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Annexes
Annex – I

Case Studies
In this Annex we will discuss the implementation of IFMIS systems in a number of countries with
varying initial start off conditions. IFMIS implementation experience in these countries, amongst
others, has been used to derive the overall lessons that have been presented in the previous
pages. The cases have been selected to focus on specific areas of emphases as indicated.                               109


Case I: Implementation of Treasury/IFMIS Systems in Transition
Economies
Case Emphasis: The World Bank has financed the implementation of Treasury systems in the mid
1990’s in several countries that were part of the Former Soviet Union – the so called CIS (Com-
monwealth of Independent States) countries. In this section we will discuss the cases of Treasury
Systems implementation in Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Russia, starting in early to mid-90s, as
these countries moved from a centrally planned to a market economy. In all of three countries,
Treasury systems supporting core treasury functionality are now operational. In some cases fur-
ther work has been initiated to broaden the functionality to include other areas such as budget
preparation, HR and Debt management.

Pre-Reform Situation

The pre-reform situation in each of these countries in the mid-1990s had broad similarities. The
main features that characterized this situation were:

The fiscal situation was under stress; Government deficit exceeded its targets and a weekly/
monthly system of cash rationing had to be instituted; there was an accumulation of expenditure
arrears; there were periods in Ukraine in the 1990s when government workers in the health and
education sectors did not receive a paycheck for several months.

Several Bank and IMF missions carried out during this period diagnosed the cause of the problem
to be the absence or weaknesses in the legal framework, institutional structures and accompany-
ing systems required for management of Government finances.

At independence from the former Soviet Union in 1991, these countries like other CIS countries,
had inherited a weak budgetary system and ineffective budget execution processes. The MOF
lacked the capacity and information to develop the macroeconomic framework needed for for-
mulation of the budget and making of revenue and expenditure projections. The national budget
was not prepared in a transparent format. Large lump-sums were allocated to the “State Appa-
ratus” without any breakdown by ministries or administrative units. The budget classification in
use did not allow meaningful budget monitoring. The system of functional budget classification
was not in conformity with standard international classification systems such as the UN Clas-
sification of the Functions of Government (COFOG) and the IMF classification of Government
Finance Statistics (GFS).
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         The Central Bank was responsible for cash execution of the budget through its network of
                         branches. Spending units had Bank accounts outside the control of the MOF and the MOF trans-
                         ferred money to these accounts periodically. Sizable idle balances could build up in spending
                         unit bank accounts while the MOF was in deficit in overall terms. The MOF had no information
                         on balances in these accounts nor had any control or means to exercise control to ensure that
                         expenditures are in accordance with budget appropriations.

                         Monthly budget execution reports were prepared by the MOF from reports received from the
                         Central Bank. Reports on expenditures, classified by institutions and economic composition,
                         were not available until quarterly reports were received from the budget organizations through
                         their controlling ministries. These were received and collated with substantial lags.

                         The MOF had no means of ascertaining actual government expenditure vis-à-vis the budget allo-
110
                         cations in a timely manner and could not effectively monitor compliance with strategic priorities
                         or initiate in-year remedial measures. There was a lack of reliable, comprehensive and timely
                         accounting information and administrative capacity to adjust the budget in response to changing
                         circumstances or base line data for budget preparation. There was a clear indication of the criti-
                         cal need for more effective budget execution and expenditure management systems capable of
                         exerting fiscal control.

                         Accordingly, the IMF and the Bank worked with these governments to help them formulate poli-
                         cies and assist in setting up the legal framework and institutional structures required for financial
                         management.

                         Project Design: Since the problems encountered in each of these countries were broadly similar,
                         the solution suggested to address these issues in each of these countries also had similarities.
                         Basically, the reform projects in each of these countries had two elements:

                         •	   First, it was necessary to, formulate policies and set up institutional structures required
                              for management of government finances ab initio to enable the MOF to regain control
                              over the financial resources and ensure that expenditures are in accordance with budget
                              appropriations.
                         •	   Second, it was necessary to set up automated systems that ensure that these policies are
                              implemented without exception.

                         Key policy actions that were pursued during the projects are detailed below:

                         •	   The development of a comprehensive Budget Management Law which provides a frame-
                              work for the proper management of public moneys and property with specific emphasis
                              on: (a) the establishment of the Treasury and its functions (b) budget preparation and bud-
                              get execution procedures and responsibilities for the receipt and custody of public moneys
                              (including the banking arrangements); (b) public expenditure management (including con-
                              trol processes and the linkages with appropriations); (c) the accounting system; (d) the role
                              and responsibilities of officials; (e) control and management of public property; (f) borrowing
                              and investment (specifically the management of the public debt); and (g) reporting and audit.
                         •	   The adoption of a GFS consistent budget classification system and design of a treasury chart
                              of accounts embodying this budget classification for implementation.
                         •	   Creation of a Treasury Ledger System (TLS) based on a new chart of accounts (COA). This
                              ledger system, which is also called a Treasury General Ledger (TGL), and is kept by the
                              Central Treasury, included ledgers for financial accounting as well as for monitoring of bud-
                              get implementation. The new COA reflected the new budget classification of revenues and
                              expenditures. The TGL also had provisions for recording data on original budgets, revisions
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




     as approved by the Budget department, warrants issued by the Treasury and sub-warrants
     by line ministries at regional level.

The program of setting up the Treasury Department included centralization of all Government
payments through the Treasury and consolidation of bank accounts to a single account at the
Central Bank—the Treasury Single Account (TSA). All receipt processes would be re-engineered
to ensure revenues are directly deposited in the Government account. A network of Treasury
offices would be established at the regional (oblast level) and district (rayon level) which would
take over budget execution and primary accounting responsibilities from the Central Bank. Fiscal
monitoring and control functions would be centralized in the MOF. All SU bank accounts would
be closed. The regional offices were made responsible for ex-ante control of all payment orders
raised by SUs against their sub-warrants, and for calculating the division of designated tax rev-
enues between the central government and the local governments, and for advising the Central
                                                                                                                        111
Bank regional branches of the allocation of revenues.

The second element of the project design envisaged the design and implementation of a modern,
automated and integrated Treasury System for government financial management to support the
re-engineered Treasury processes and procedures.

The system would encompass the functional requirements for the budget implementation and
accounting processes and would cover the appropriation, commitment, funds allocation, and
payment processes for both the investment and current budgets. The Core functional processes
and information flows associated with the system have been discussed earlier in Chapter III and
IV. These two elements of the reform program taken together would ensure:

•	   Better fiscal control
     •	 By ensuring that expenditures are in accordance with budget appropriations, commit-
          ments and cash allocations
     •	 Close monitoring of outstanding bills, cash in Government bank accounts, arrears and
          fiscal deficits
•	   Better cash management
     •	 By bringing all government accounts under the control of Treasury and consolidation
          in a Treasury Single Account (TSA)
     •	 By reducing idle balances in Government Accounts and improved planning for cash
     •	 Timely and accurate reporting for Economic management and for Preparation of statu-
          tory financial statements
     •	 Improved quality of baseline data for budget preparation

The organizational structure for the Treasury as implemented in these three countries is shown
below in Figure 27.

Project Development Objectives (PDOs)

The overall objectives of these projects were broadly to:

•	   Support on going Government efforts to establish a Treasury Department and implement
     associated systems and procedures.
•	   Assist the Government to design and implement a fully functional, automated treasury sys-
     tem that (i) provides comprehensive reliable and timely financial management information;
     and (ii) helps manage government expenditure effectively and serve as an effective instru-
     ment for budget execution and cash management.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Figure 27: Treasury Organization Structure – Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine

                                                         Treasury Organization Structure I

                                                                         Central                        Central Bank
                                                                         Treasury                      Head Ofﬁce TSA


                                Provincial                              Provincial                     Regional Branch
                              Treasury Unit                           Treasury Unit                   of Central Bank TSA


                          Spending                  District             District               District
112                         Unit                 Treasury Unit        Treasury Unit          Treasury Unit




                         •	     Provide a transparent system of accounting that shows the utilization of the financial
                                resources of the Government and enables management and audit of these resources

                         PDO Indicators

                         The achievement of these was to be measured by:

                         •	     The degree to which the payment processes have been centralized;
                         •	     Timely presentation of fiscal accounts for external audit
                         •	     Training of adequate numbers of financial and technical staff to operate new system
                         •	     The establishment of a Treasury Single Account established at the Central Bank; and clo-
                                sure of SU bank accounts at commercial banks.
                         •	     The degree to which the new management processes and expenditure controls for budget
                                execution were in place and functioning.
                         •	     Adoption of Revised budget classification system and budget prepared according to new
                                classification.
                         •	     Establishment of the Treasury ledger systems with required functionality rolled out to all
                                oblasts and associated rayons.
                         •	     Timely and reliable budget reports produced for MOF / Treasury / Budget Agencies by end
                                of project.

                         Project Implementation Strategy

                         In each of these countries, it was necessary to pursue a two pronged implementation strategy.
                         Since the implementation of a new Treasury system across the whole country would be a major
                         undertaking—possibly taking 8–10 years—there was the need to set up interim systems that
                         could yield immediate results.

                         Work on the implementation of the key policies related to setting up the Treasury started in
                         these countries in 1993–94. As the ideas related to the basic policies and institutional struc-
                         tures of the Treasury took hold, the respective Governments established a Treasury depart-
                         ment and a network of Treasury offices in each of the provinces (oblast) and district (rayon)
                         offices. A TSA was set up at the Central Bank and SU bank accounts were closed. Gradually,
                         all expenditure and receipt transactions started being routed through the Treasury offices and
                         the coverage of the Treasury extended to almost 100 percent. The so called “power ministries”
                         resisted bringing their budget execution processes and bank accounts under control of the
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Treasury, but this was overcome due to Government commitment regarding the implementa-
tion of these policies.

Systems implementation in all of these countries started with setting up basic Fox-Pro based sys-
tems with limited functionality at rayon/oblast offices to process expenditure and receipt transac-
tions. Often the different oblasts and rayons used different systems and some continued to work
manually. The quality of these systems improved over time in terms of the application software
development tools used and the uniformity of the systems across the landscape, but the func-
tionality remained limited to core processes (checking for the budget and payment processing).

The country specific features of the World Bank interventions in each of these countries are
described below.
                                                                                                                          113
Kazakhstan

Preparation of the Bank Treasury modernization project started in 1994. The Bank loan of
US$15.8 million was approved in July 1996. In the first phase the Bank-financed the setting up
of an interim system, through funds from an existing project based on a locally available soft-
ware package—CORVUS). This improved the quality and uniformity of the basic Fox-Pro based
systems that were operational at the rayons and oblasts at that time but had limited functionality
as mentioned above.

Work started simultaneously on the development of the design and procurement of a full func-
tion treasury system. The functional design of the system and development of the specifications
of the new system was done by an international firm—Barents, selected after a competitive
process, and financed through the Bank loan. This was followed by the procurement of the
application software and technology platform through a two stage ICB. A consortium headed by
Hewlett-Packard and partnered with Oracle won the contract; Oracle Financials was selected as
the application software. After parameterization and pilot testing (in one oblast and all associated
rayons) the system was gradually rolled out to all rayons and oblasts. The system was originally
designed as a partially distributed system with servers located in each of the oblasts which were
to serve all rayons under its jurisdiction. This was done in view of the state of the telecommu-
nications network available at that time (1998–99). The Government insisted on moving to a
centralized architecture, with the main servers being located at the Treasury Headquarters in
the capital (Astana), and connecting all remote offices via a satellite based telecommunications
network. This was done. However, due to response time problems from remote sites caused by
the latency delays encountered in a satellite-based connection, this was later replaced by land
lines—mainly fiber optic based connections. This replacement took place after the closure of the
bank project in 2002.

The coverage of the system and the number of users increased from about one thousand to start
with in the early 2000s to several thousand now. The main servers have also been upgraded as
required. The latter investments have been financed by the government from budget resources.

The Kazakhstan project represents the first case of the use of the Oracle Financials application
software package as the basis for systems implementation. At this time Oracle Financials had not
developed a software version specifically designed to meet government budget execution needs,
and work-arounds had to be implemented in the basic package to meet these requirements. The
Kazakhstan Treasury project served as the test case for implementing off-the-shelf software for
Treasury systems. Oracle used the experience gained here and documented in a Bank docu-
ment—the Treasury Reference Model—to develop a government version of the software that is
now widely used.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         The success of the Kazakhstan Treasury Modernization project can be measured by the fact that
                         the policies procedures and system developed in this project introduced major changes in the
                         way budget management is handled in the country, and enables the Government to achieve
                         control of the budget process and the government’s financial resources. The Treasury system
                         developed in this project continues to be the core Government application that supports budget
                         execution processes. Work on enhancement of the coverage of system and implementation of a
                         full function IFMIS has continued since then, and is now well advanced.

                         The key success factors for this project were:

                         1.	   The project design focused on a specific key government requirement which was diagnosed
                               as being critical by the IMF and the Bank at that time and tried to provide a solution to that
                               problem. It did not attempt to solve many problems within the scope of a single project, for
114
                               example,. those related to tax administration, /customs administration, human resources
                               management, Debt management, auditing, etc. This enabled the Government and Bank
                               team to focus attention to all issues related to the specific problem instead of dissipating
                               efforts and scarce resources across multiple others.
                         2.	   The project focused on Treasury reform and the underpinning legal and institutional frame-
                               work and the systems that were required to put this in place. It was not viewed as an IT
                               project either by the Bank or the Government. The project manager from the Government’s
                               side was a key Treasury official from the functional side.
                         3.	   The Government showed tremendous commitment to overcome the political economy and
                               other challenges including those in the implementation of the system and stayed the course
                               for the Bank and the IMF worked closely together. An IMF advisor was stationed in Kazakh-
                               stan throughout the duration of the project, and continued to provide policy guidance and
                               ensure that the project did not stray from the core issues that it was designed to address. The
                               Bank’s key technical staff also stayed on the project throughout its duration.

                         Among the key vulnerabilities for the project, one could list the lack of adequate capacity dur-
                         ing the implementation stage within the MOF to manage and maintain the new Treasury system.
                         At project end, the government outsourced much of the systems implementation aspects to an
                         outside firm.

                         Ukraine

                         Work on the Ukraine Treasury reform started almost in tandem with that in Kazakhstan and again
                         in response to the Bank and IMF diagnoses of what needed to be done to enable Government to
                         regain control over its finances.

                         The first intervention in Ukraine was attempted under a broader Institutional Development Proj-
                         ect, which attempted to address several institutional issues within the Ukraine Public Sector.
                         However, the Treasury component of the Integrated Budget Law (IBL) could not achieve much
                         traction. A foreign consulting firm hired to do the design work on policies could not get the
                         Government’s attention. Work on Treasury reform continued outside of the ambit of the project
                         component and it took several years before ideas like the requirement for a Treasury, a TSA and
                         related systems could take hold in Ukraine.

                         The Bank attempted a second intervention a few years later that was more focused on Trea-
                         sury problems and the new Treasury Development Project (TDP) was approved by the board in
                         1998. Which provide for US$16.8 million for setting up the policies, procedures and systems
                         for the Treasury. The new project focused on the implementation of polices and institutional
                         structures required for the Treasury and much of the Bank-Fund dialogue over the initial years
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




focused on the policy aspects. In view of the failed attempt under the IBL, and also in accordance
with advice from other donor partners working in the country—USAID and ADETEF—the Bank
project had more modest objectives in Ukraine as regards the type of technical solution to be
implemented. It was decided that it would be best to first set a up a robust interim system that
could serve Ukraine for the medium term and which encompassed the core functionality of the
Treasury. This could be the take-off point for a full function system which could be procured later.

In contrast to Kazakhstan, the political economy in Ukraine was such that vested interests in the
country could launch a serious challenge to the Treasury reforms and the project. For example,
the banking sector lobbied Parliament to convince them that the concept of the TSA would be
disastrous for the sector that relied mainly on government funds for liquidity. Once these prob-
lems were overcome and the project proceeded to implement policies to ensure good fiscal
control, and the TSA was actually implemented, it had a very significant positive impact on the
                                                                                                                          115
fiscal deficit and the government’s ability to manage its finances.

In Ukraine there was a good pool of technical staff that could be used for systems development,
although their skills needed upgrading. The various government agencies insisted that these staff
could develop any systems required and that a Western off-the-shelf package was not neces-
sary. Nevertheless, the Bank continued its efforts in assisting the government in setting up the
Treasury as an institution and gradually improving its systems. Eventually, a custom-developed
system, which was partly based on a locally developed package, was completed and deployed.
This system was rolled out to all Treasury offices by 2002, and continues to this day to be the
basic system used by the treasury for budget execution. On closure of the TDP, the Bank started
to design a more comprehensive Public Finance Modernization Project (PFMP) to address mul-
tiple problems in the sector. This project was finally approved by the Bank’s Board in 2006.
However, due to various issues mainly related to the political economy in the country, progress
has been slow.

The Ukraine experience once again underlines the need for focused intervention and limit-
ing the project scope to achieve key policy reforms in a difficult environment. Compromises
cannot be made on the core policies, but for subsidiary issues like the quality of the system—
whether commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) or custom-developed. The other Kazakhstan lessons
also apply here.

Russia

Work on the Russia Treasury project started in late 1998. The IMF had worked in the 1990s to
assist in setting up the legal framework and institutional structures. However, at start of project
preparation, the coverage of the Treasury and the TSA was minimal and Treasury systems were a
patchwork of very basic Fox-Pro based systems with inadequate functionality and coverage. The
Budget framework, including the Budget Classification Structure, also required additional work.
The legal framework and institutional structures required to enable the MOF to regain control
over the financial resources and ensure that expenditures are in accordance with budget appro-
priations needed improvement as well as increased application and coverage.

As in Ukraine and Kazakhstan, there was need for a two-pronged strategy, because the imple-
mentation of a new Treasury system across the whole country would be a major undertaking
lasting 8–10 years.

The first stage of this strategy would require that Government continue with implementation
of policy initiatives, the TSA, Budget reform with IMF and Bank advice, and continue with the
implementation of an Interim Treasury system with improved functionality and capacity. This
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         meant improving the existing custom-developed system and additional hardware. The Govern-
                         ment would continue to finance this.

                         As part of project preparation activities the Bank financed an institutional review of the Treasury
                         through a Policy and Human Resources Development (PHRD) Grant in 2001–2002, which high-
                         lighted the institutional weaknesses and improvement required.

                         The second stage of the strategy included: The design of a full function Treasury System and
                         associated procedures (2002–2003); Procurement and development of application software and
                         implementation services (2004–2005); Parameterization testing of the application software (2006–
                         2007); and procurement of the hardware in line with implementation requirements (2008–2012).

                         The new systems were then implemented at 3 pilot oblasts and associated rayons during 2009
116
                         and then replicated systems across all sites—in 5 waves with 10–15 regions in each wave—over
                         the period 2010–11. To implement the system country wide, Government financed a major
                         upgrade of the telecommunications network over the period 2005–2010. It also financed a mas-
                         sive upgrade of all Treasury offices across the countries and implementation of required infra-
                         structure as embedded in engineering support systems.

                         Systems Functionality

                         The Treasury systems set up by the project in Russia support Budget Management, including,
                         Budget Apportionment; Budget Allotment; Budget Releases; Budget Transfers; Commitment Man-
                         agement—recording all commitments relating to intended government expenditures; Payment
                         Management—processing all government expenditures relating to procurement of goods and
                         services from current/capital budgets; Salary and Pension Payments; Debt servicing payments;
                         Subsidies/Fiscal transfers to sub-national levels or SOEs; Receipts Management—recording rev-
                         enues and other receipts; Accounting (posting all transactions as they occur); Cash Management;
                         and Fiscal Reporting. The core functional processes and information flows are shown in the
                         Figure 28.

                         Systems Architecture: The interim systems that had been set up were configured to rayon-based
                         distributed architecture due to a bad telecommunication network. The final systems set up under
                         the project were based on an oblast-centric architecture, with a central system which consoli-
                         dates information across the country.

                         Application Software: The interim systems were custom-developed. The FTAS is based on a
                         COTS package – Oracle Financials acquired through an ICB.

                         Spending Unit (SU) connections: Initially, SUs brought hard copies of documents to Treasury.
                         They gradually moved to electronic transfer of documents. Now a web portal is used for transfer
                         of information between SUs and Treasury.

                         Technology Requirements: The project required significant investments in technology in the fol-
                         lowing areas:

                         •	   Application Software to support functional processes: Hardware – Servers located at
                              various processing centers, Work stations, peripheral hardware; Middle ware – Operating
                              systems, RDBMS, application development tools, and system management tools.
                         •	   Telecommunications Infrastructure: WAN-Links between various Treasury offices via
                              telecommunications network—public switched network, leased lines, dial up lines; LANs—
                              connections between work stations at a particular site, and Network management systems,
Figure 28: Russia Treasury Systems – Functional Processes and Information Flows


                                              Russia—Treasury Systems: Core Functional Processes and Information Flows



                                                             Enter:
                                                             . Approved budget/Apportionments                                                   Vendors
                  Budget Administrators
                                                             . Detailed budget for SUs                                                         Employees
                                                             . Budget releases warrants                                                        Pensioners
                                                             . Authorized budget transfers/
                                                               supplementary allocations
                                                                                                                                            Payments


                                                                                                                                     TSA Bank
              MOF/Budget Administrators/                             Receives ﬁscal and Budget
              Treasury/Line Ministries and                       Execution reports Monitors Budget
                                                                                                                   FTAS            Loans
                    Spending Units                               ExecutionDirectly or via web portal                               Grant        Tax Payers
                                                                                                                 TREASURY
                                                                                                                                 Receipts
                                                                                                                  SYSTEM

                                                                                                                                      Donors
                  Sends:
                  . Direct commitments                                      Reviews enters payment requests
                  . Contracts                                                 releases/schedules payment                       Monitor Actual receipts
                                                                                                                               Compare with Assessments
                  . Purchase Orders
     Line         . Vendor Invoices                        Treasury                                                                  Revenue
 Ministries/SUs   . Payment requests                                                                                                 Agencies
                  . to Treasury via web portal for                          Monitors Receipts Performs Bank
                                                                            reconciliation Cash Management
                    entry to the systemReviews
                                                                                                                                                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                         117
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         •	   Back up/Disaster Recovery arrangements: Business Continuity Strategy, Power back up
                              systems, and information security systems.

                         Infrastructure

                         The project required very significant upgrades in infrastructure. The Government  modernized
                         the telecommunications network with investments in excess of US $100 million to ensure that
                         high bandwidth connections were available from each local Treasury office to its parent Regional
                         office and then on to the Main Treasury department in Moscow. 2,500 regional and local Trea-
                         sury offices.

                         Appropriate and  adequate security protocols and backup power arrangements have been
                         implemented. These include network access and physical access mechanisms to secure areas in
118
                         Treasury offices.

                         Electronic signature facilities: Public key infrastructure (PKI) has been implemented.

                         Scale Size: The number of active users on the system ranges from 25,000 to 30,000. Active users
                         in similar systems in countries with similar populations such as Indonesia, Pakistan, Vietnam, etc.
                         are 5,000–8,000 with costs in the range of $30–$50 million.

                         The size of the country required that the system be implemented across 83 provinces spread
                         across 9 time zones. The total number of transactions processed through the system is 30–40
                         million a month. about 30,000 Treasury staff were trained in the use of the system. The total
                         number of offices where the system is implemented is approximately 2,500 spread across the
                         country. About 300,000 federal government spending units are serviced by the system. In addi-
                         tion, regional and local governments also use the system to process approved payment requests
                         as part of measures to ensure that these payments are made through similar TSAs established for
                         their respective areas.

                         Costs

                         The main cost elements of the project are listed below. Financing came from the Government of
                         Russia and the World Bank.

                         Bank Financing

                         Policy and Design Consultancies cost about $10 million. This includes legal and policy frame-
                         work (Budget law, budget management, institutional arrangements, COA, accounting policies);
                         Functional design (functional processes, information flows, documents, procedures); Technical
                         Design and Architecture (software, hardware and Communications Specifications).

                         Application software, hardware, and implementation services – about $200 million, to cover
                         Servers, Networking (LAN and WAN), Information security, Application software and tools (+
                         DBMS, application development tools), etc., and Implementation services (parameterization/
                         customization, implementation).

                         Training – about $14 million, including End-User training in the day to day use of systems and
                         trouble-shooting, Technical training for technical staff in the use and maintenance of specific
                         tools used, and Management level training in the use of the systems.

                         Implementation support and operating expenses and fees: about $7 million.
                                                                                         AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Government Financing

Additionally, Government made very significant investments in:

•	    Development and implementation costs for Interim Systems including hardware, software,
      and their upkeep over 8 years until such time that the new system was ready.
•	    Upgrading/setting up WAN telecommunication networks – over $100 million.
•	    Upgrading physical facilities at Regional and Rayon Treasury offices – over $100 million.
•	    Work stations and peripherals etc. for all offices and some servers for system replication –
      over $100 million.

Procurement Strategy for Hardware and Software
                                                                                                                             119
The functional and technical design of the system was developed first and used as a basis to pro-
cure the technology platform, including, Application Software and implementation services were
procured first through a 2 stage ICB—Oracle Financials selected as the application software. The
sizing and specifications for the hardware were developed on the basis of requirements given
by the software supplier to operate the application software and prepared in generic terms. H/W
was procured in several tranches through ICBs in line with implementation requirements.

Critical Success Factors:

1.	   Government Commitment and Support of the MOF. The most important lesson that can
      be learned from this project is that it has required the consistent and complete support of
      the Government of Russia and the MOF/Treasury at the highest levels over the duration of
      the project (10 years). This was possible because the project was framed as a public expen-
      diture management (PEM) systems reform initiatives rather than just accounting systems
      reform.
2.	   It is necessary to maintain continuity of critical staff with appropriate skills in the Bank team
      to assist in project supervision and by provision of good, high-level technical advice based
      on experience in similar projects in many other countries.
3.	   Changes to the legal framework and operational procedures should be introduced at fixed
      times (say start of a new FY) and not arbitrarily throughout the year.
4.	   Customization of the Application Software should be restricted to essential and unavoidable
      items. Additions of custom scripts/code on top of application software to cater to minor idio-
      syncrasies of the existing system is time consuming, costly and troublesome when porting
      to a new version.
5.	   To begin, set up the transaction processing layer of the systems. This is the most difficult and
      time-consuming stage. It is necessary to have this layer in place in order to access useful and
      credible information for financial operations and management reporting. Other layers would
      be built on top of this layer. In Russia, the Government has now developed a reporting and
      monitoring system that provides information on Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to enable
      the MOF and all budget participants to monitor and control the budget execution process.

Summary of Implementation Considerations

1.	   First implement modules to cater to Core Budget Execution Processes, payments and
      receipts transactions across government before going on to other non-core elements, such
      as fixed assets management, and human resources management.
2.	   First implement Treasury Centric System then De-Centralize to spending Units. An attempt
      should be made to first capture payment / receipt transactions at Treasury offices then de-
      centralize to Spending units—if necessary/possible.
                                                                                                    120
Figure 29: Russia System to Monitor Key Budget Indicators

    KPI system ﬂow chart


                  Data on the federal budget,
                 budgets of constituents of the
                 RF, local budgets at all levels
                                                            Data Warehouse              Multi-user KPI
                                                             (updated daily)              System:
                                                                                                                    Ministry of Finance
            Department
               FT-1
                 ...                       OFT-1                               Common from
            Department                                                         . Baseline indicators
              FT-N                                                             . Key indicators                    Ministry of
                                                                                                                             f Regional
                                             ...                               . Graphic visualisations              Development
                                                                                                                              p
            Department                                                         . Additional analytical functions
               FT-1
                 ...                                                           Desktop
                                           OFT-1                               .                                     The Government
                                                                                                                         G
            Department                                                          Indicators
                                                                               .                                     Executive Ofﬁce
              FT-N                                                              Alerts
                                                                               .Preconﬁgured reports
                                                                               Scheduled reports
                                                                                                                   Presidential
                                                                                                                              l Executive
                                           FT Main                                                                        Ofﬁce
                                            Ofﬁce
                                                                                                                                            A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                                                                                                                   Government agencies
                          External data:
             .   MF RF          .   Constituents of
             .   FSSS               the RF
                                .   etc.
                                                                                                                   Other external users
                                                                                         AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




3.	    To start with, budget preparation can be done outside the system or by another system, and
       the final approved budget can then be loaded in the system and used to control expendi-
       ture—However, all subsequent in year budget transactions, like budget releases, transfers
       etc. should then be done in the Treasury system.
4.	    Systems should be designed along functional and not organizational lines.
5.	    Define the contours of the system clearly to avoid duplicative investments.
6.	    Budget Administrators/Vote Controllers, Treasury, and Line Ministries should use the same
       system to process their transactions and should share databases.
7.	    Budget Preparation and Budget Execution should use the same Chart of Accounts.
8.	    Transactions should be captured in real time as they occur.
9.	    Financial controls should be applied in ex-ante mode to all transactions processed by the
       system. (e.g. funds availability checking on budgeted expenditures prior to committing
       funds or making payment).
                                                                                                                             121
10.	   Ex-post transaction posting should be avoided.
11.	   No expenditure transaction should be processed outside the system. Data captured only
       once as an accounting transaction progresses through the system. This includes Budget
       Funds-Payroll, Debt, Subsidies, Fiscal transfers, EBFs, Donor Funds, Technical revenues.
12.	   The FMIS database should be treated as the primary source for financial reporting within
       Government—no second set of books.
13.	   Project Management arrangements: Project Manager – senior official from functional side
       with stature within bureaucracy, adequate financial and administrative powers. This has
       been the case in many successful projects; Core Team – Group of trained professionals
       from core functions, who can act as change agents; Representatives of major stake holders
       need to be represented on the team to manage the interface with their agencies. Project
       Secretariat – should have specialist staff with experience in the installation of large scale IT
       systems and IT procurement; Familiarity with IT projects and good contract management
       expertise has been an advantage.



Case II – Pakistan – PIFRA – Project for the Improvement of
Financial Reporting and Auditing
Case Emphasis: This case illustrates the experience of setting up an IFMIS systems in a country
with several distinguishing characteristics:

•	     The legal and institutional structures required for management of Government finances
       such as a Treasury and Accountant General (AG) organization, Treasury-based transaction
       processing, and TSA arrangements (consolidated fund accounts) do exist but are in need
       of repair. Over time mechanisms to by-pass these institutions, such as personal ledger and
       assignment accounts in the name of spending units officials have been set up, ostensibly
       with purpose of expediting transaction processing. This has eroded control mechanisms.
       The reform project needs to repair existing financial management arrangements and sys-
       tems—plugging the leaks.
•	     The Pakistan case is typical of some other South Asian countries, where the expenditure
       and receipts processing has been departmentalized for parts of the government (such as
       the Defense establishment) by placing AG staff directly in these departments. These staff do
       not use the central transaction processing system for their day-to-day work but periodically
       loads summaries of transactions processed by them into the central system which then
       produces consolidated accounts.
•	     This example also illustrates a system implementation exercise in which the scope of the
       system spans the functions of the MOF (Budget Department) and the Treasury and includes,
       budget compilation, budget preparation and modules for payroll, pension calculations, and
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                              interfaces to the auditing organization. This is largely due to the fact that in several South
                              Asian countries including Pakistan, the functions of the Accountant General include cen-
                              tral payroll and benefits processing, unlike the functions of the Treasury in other countries
                              where these functions are handled by the spending line ministries or a central establishment
                              division.
                         •	   Another aspect of interest is that the system implementation extends beyond the central
                              budget and separate but identical systems modules have been implemented for the pro-
                              vincial and district budgets also. This again reflects the fact that in several South Asian
                              countries a single cadre of accounting and auditing staff is responsible for carrying out these
                              functions for all levels of government.

                         Background
122
                         The process of improving fiscal and financial reporting in Pakistan was initiated in the early
                         1990’s after observations by both the World Bank and the IMF, and a diagnostic study under-
                         taken by the Auditor General of Pakistan (AGP), that the (then manual) accounting and report-
                         ing system did not meet adequate standards for either financial or fiscal reporting. Notably,
                         both accounting and auditing were directed by the Auditor General of Pakistan (an anomaly
                         from pre-1947), budget reports by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) were not fully reconciled
                         with accounting reports by the AGPR and provincial AGs, the Chart of Accounts (COA) was
                         not compliant with IMF Government Finance Statistics (GFS) standards for fiscal reporting,
                         and neither financial nor fiscal reports were timely or reliable. To meet these challenges, the
                         Pakistan Audit Department (PAD) launched the PIFRA Program in 1995 with World Bank sup-
                         port. Under this program two projects have been executed, PIFRA I and PIFRA II. PIFRA I was
                         completed in 2005, and PIFRA II, launched in 2005, is currently ongoing and scheduled to
                         close on December 31, 2014.

                         Objectives

                         The PIFRA program aims at: (a) Modernizing the institutional framework for budgeting and
                         accounting, strengthening financial management practices, tightening internal controls to mini-
                         mize occurrence of errors and irregularities in processing of payments and receipts; (b) Introduc-
                         ing modern, automated systems to support budgeting and accounting processes; (c) Establishing
                         a capacity to generate complete, reliable and timely financial information to fulfill statutory
                         reporting requirements and facilitate informed government decision-making; and (d) Modern-
                         izing government audit systems and procedures and adopting internationally accepted auditing
                         standards.

                         Policy Reforms

                         The main policy reforms introduced under the project include:

                         •	   Separation of the Auditing and Accounting Functions and creation of a position of the Con-
                              troller General of Accounts (CGA).
                         •	   Introducing:
                              •	 A New Accounting Model based on Modified Cash basis
                              •	 Redesign of functional processes and accounting procedures.
                              •	 Introduction of a New Chart of Accounts (COA) and GFS conformant budget classifi-
                                    cation structures.
                              •	 Introduction of a unified system of budgeting and accounting across all levels of Gov-
                                    ernment—National, Provincial, District and Sub-district
                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Design

As part of the project, a major mission critical country-wide integrated system, the Financial
Accountability and Budget System (FABS) is being implemented to spearhead the reforms and
assist the Government in the functional processes associated with Financial Accounting and
Budgeting at the Federal, Provincial and District levels.

FABS – Functionality includes:

•	   Budget Preparation: Assists in compilation of budgets, prints the budget book and associ-
     ated reports, maintains a record of initial budgets, revisions, and budget releases.
•	   Budget Execution:
     •	 Records commitments, receipts of goods and services                                                          123
     •	 Ensures expenditures are in accordance with budget appropriations, commitments
          and budget releases
     •	 Authorizes payment after checking for controls; gives payment instructions to bank
     •	 Records revenues and other receipts, enables better control over fiscal deficits and
          arrears
•	   Accounting and Fiscal reporting:
     •	 Enables accurate and timely posting of all transactions
     •	 Comprehensive reporting
•	   Calculates Payroll for Civil servants
•	   Maintains General Provident Fund Accounts for Civil servants
•	   Calculates Pension payments and maintains pension accounts for government retirees.

FABS has been implemented using an internationally well-known off-the-shelf application soft-
ware package, SAP, that was acquired after international competitive bidding. FABS includes
Modules for:

•	   Budget preparation
•	   General ledger
•	   Accounts payable
•	   Accounts receivable
•	   Payroll
•	   Pensions
•	   General Provident fund
•	   Cash Flow Forecasting

The Functional requirements of the system were developed by an international consulting firm.
Total direct costs related to systems implementation have been about US$40 million, compa-
rable with costs for similar projects in other countries.

The main system users are:

•	   Budgeting organizations across all levels of Government including the Federal MOF; Pro-
     vincial Finance Departments ; District Finance Departments
•	   Accounting organizations across all levels of Government including the Office of the CGA;
     AGPR and Sub Offices; Provincial AGs; District Accounts Offices – DAO (105); Sub-district
     and Tehsil offices; Government of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK)
•	   Line Ministries and Provincial Line Departments
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         The system has been implemented in a partially distributed architecture and interfaces with
                         the Planning Commission, the Central Board of Revenue, the State Bank, the National Bank,
                         and the Debt Management Office. Five separate systems have been implemented as follows:
                         (a) Federal Government Budgeting and Accounting transactions are carried out on a central
                         server located in Islamabad. (b) Provincial Government Budgeting and Accounting transac-
                         tions are carried out on servers located in each of the provincial capitals, Lahore-Punjab,
                         Karachi-Sindh, Peshawar-NWFP and Quetta-Baluchistan. (c) District government budgeting
                         and accounting transactions are carried out on the respective provincial servers. The systems
                         architecture and the institutional interfaces with the systems are shown in Figure 30.

                         Implementation Status

                         The project is managed by a PIFRA Directorate in the office of the Auditor General. Policy guidance
124
                         is provided by a Steering Committee with representatives from all principal stakeholders includ-
                         ing the MOF, the provincial Finance Departments, and the Controller General of Accounts. FABS
                         is now used by the Federal, Provincial and District governments to: (i) prepare and compile the
                         Annual Budget Estimates and fulfill associated reporting requirements; (ii) exercise ex-ante bud-
                         getary control on and enable processing of all government expenditure and receipts transactions;
                         (iii) implement commitment controls on contract amounts exceeding PKR 0.5 million; (iv) make
                         payments (currently by check) against Bank accounts where Government funds are held; (v) pre-
                         pare the payroll for some 1.9 million Government employees across all levels of Government;
                         (vi) make pension calculations for all Government pensioners; (vii) maintain the GPF account-
                         ing for all Government employees; (viii) preparation of periodic budget execution and fiscal
                         reports for all stake holders including the MOF/Provincial Finance Departments/Line ministries
                         and departments.

                         A large number of government staff, approximately 35,000 state functionaries (including
                         executives, financial managers, and accounting and auditing professionals), working on
                         assignments related with accounting, auditing and finance at all tiers of the government (fed-
                         eral, provincial, district and tehsil) have been trained to perform their day-to-day operations
                         using the new systems. Training interventions, coupled with change management initiatives,
                         have been used to facilitate acceptance of new policies, business processes, procedures and
                         systems at all levels of management. With the implementation of the FABS-based GFMIS, a
                         repository of all Government expenditure and receipt transactions is now available to the
                         Government’s audit organization to perform their audit functions. The audit organization has
                         deployed a number of automated tools to perform their work which includes ACL and other
                         software. The application of computer aided audit techniques (CAATs) and modern perfor-
                         mance and systems-based audit has made the national external audit system both timely and
                         more effective.

                         Impact

                         PIFRA I and II have introduced major changes to government budgeting, accounting, and finan-
                         cial reporting, as well as auditing. The PIFRA program has effectively addressed all of the key
                         issues identified in the diagnostic study and the World Bank /IMF reviews. The first project
                         accomplished the policy goals of: (a) Modernizing the institutional framework for budgeting and
                         accounting processes and separating accounts and audit (and placing the former as an attached
                         department of the MOF); (b) Designing a New Accounting Model ( NAM) and introducing a
                         Budget classification structure and COA that was compliant with international accounting and
                         GFS standards; and (c) Designing and implementing an automated information system to support
                         budgeting and accounting;
Figure 30: PIFRA FABS Systems Deployment, Information Flows, and Institutional Relationships


                                                                              PIFRA—FABS
                                                              Systems Deployment and Institutional Relationships

                                    Access to Provincial                                      Access to District
                                    Transaction data for                                     Transaction data for
                                                              Auditing Organization                                       Accounting
                                           audit                                                    audit
                  Budgeting                                             Access to Federal
                                                                                                                         Organizations
                 Organizations                                          Transaction data
                                                                        for audit                            Controller General of Accounts
                                                               Federal System        Transactions/
           Federal Ministry of Finance                        Located at AGPR         Ac/Budget
                                                             Ofﬁce Central Server       reports

                              MOF, Provincial and District Departments
                                of Finance Load Approved Budget                                                     AGPR/AGPR Sub ofﬁces
                               Budget Releases, Budget Transfers and
                                     Monitor Budget Execution                                                                                        Payment instructions
                                                                                                                                                     Bank Balances Bank
                Provincial Department                          Provincial System        Transactions/                                                reconciliation reports
                      of Finance                            (Provincial AG servers)      Ac/Budget                      Provincial A. Gs
                                                                                           reports



                     District Department                        District System
                                                                                                                Payment instructions Bank      National           State
                          of Finance                        (Provincial AG servers)
                                                                                                                     Balances Bank             Bank of           Bank of
                                                                                                                  reconciliation reports       Pakistan          Pakistan
    MOF and Provincial Finance                     Line dept
 Departments issue budget guidelines.              connections to
Budget DDOs submit budget proposals                FABS systems
                                                                                           Transaction
                  Federal Drawing and                                                      input from
                Disbursing Ofﬁcer (DDO)                                             Accounting ofﬁces to
                                                                                   Federal/Provincial and
                                                                                     District systems and
                        Provincial DDO                                          Accounting/Budget reports
                                                                                              from system
                                                                                                                    District Accounts Ofﬁces
                                                           Expenditure Transactions from DDOs to system
                            District DDO                   Budget monitoring reports from system to DDOs
                                                                                                                                                                              AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                                      125
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         PIFRA II, has built on this base and introduced modern accounting, reporting, and audit meth-
                         odologies that cover core government. As a result, financial reporting of accounts has become
                         timely and reliable. Audit reports and financial statement certifications that hitherto were com-
                         pleted and submitted to the legislature in 18–21 months are now completed and submitted
                         within 8 months of the end of a fiscal year. Transparency has improved due to strengthening of
                         internal controls and access of stakeholders to the financial information. Accounting and Pay-
                         ment processes have now been fully automated and the objectives of accuracy, completeness,
                         reliability, and timeliness of accounts have been substantially achieved. Specifically, PIFRA has
                         enabled: (a) preparation of IPSAS-compliant cash basis financial statements for audit within
                         2 months of year-end; and audit reports to the President (or provincial assemblies), based on
                         international standards, are now presented to the President and Governors for onward submis-
                         sion to the respective legislatures within eight months of year-end; (b) Establishment of system-
                         generated monthly and quarterly fiscal reports for macro-economic review and analysis by the
126
                         MOF and international community; (c) The timeliness of audit reports has increased effective-
                         ness of parliamentary oversight.

                         Lessons Learned

                         1.	   Commitment and support of the MOF is Critical. Such Projects should be framed as pub-
                               lic expenditure management (PEM) systems reform initiatives rather than just accounting
                               systems reform. Senior level policy makers in MOF and donor organizations relate to this
                               better. Linkages can then be established between project and requirements under policy
                               based lending.
                         2.	   The Project manager should be a senior official from the functional side, with stature within
                               the bureaucracy, and with adequate financial and administrative powers.
                         3.	   A core team of officials from the core functions should be involved in design, who can
                               subsequently act as change agents.
                         4.	   Institutional and political economy issues are more difficult to resolve and take more time
                               for resolution than technical issues.
                         5.	   Reform of underlying fiscal management processes should be the basis for systems design.

                         Main Problems faced

                         They relate to: (a) Political economy Issues – Resistance from Provincial Governments over Fed-
                         eral control of the payment function for Provincial expenditures; (b) Dearth of project manage-
                         ment capacity and technical capacity within government for Implementing modern computer
                         based automated systems; (c) Resistance to separation of Audit and Accounts – feeling of loss
                         of career prospects for PAAS cadre officers and (d) Lack of career prospects for technical IT staff
                         within Government.

                         Continuing Vulnerabilities

                         These include: (a) Continuing lack of a career path for Technical IT staff; (b) Non-inclusion
                         of detailed transactions for Defense expenditures in FABS; (c) Continued use of assignment
                         accounts; (d) Resistance in the MOF to routing all expenditures through the system on an ex-
                         ante basis e.g. debt related transactions and fiscal transfers; and (e) the continued gray area
                         in the separation of accounting and auditing due to a single cadre of officials manning both
                         functions.
                                                                                    AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Case III: Indonesia-GFMRAP

Case emphasis: This case illustrates the importance of ex-ante transaction entry and the impor-
tance of picking up the transaction at the start of the expenditure cycle.

Diagnosis of the Pre-Reform Situation and Institutional reforms

Fragmented and overlapping structures in the MOF were identified by the IMF and other related
studies as the major constraint on sound PFM in Indonesia with a resulting inadequate focus on
aggregate fiscal discipline, good resource allocation and reliable fiscal reporting.

Under the Government Financial Management and Revenue Administration Project (GFMRAP),
the government decided to reorganize the MOF reflecting these recommendations.                                          127
The major changes were the consolidation of budget development activities in a new DG budget
and the creation of a new General Directorate of Treasury (DG Treasury). The Treasury func-
tions currently handled at the General Directorate of Budget (DG Budget), financial institutions
(DGFI), the Secretary General, the Agency for Government Accounts (BAKUN), and the many
field offices of the DG Budget and BAKUN delivering payment, verification, and accounting
functions were transferred to the new DG-Treasury.

Policy Reforms

Key policy actions that were pursued are detailed below:

•	   A new Law on State Finances (No. 17 of 2003) and a new State Treasury Law were passed
     by the Indonesian Parliament. The new laws provide a framework for the proper manage-
     ment of public moneys and property with specific emphasis on: (a) the receipt and custody
     of public moneys (including the banking arrangements); (b) public expenditure manage-
     ment (including control processes and the linkages with appropriations); (c) the accounting
     system; (d) the role and responsibilities of officials; (e) control and management of public
     property; (f) borrowing and investment (specifically the management of the public debt);
     and (g) reporting and audit. In support of these laws, subsidiary regulations and decrees are
     being drafted. These include: regulation of budget preparation; budget classification; and
     budget implementation.
•	   Progressive consolidation of government cash resources leading to establishment of a Trea-
     sury Single Account (TSA) at Bank Indonesia (BI).
•	   The adoption of a GFS-consistent budget classification system and final design of a treasury
     chart of accounts embodying this budget classification for implementation over several
     years beginning on January 1, 2005.
•	   Implementation of a transaction based modernized treasury system embodying the new
     chart of accounts.
•	   Centralization of all Government payments through the modernized Treasury and consoli-
     dation of bank accounts to a single account at the Central Bank (Bank of Indonesia). It was
     initially expected that consolidation of bank accounts and automation of payment process-
     ing would be progressively implemented across Government during 2004–2007.
•	   The reliance on a core treasury system for recording and reporting on all relevant central
     government financial transactions.

The GFMRAP project provided a means to take this set of coherent reforms forward. In particular,
the project financed the design and development of a modern treasury system, and the procure-
ment, testing and installation of the necessary hardware and software and related implementation
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         services. It also provided an umbrella for provision of the related technical assistance, advice and
                         training to assist with design and implementation of the related set of policy reforms.

                         The Treasury system’s function would be to regulate budget execution by ensuring that payments
                         made are in accordance with the budget, within spending limits, and within cash constraints.

                         The Treasury system would be designed with the two basic objectives of:

                         (i) controlling the state budget and (in time) the assets and liabilities of the central government;
                         and (ii) providing comprehensive, reliable and timely information on the financial position of the
                         general government of Indonesia so as to facilitate government financial management.

                         Adopting the strategy and progressing in the manner outlined above would ensure the imple-
128
                         mentation of an essential element required for fiscal management and control and, would facili-
                         tate central ministries’/other entities’ connection to the Treasury system and processes and access
                         to their financial information and reporting, pertaining to their organizations.

                         The core functional processes and information flows associated with budget execution using the
                         Indonesia Treasury System are shown given in Figure 31.

                         Initially, the Government planned to identify, select and implement the Treasury system over the
                         period 2004–2008. The project would first assist in the design of the systems. The system will
                         then be implemented at a set of pilot sites and after a successful pilot exercise, replicated across
                         the country.

                         This was, however, delayed and the implementation is now in its final stages. We shall examine
                         some of the reasons for the delays in the following paragraphs.

                         Project Status

                         The Indonesia GFMRAP project was delayed considerably and is still in its implementation stage
                         and is expected to be completed in 2014.

                         The loan agreement was signed in December, 2004. It was an $80 million project of which $55
                         million was from the World Bank.

                         After the design consultants had completed the systems specifications, the Government embarked
                         on a two stage ICB process to procure the hardware and software and implementation services
                         in through a turn-key contract. The procurement process prolonged for almost 4 years from 2005
                         until mid of 2009 due to a number of reasons attributable to the combination of the inexperi-
                         ence of the MOF officials to procure a large scale IT system and the capabilities of the bidders to
                         understand and follow detailed administrative requirements in compliance with the World Bank
                         procurement guidelines.

                         The bid evaluation for the SPAN21 Systems procurement could be completed only in February
                         2009, and by the second half of 2009, the contract was signed and operationalized. The appli-
                         cations software selected was Oracle Financials (Oracle eBusiness Suite and Hyperion). The
                         software includes budget preparation, spending authority, budget commitment, payment man-
                         agement, cash management, government receipts, and general ledgers modules.



                         21	 SPAN   is Financial Management Information System in Indonesia.
Figure 31: Indonesia Treasury Systems – Core Functional Processes and Information Flows

11. Treasury produces Budget execution 10. Treasury produces consolidated
reports for other stake holders        ﬁscal reports from the Treasury system
                                                                                      3. Treasury enters initial budget
                                                                                      appropriations, allotments, cash                 8. Treasury receives
                                                                                      limits and in year changes to                    information on Deposits
                                          2. Budget                                   Treasury system                                  in TSA ( e.g. Tax and
                                          Appropriations-DIKs      Directorate                                                         other Receipts, broken
                          Directorate     and DIPs                 General of                                                          down by individual
  Bappenas                General of                                Treasury                                                           transactions
                            Budget                                                                                                                            Suppliers   Tax Payers
                                                                                                                    Treasury
                                                                       DIEA
                                                                                                                     System
                                                                                                                                       Banking Network
                                                                                9. DIEA accesses
                 1b. Current Budget                                             Treasury system to
                 Proposals-Duk from Line Ministry.                              produce P6,7,8 mreports
                 2. Approved budget appropriations-DIPs                                                                                      Central
                 and DIKs from DG-Budget                                                                                                      Bank
                                           2. DG-Treasury
                                           approves in-year                             3. Regional                                           (TSA)
                         Line Ministry     changes to                                   Kanwil has online
                          line ministry    allotments and                               access to Treasury                                                       COMMERCIAL
                            reconciles     limits for                Treasury           System and enters                                                          BANKS
                       information from subordinate units            Regional           changes to DIKs
                                                                      Ofﬁce             and DIPs
1a. Investment Budget Treasury and SUs       10.-Accounting
                         to prepare                                  (Kanwil)                                       Treasury           7. Treasury system
Proposals-DUP                                Reports for Line
                         departmental                                                                                System            passes payment
                                             Ministries and SUs
                           accounts                                                                                                    transaction to the
                                                                                                                                       banking system
   Accounting reports from SUs                                                         6. KPKN
                                                                                       processes SU
                                                                   Treasury            payment
                           Spending                               Units (KPKN)         requests
                                                                                                                                     Kanwil/KPKN Access to zero balance
                             Units            4. Spending Unit                                                                       accounts in Commercial banks for
                                              forwards payment    Internal audit                                                     cash disbursements/deposits
                                              request to KPKN        section
                                                                                                                                                                   Legend:
                                                                                                                                                                 System Flows
                                                                         5. Internal audit performs on line and concurrent veriﬁcation of    Indonesia MIS
                                                                         sample transactions as they are processed by the KPKN                version V.vsd
                                                                                                                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                                            129
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         It was expected that work would commence in late 2009 and be completed in 2013. However,
                         at the end of 2013, only the configuration and development of the system is over and additional
                         time is needed to gradually roll out the system to 216 locations (177 District level Treasury
                         offices (KPPN); 31 regional offices; and 9 Treasury HQ units) across Indonesia during the first
                         semester of 2014

                         Important Takeaways from the Indonesia Experience

                         These relate to the following areas:

                         •	    Implementing the changes to the institutional arrangements for budget execution and the
                               necessary legal framework and a reorganization of the MOF before the system design.
                         •	    The stage in the budget execution cycle at which the transaction is picked up by the system.
130
                         •	    Issues related to the introduction of detailed business process re-engineering
                         •	    Module sequencing – budget preparation and budget execution
                         •	    Procurement issues which are also common to other projects;
                         •	    Configuring the consulting assistance packages required for such projects.
                         •	    Spending unit connections to the system

                         Each of these areas is discussed below:

                         1.	   It needs to be noted at the outset that the GFMRAP/SPAN system effort described in this
                               section is not the first time that an IFMIS implementation had been attempted in Indonesia.
                               In the 1990s, two major Bank-financed projects attempted to set up systems which could
                               improve the accounting capabilities of the Government. These projects made very little or
                               no attempt to change the policy and legal framework, and the institutional arrangements
                               for budget execution that were the cause of the problems; they merely concentrated on
                               accounting systems reform under existing arrangements.
                                     As mentioned above in the new project fundamental changes were made to the institu-
                               tional arrangements for budget execution and a reorganization of the MOF was undertaken
                               and introduced before the system design along with the necessary legal framework. The
                               significant feature of the new project was that it recognized that the problem that needed
                               to be tackled was primarily an expenditure management problem and only secondarily an
                               accounting problem. This is an important lesson from the Indonesia project.
                         2.	   A second important difference was that these projects envisaged picking up the transaction
                               in ex post mode after the payment had been made by the payment offices — KPPNs. These
                               attempts were not successful since once the payment is made there is no fool proof way in
                               which one can guarantee that all transactions are picked up by the system. The only way
                               this can be done is by ensuring that no payment is made outside the system and that the
                               transaction is picked up by the system before a payment can be initiated.
                                     Ex-ante transaction pick up is a key requirement of IFMIS systems for such projects.
                                     Accordingly, in the new project, the budget administrators, the treasury offices were
                               envisaged to be connected to the system and all stages of the transaction were supposed to
                               be picked up ex-ante mode (before payment is made) by the system (at the PO stage (with
                               a resulting commitment) followed by the Invoice and the goods report and the payment).
                         3.	   Introduction of detailed business process engineering.
                                     Unlike the plan in the original design as detailed in the World Bank Project appraisal
                               document (PAD), the Project consultants embarked on a detailed business process re-engi-
                               neering exercise where every little business process is reviewed and improved. This is a very
                               time-consuming task and delays systems implementation.
                                     It needs to be recognized that the major business process re-engineering required is
                               that the transaction now needs to be routed from the spending units to the Treasury office,
                               instead of from the spending unit to the Bank.
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




            Secondly all stages of the transaction needs to be recorded in the system in ex-ante
      mode, as mentioned above. Streamlining of all other processes, for example, approvals,
      would improve efficiency, but are not really prerequisites of systems implementation. In
      fact, most COTS packages already provide for standard best practice processes and it may
      not be a bad idea to actually use these as a starting point unless there is a specific legal
      requirement that needs to be fulfilled.
            In the case of the Indonesia system it was found that 90 percent of the business pro-
      cesses offered by the COTS solution were in accordance with the results of the detailed
      BP engineering exercise. A lesson from m this experience is to distinguish clearly between
      which part of the business process re-engineering is actually required prior to systems
      implementation, and which part can be best served by using the processes incorpo-
      rated in the COTS system in use and which can be adjusted as systems implementation
      proceeds.
                                                                                                                           131
4.	   Module Sequencing: Unlike the original project design the Indonesia project placed initial
      (or at least simultaneous) emphasis on the budget preparation module instead of first com-
      pleting implementation of the Budget execution/ treasury modules.
            The Budget Planning (Hyperion) and Budget Execution (EBS) systems were procured
      under a single contract. The design and implementation of these modules were linked and
      new business processes and COA were simultaneously adapted in both.
            The project team insists that for the implementation (pilot and rollout), these modules
      were decoupled and transition strategies were developed such that each could go live as
      and when they were ready and therefore this implementation approach did not contribute
      to delays of EBS.
            However, implementing the new Budget preparation package, Hyperion, is a major
      exercise, which has inevitably resulted in diversion of the implementation effort to the bud-
      get preparation module and away from core Treasury/Budget execution modules that are
      the main part of an IFMIS application. The Hyperion implementation has as yet not been
      fully accomplished. It is understood that currently the Treasury system is still operative only
      at the center, and has not been rolled out to all the KPPNs.
            In order to achieve significant outcomes such as good budgetary control and cash
      management, it is necessary to first implement modules to cater to Core Budget Execution
      Processes, to capture payments and receipts transactions across government, before going
      on to other non-core elements. It is most effective to first implement a Treasury-centric
      System in which spending units are required to bring / transmit (via a web portal) expendi-
      ture and receipts transactions to designated treasury offices and subsequently de-centralize
      transaction entry to spending units if necessary or possible.
            To start with, budget preparation can be done outside the system or by another sys-
      tem, and the final approved budget can then be loaded in the system and used to control
      expenditure—However, all subsequent in year budget transactions, like budget releases,
      transfers etc. should then be done in the Treasury system. This is the model that has been
      implemented in Russia, Kazakhstan, Pakistan and other countries.
            Adopting this implementation path may have expedited the Indonesia implementa-
      tion—a useful lesson.
5.	   Systems Procurement: Procurement processes in the Indonesia case suffered from major
      delays. This is not specific to this project but has also occurred in other systems procure-
      ments using the WB procurement guidelines/processes. Other examples include Russia and
      Pakistan.
            As mentioned in the chapter on procurement in the main text the World Bank rules
      and procedures accompanying this process need to be very well understood by the Govern-
      ment or the consultants who design the procurement package and tender documents for
      the system, and who would be responsible for assisting the Government in managing the
      procurement. This is seldom the case and many times the bidding process, or parts of it,
      have to be redone before approval is obtained.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                                     It is therefore essential that (i) adequate training in the process and the accompanying
                               rules framework, etc. be given to the Government team which will be responsible for this
                               process, and the team needs to stay with the project throughout the procurement and con-
                               tract implementation stages; and (ii) experience with the WB procurement process should
                               be mentioned as a specific requirement for the consultants to be hired to assist Government
                               in the design, procurement and implementation phases. Sometimes, a procurement agent
                               is hired for this work.
                                     This is an important lesson from the delays encountered in these projects and the ways
                               to mitigate those delays.
                         6.	   Consulting support required for GFMRAP.
                                     Again, as mentioned in the chapter on procurement the packaging of the major pro-
                               curement consultancy to assist the Government in the design, procurement and implemen-
                               tation of the system procurement strategy should be done in a manner in which the same
132
                               consultant is employed for the design the procurement and the implementation phases. It
                               is best to retain the services of this firm to also supervise systems implementation by the
                               selected contractor since they would be in the best position to do so having developed the
                               design. Assigning this task to a new firm would incur the risk associated with disagreements
                               on the basic design formulated earlier.
                                     However, in several Bank projects including the Indonesia GFMRAP, the main con-
                               sultancy was split in to two or more and contracted separately. This was done ostensibly
                               with a view to address issues of conflicts of interest and enabling a better estimation of the
                               consulting costs for procurement and implementation.
                                     In addition the consultancy for the supervision/implementation phase was called an
                               Independent Validation and Verification (INV&V) consultancy. These consultants often mis-
                               read the purpose of the hiring and saw it as an audit type of exercise where they were to
                               critique the initial design and the implementation work, instead of actually helping the
                               government to make sure that the contractor implements the system in accordance with the
                               design which had been specified and approved earlier.
                                     In some countries, the INV&V consultants thought part of their role was to report any
                               deficiencies in the design and implementation process to the Bank team supervising the
                               project, instead of helping the government to manage the contractor. This caused major
                               difficulties, and these consultancies often did not achieve the purpose for which they were
                               intended. The government was left with little or no consultant help in the contract manage-
                               ment/supervision implementation phase.
                                     Normally, the INV&V process is carried out by the Government with the help of Bank
                               support where the consultant’s design is evaluated by the Government and Bank team to
                               ensure that it makes sense in the country specific circumstance. A consultant could also be
                               hired for this process.
                                     However the job of this consultant is to merely advise the government about initial
                               design, the systems specifications and implementation plan and how it could be changed.
                               It is up to the government with Bank advice whether to accept or reject the consultant’s
                               recommendations. If the INV&V consultant’s advice is accepted, the Government would
                               advise the main consultant to incorporate these suggestions in the design.
                                     In view of the fact that configuring the main consultancy assignments has proved to
                               be a significant bottleneck for systems implementation in some countries, it would be use-
                               ful to specify at the start of the project that the consultancy package should be designed to
                               mitigate these problems and ensure that appropriate consulting help is available through-
                               out the various stages of the project and the TORs defined accordingly to make the tasks
                               very clear.
                                     A collaborative approach to the project should be adopted at the outset by the cli-
                               ent, with the World Bank as independent adviser. Collaborative practices should also be
                               explained in detail to consultant teams during kickoff and mobilization meetings.
                                                                                          AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




7.	   Connecting Spending units to the system.
            As mentioned above it is best to pick up the transaction as close to its point of origination
      as possible. Therefore a spending unit based deployment option would in principle be prefer-
      able. However there may be significant cost implications involved in such a deployment. The
      number of spending units in a country can be quite large (often several thousands) compared
      to typical sub-Treasury office numbers which would normally be of the order of 100–200. This
      means that the number of end users connected to the central server and using the application
      software directly would be correspondingly higher as would be the hardware requirements
      for providing systems access to all these users across the network. Thus, for example, the
      hardware and software license costs for a typical remote user could be about $2,000. If there
      are 10,000 such users across the network the additional cost involved would be $20 million.
            Therefore, normally spending units are required to send their transactions to a desig-
      nated Treasury office either in hard copy or electronically and the designated treasury office
                                                                                                                              133
      then enters the transaction in the system. The main line ministry head offices could still be
      connected to the system directly to enable them to monitor the status of their budgets, etc.
            This is the model that is implemented in many countries (Russia, Kazakhstan, Pakistan)
      in the initial stages of systems implementation. It is noted that this model is normally the
      one that is used anyway, when the systems have not been automated.
            Once the system is operational, SUs could be provided access to the system via a web
      portal. This would enable the SU to send a transaction to the system. However, this transac-
      tion would not update the databases and would only create a file that would subsequently
      be used by the Treasury office to update and process the transaction.
            In Indonesia the web portal model is now being implemented with the development of
      a SAKTI22 web-based interface to the system. However, it needs to be noted that the imple-
      mentation of SAKTI is NOT a pre-requisite for the implementation of SPAN. Spending units
      can continue to send transactions to the KPPNs manually as they do at present until such time
      that the SAKTI system is operational. The web based interface can be phased in overtime.
            With the implementation of Hyperion, a web-based interface is being developed to
      enable SUs to submit budget proposals to the Budget directorate and communicate changes
      during the budget preparation phase.
            An important point to be understood is that if there is a seamless interface between the
      budget preparation module and the budget execution modules which means that they share
      the system databases then it is fine. If these two modules need to have data transfer between
      them, there are a few prerequisites.
            First, after the budget has been finalized in the budget preparation module, it should
      be loaded into the budget execution module and all in-year changes to the budget, includ-
      ing to budget releases, and virements need to be made in the budget execution module.
      The databases of the budget execution module are the primary databases of the IFMIS and
      all reporting needs to be done from these databases.



Case IV: Nepal

Case Emphasis: This case illustrates the importance of placing primary focus on policy reforms
rather than technological issues.

A specific feature of the Nepal case is that it shows the criticality of placing primary emphasis
on the institutional and policy reforms. The case illustrates the fact that once the policy frame-
work is put in place then it is possible to achieve very significant outcomes with quite limited



22	 SAKTI   is an application to support SPAN (IFMIS) in Indonesia.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         technological investments. Thus, the total cost of the system in Nepal is about $5–7 million. On
                         the other hand if attention is not given to the policy side then very large investments would result
                         in very limited outcomes.

                         Pre-Reform Situation

                         The Government operated a decentralized payment and revenue remittance operation. The
                         Financial Controller General Organization (FCGO) has 75 district level branches of the District
                         Treasury Controller’s Office (DTCO) staffed by trained accountants. The spending units (approxi-
                         mately 3500) directly processed and administered government payments and record receipts.
                         The spending units maintained their own bank accounts (approximately 14,000) and make
                         payments against these accounts. Similarly, the tax authorities maintained their accounts and
                         received and recorded revenue. These accounts were held at the Nepal Reserve Bank (NRB)
134
                         regional branches and several agency banks. The SUs compiled transaction level accounts. These
                         were progressively consolidated at the line ministries and the FCGO – The role of the FCGO
                         was only to consolidate the accounts. At the start of the fiscal year, the DTCO authorized the
                         agency bank by mean of a Bank order to credit the expenditure accounts maintained by the SUs
                         with 1/6th or 1/3rd) of its budget appropriations. The SU incurred budget expenditure against this
                         account. At the end of the month SU submitted an account of payments made and the DTCO
                         issued a replenishment order to the agency bank restoring the balance. At the end of the year the
                         unused balance was remitted back to the Treasury main account at the NRB

                         Inland and Custom revenues were credited into accounts operated by the Inland Revenue and
                         Customs departments. Non-tax revenues were deposited in the SU Bank accounts. The Inter-
                         bank clearing operations are manual and are managed by the NRB and its 7 branches. Checks
                         issued by the SU reached the agency bank through the clearing system for settlement .Checks
                         received toward government revenues were first cleared by the receiving agency banks and then
                         the proceeds were credited to the appropriate revenue account of the tax authorities and SUs.
                         The clearance process could take 3–5 days or even more for remote areas

                         Problems with the System

                         FCGO did not have adequate control over the budget execution process. MOF did not have data
                         to prepare accurate and up to date fiscal reports. Retail payment and receipt operations of SUs
                         were not overseen by the DTCO. They are open to ex-post audit. However, Audit resources did
                         not permit adequate audit coverage. Serious instances of embezzlement and financial irregulari-
                         ties often surfaced.

                         The FCGO and DCTOs did not exercise control over government cash flows and balances

                         The banking arrangements fragmented Treasury balances into thousands of bank accounts which
                         operate outside Treasury control and generated significant idle balances. All the 100 or so bank
                         branches were not able to send their reports to the NRB before the end of the day therefore the
                         NRB and FCGO did not have up-to-date information on the amount of money in bank accounts.

                         There was little control over the float between receipt of revenues and its deposit in the main
                         government accounts.

                         IMF Recommendations

                         Payment and revenue recording need to be controlled by the DTCO. All SU accounts need
                         to be closed and brought under the control of the DTCO. A progressive consolidation and
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




rationalization of these accounts would take place. The SU will bring their payment requests to
the DTCO who will perform routine checks (not a full pre-audit) and issue a check in the name of
the supplier of goods and hand it over to the SU accountant (not supplier). The Bank will prepare
a list of payments/ receipts made by/in favor of the DTCO. Based on the aggregate numbers for
the disbursement/ payments, the DTCO will determine cash requirements at the agency Bank
and issue appropriate instructions to the NRB.

Bank Assessment of the Systems Upgrade Required to Implement IMF
Recommendations

Under the regime proposed by the IMF, the basic role of the DTCO would change from that of
ex-post consolidation of expenditure/ receipt transactions to that of ex-ante control. To be able
to perform these functions, the DTCO offices will need to be equipped with the technological
                                                                                                                          135
infrastructure and information systems to support basic treasury operations.

The DTCO offices would need to have access to a Core Treasury System which processes the
functionality required to support Treasury operations.

This system could be implemented at each DTCO under a distributed architecture, or the system
could be implemented centrally at the FCGO office, for example, and the DTCOs connected
to this site via telecommunication lines. The choice would be dependent on the availability of
adequate telecommunication connectivity between the DTCO and the central site. To operate
satisfactorily, there needs to be adequate telecommunication connectivity between the DTCO
and the FCGO/ MOF. For a centralized system operated at the FCGO with the DTCOs connected
to it, it would be necessary to have telecommunications connection between the DTCOs and the
FCGO with a bandwidth of at least 64 kbps. (128 kbps preferred). The less preferred alternative
is to implement a distributed architecture with the application software installed at each DTCO
and periodic data transfer facilities between the DTCOs and the FCGO.

Since the SUs would have to bring their expenditure transactions to the DTCO for processing
they would either need to have direct connections to the DTCO, or at least have reasonable
manual access. Since expenditure transactions would be processed at agency banks and peri-
odic reports required from these banks to the DTCO, there needed to be either a direct telecom-
munication link between the DTCO and these Banks or reasonable manual access.

The proper operation of these systems is also conditional on the availability of a reasonable inter-
bank clearing mechanism. Ideally this should be automated, but in the interim a good manual
system would also suffice.

Finally, staff at the DTCO would need to be trained in the restructured payment and receipts
processes and to be able to perform ex-ante control of transactions.

Since the role of the staff at the DTCO would change significantly under the new regime, from
ex-post consolidation of transactions to ex-ante control, adequate training needed to be incorpo-
rated to staff. Also, staff augmentation may be necessary at the DTCO for it to be able to perform
the transaction processing functions that would be transferred to it under the proposed scheme.

The Project

The United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) and the World Bank
expressed an interest in supporting the Government of Nepal in the implementation of the
TSA system and to finance the required upgrade/ changes to the information systems and other
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         technical infrastructure and the training of staff that would be necessary for the implementation
                         of the TSA system.

                         Implementation strategy

                         In view of the Bank’s experience that the implementation of a full function Treasury system across
                         the country could take several years, it was proposed that it would best to move on a two track
                         strategy. First make a quick assessment of what is required to be able to initiate the TSA pilot at
                         the pilot DTCOs and make the necessary changes/upgrades so that the pilot could be started as
                         soon as possible. Then, following this, to carry out a more detailed analysis of the requirements
                         for a more full function Treasury system in terms of the application software, hardware, and
                         other requirements for extending the system to other DTCOs and Treasury offices in the country,
                         and initiate a more comprehensive project. The lessons learned during the pilot implementation
136
                         could be incorporated in the more comprehensive project.

                         It was decided that the system that had been developed by IMCL under a DFID grant would
                         be used as a basis to start off the interim system. For this, the module that was being used by
                         the DTCOs for consolidation of the payments from the spending units would be modified to
                         incorporate the essential features of ex-ante budget control and payment and receipts processing
                         transaction processing that are core elements of a treasury system. The revised system, called the
                         DEC-TSA, would be implemented at each of the DTCOs spending units would send their trans-
                         actions to the DTCO which would process them using the DECTSA and generate checks drawn
                         on the Bank branch that was used to service the DTCO. The SU would no longer have direct
                         access to the Bank and all SU Bank accounts would be closed. Initially, the system operated in
                         a distributed mode at each DTCO, but as the Telecommunication facilities between the DTCO
                         and the FCGO office improved the DECTSA started operating under Centralized architecture on
                         servers located in the FCGO office. Budget approval and release data was loaded into the central
                         servers and used to control payments. Reporting modules would have the capacity to produce
                         budget execution and other fiscal reports as required.

                         This home-grown bespoke system provides a reasonable basic general ledger, cash book and bud-
                         get control functionality with reporting capabilities. The system is being rolled out to all districts.

                         The information flow associated with the payment and receipt processes in the new system are
                         shown schematically in Figure 32.

                         The key considerations for this proposed implementation phasing are the need for a planned
                         and structured absorption of the system. In addition, and to support the ease of this roll-out, it
                         is critical that the roll-out methodology in terms of technical, process, training and related skills
                         transfer are tried out as pilots before each staged roll-out phase.

                         Implementation Progress

                         Systems implementation has progressed remarkably across most of the 75 districts DTCO offices
                         including the Kathmandu DTCO which is responsible for processing over 50% of the total gov-
                         ernment transactions.

                         System roll out to each DTCO has occurred in tandem with the closure of SU Bank accounts
                         within the jurisdiction of each DTCO. Most of the 14,000 or so Bank counts have been closed
                         and the balances consolidated into a TSA held at the NRB. The majority of the payment and
                         receipt transactions of the central government are processed through the system (over 95%)
                         These transactions include capital and recurrent expenditures and tax and non-tax receipts.
                         Expenditure transactions are recorded after ex-ante budget control.
Figure 32: Nepal Treasury Systems – Participants and Information Flows

                                                                                          Advuce from FCG to NRB to
                 Budget Appropriations/                                                   tranfer funds to Agency Banks
                 Changes to Treasury; Fiscal                                              and upto date balances from
                 reports from Treasury System      Financial Controller General           NRB in Government Accounts
     MOF                                                                                                                   National Reserve Bank
                                                              (FCG)                                                                (NRB)


                                                                                   Advice from DTCO to NRB to
                                         Budget data down loaded
                                                                                   transfer funds to Agency Banks
                                               from FCG to District
                                                    Treasury System                                                         Interbank Settlement
                                          District Accounts to FCG                                                          and Clearing System




                             Payment requests                                     Payment instructions
                             from SU to DTCO                                      from DTCO              Agency Banks (operate                     Tax Payers
       Spending Unit                                   District Ofﬁces DTCO
                                                                                  List of payments and   zero balance accounts)                      Bank
                                                                                  Receipts from Agency
               Suppliers invoice to SU                                            bank to DTCO



      Suppliers/Vendors                                                                                     Suppliers/Vendors                      Tax Payers
                                                                                                                  Bank
                                                                                                                                                                AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




                                                                                                                                137
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         The donor funded project expenditures as well as repayment of debt related transactions are
                         also processed through the system on an ex-ante basis. In addition, expenditures of DDCs that
                         receive funds from the 4 de-concentrated ministries—Agriculture, Livestock, Health and Edu-
                         cation—through conditional grants are also processed through the system. The un-conditional
                         grants to the local bodies and DDCs are recorded as expenditures at the time of transfer. These
                         transactions contribute substantially towards the comprehensiveness of budget execution cover-
                         age within the system for better reporting and improved controls.

                         Gaps in the coverage are a very small portion of the overall general government expenditures. These
                         gaps include, amongst others, direct payments by donors to third parties and CSOs, TA, internally-
                         generated fund (IGF) related expenditures of the local bodies and DDCs, commodity grants.

                         Comprehensiveness of budget execution coverage through the system, as noted above, now
138
                         provides a platform to support the compilation of IPSAS cash flow statements for individual
                         ministries as well as for the general government. These statements can be compiled through map-
                         ping of the COA as developed in the system with the various items of the Cash flow statements.

                         Budget Execution Reports: The system is capable of producing ministry-wise budget execution
                         reports. These reports are an important tool for more efficient budget execution management by
                         the line ministries and contribute in strengthening public financial management. However, the
                         dissemination of these reports to the line-ministries has not been institutionalized yet.

                         Expenditure forecasts and budget ceilings: The project team has developed expenditure forecast
                         forms. Every ministry is required to submit monthly, quarterly and annual cash plans on Form
                         20 to the FCGO. These cash plans include both current and capital expenditures and are cap-
                         tured in the system on a regular basis for a more efficient cash management. A few expenditure
                         forecast reports have also been developed, which aggregate data from these forms. These cash
                         plans establish the budget ceilings for the ministries, departments and spending units. There is no
                         subsequent release process by the Ministry of Finance.

                         Reporting access to key line ministries: The Ministry of Education has been given on-line access
                         to a separate reporting server. 2–3 users of the Ministry of Education are accessing their financial
                         reports for their management needs. The data from the FMIS is transferred to this server in a batch
                         mode on a daily basis (6 pm daily) aggregated at line-item level—daily line-item totals.

                         The stability of the WAN network has also improved and remote users from DTCOs do not face
                         extended down tines. The Government has implemented Fiber optic connections with most of
                         the DTCOs. The remainder are connected via ADSL lines.

                         Remaining Work

                         Notwithstanding the remarkable progress the government has made as noted above, the system
                         still lacks functionalities to provide support for a more strengthened public financial manage-
                         ment in some critical areas. These areas can be grouped in three categories:

                         Priority items: These items have visible immediate impact on the outcomes by leveraging exist-
                         ing state of system implementation and should be done on a priority basis.

                         •	   Automatic bank reconciliation through the development of an interface: To be developed
                              on a priority basis.
                         •	   Additional reports, including cash forecast reports, fiscal operations tables on IMF format,
                              IPSAS Cash standard reports, financial balance sheet, etc.
                                                                                       AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




•	   (Cash forecast reports will incorporate data from multiple sources, including detailed debt-
     repayment schedule, revenue forecasts, expenditures forecasts (Form 20), capital receipts
     forecasts, etc. A simple forecast report is envisaged, instead of more sophisticated statistical
     forecast modeling reports).

Medium term: These areas include:

•	   Commitment management, including recording of purchase orders, multi-year contracts,
     goods receipts, invoices: Design of detailed procedures is recommended to be carried out
     as part of the development of the accounting manual, discussed in later section. The gov-
     ernment plans to implement commitment accounting for high value contracts
•	   Direct payments, including third party payments
•	   Advances and fiscal transfers.
                                                                                                                           139
Long-term: To be considered for implementation on a COTS-based solution through a follow-on
project. Key areas include:

•	   Comprehensive Commitment accounting
•	   Payroll and establishment control/position management: Currently, pays are processed
     as expenditure transactions on a lump-sum basis and distributed to the staff through the
     spending unit accountants. Given that more than 70 per cent of the current budget is spent
     on payroll, this is a substantial area of control weaknesses that needs to be improved.
•	   e-Payments: Electronic bank advice automatically pushed to the Banking systems when
     they have been upgraded for such an interface.
•	   Budget preparation and compilation on MTBF format through an integrated technology
     platform.
•	   Expenditure recording incorporating MTBF elements:
•	   Interfaces with the debt-management system after CS-DRMS has been upgraded, Revenue
     Accounting System and Pension Management System.
•	   Asset registers: Asset accounting in government should be started with establishing asset
     registers to record the assets codes, location, movements, custody, supplier, etc. Asset
     accounting in terms of valuation, depreciation is a huge task and should be contemplated
     only after necessary preparations.

Lessons Learned

•	   In addition to the other aspects highlighted in the previous cases, a specific lesson that can
     be learned from the Nepal case is that it shows the criticality of placing emphasis on insti-
     tutional and policy reform.
•	   Once the policy framework is put in place then it is possible to achieve very significant
     outcomes with quite limited technological investments. Thus, the total cost of the system in
     Nepal is only about $5–7 million. On the other hand, if attention is not given to the policy
     side then very large investments would lead to very limited outcomes.

Continuing Vulnerabilities

Critical need for an IT organization –The Bank has repeatedly highlighted the critical importance
of setting up a stable and fully-staffed technical organization within the government responsible
for the sustainability of the IFMIS. After Implementation these systems become a mission critical
government system on which the government depends for its day today financial transaction
processing. Any disruption in systems operations can lead to significant disruptions in a govern-
ment’s financial operations.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         This is a key area that needs to be addressed in Nepal as in other countries in South Asia. In Paki-
                         stan, for example, there is no career path for technical IT staff in Government positions unlike in the
                         private sector, where personnel are recruited on a national basis into recognized cadre structures.


                         Case V: Maldives Public Accounting System

                         Case Emphasis: Implementation in an Island economy

                         Background

                         The Maldives Public Accounting System (PAS) was proposed for implementation—initially to sup-
                         port the financial management requirements of the Tsunami Relief Fund, with a medium to long
140
                         term plan for its implementation across the entire government. Financial management functions
                         that would be encompassed include: Budget preparation, accounting, reporting, and treasury
                         systems covering both receipts and payments) and a payroll system for government employees.
                         A detailed diagnostic of existing systems and proposed reforms along with implementation strat-
                         egy was conducted by Government of Maldives with the support of Stanton Partners, Australia
                         financed by Asian Development Bank (ADB). This report would form the basis of implementation
                         of the Public Accounting System of the Government of Maldives under this project.

                         Objectives

                         The goals of the project are to (i) promote improved budget practices, thus enhancing financial
                         management as well as the development of effective fiscal operations and macroeconomic poli-
                         cymaking; (ii) establish accurate, reliable, and timely financial reporting to meet international
                         accounting standards (Cash-based International Public Sector Accounting Standards) by elimi-
                         nating laborious manual financial reporting systems, promoting accountability, and providing
                         appropriate financial information to the Government for economic decision making; and (iii)
                         conduct more comprehensive and updated control over public funds and help develop a cash
                         management strategy to rationalize cash movements and holdings, especially at the atolls and
                         islands. The Project covers nationwide Government agencies involved in the PAS in Maldives
                         including ministries, atoll offices, and island offices and would provide the financial reporting
                         framework for public sector.

                         Scope

                         The Maldives project envisaged implementing a full-function Public Accounting system (PAS).
                         This project would include: (a) required enhancements to the legal and regulatory framework;23
                         (b) incorporation of the functional and technical design of the full-function PAS as described
                         in the Stanton partners’ report referred to above, (c) development and implementation of the
                         accounting standards, policies and operating instructions required for the new system; (d) devel-
                         opment and implementation of the new system, across the Ministry of Finance, line ministries
                         and Atolls / islands in the country; and (e) training of PAS related functional and technical staff in
                         the use, operation and maintenance of the system.



                         23	 Asrecommended by Stanton partners, three separate legislations have been prepared by the Republic
                           of Maldives for reforming the legal and regulatory framework which includes (a) the Public Finance Bill,
                           which has been presented to the Peoples’ majlis and currently under discussion by a sub-committee ;
                           (b) Audit Bill, which has seen several iterations and a draft of which is currently with the Office of the
                           Attorney General and (c) the Public Enterprise Bill which has been drafted. GoM plans to have other two
                           acts presented to Peoples’ majlis by June, 2006.
                                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




The Public Accounting System (PAS)

The system would be used to assist the MoFT in all aspects of budget preparation, execution
and management of government financial resources. The system would cover all spending units
financed from the GOM’s budget, and would include all expenditure transactions pertaining to
these units. All steps in the expenditure cycle including, budget appropriations, financing limits,
commitments, verification and payment transactions would be recorded by the system.

The overall design of the PAS is consistent with IMF recommendations; and the design features
and best practices as defined in the Treasury Reference Model developed by the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund.

The design envisages that all government moneys would be lodged in a Treasury Single Account                                         141
at the Maldives Monetary Authority (Central Bank of Maldives) All spending unit Bank accounts
would be closed and all Government expenditure and receipt transactions would be routed
through the Treasury Single Account.. This would enable:

•	      A reduction of idle balances and better cash management24 by putting all Government
        resources under control of the Treasury;
•	      Better controls during budget execution. Treasury would check whether budgetary expendi-
        tures are in accordance with the approved budget, within the specified spending limits and
        funds allocations, prior to approving an expenditure transaction; and
•	      Comprehensive accounting and fiscal reporting, thereby contributing to better financial
        management.

The term PAS is used here to refer collectively to the systems modules that provide support for:

•	      Budget Preparation and Approval: The budget preparation system will receive details of
        ongoing and planned programs and projects from line ministries, consolidate them, and
        produce from them the documents that form the basis of the negotiations between the
        line ministries and central ministries. After finalization of the budget by the legislature, the
        system will produce the approved budget estimates. The finalized budget figures will then
        be loaded into the Treasury systems for budget execution, accounting and fiscal reporting.
•	      The Treasury system will maintain data on approved budgeted appropriations (both capital
        and recurrent), sources of financing for programs and projects. This information is trans-
        ferred to these systems from the budget preparation systems after the budget has been
        finalized. During the course of the year as budget transfers, supplementary allocations, fund
        releases (warrants) take place, this information is also recorded in the system. The systems
        will process commitment, expenditure and receipt transactions as they occur during the
        course of the year and maintain a record of commitments and actual expenditures against
        budgeted allocations and details of receipts. The General Ledger will compile summary
        records for control and analysis. This system will provide the Government the capability to
        monitor the overall budget execution process and generate fiscal reports.
•	      Payroll and Pensions: In addition, the project would implement a payroll system for the gov-
        ernment employees. This will ensure integrity of the GOM’s personnel records and support
        human resource management. These systems will support functional processes associated




24	 Cash   held in safes is estimated at Rf 20 million and the total held in the Bank of Maldives on the account
     of atoll entities is estimated at a further Rf 20 million (based on 31 December 1998 figures given in
     ADB’s PAD). The total amount is considered to be at least twice the amount reasonably needed to fund
     expenditure in the atolls.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                              with staff complement control and payroll and pension payment management. For payment
                              of salaries and pensions, the systems will be integrated with the core payment and account-
                              ing systems.
                         •	   Systems to support Auditing: These systems will assist internal and external audit agencies
                              in their functions and enable direct access to the databases maintained by the other systems
                              modules.

                         The system includes integrated external interfaces from/to the PAS as under:

                         •	   Interface to the banking system: This will be used for the electronic transfer of GOM pay-
                              ment transactions to the bank/MMA and information on revenue receipts from bank/MMA
                              to the tax department. It will also be used for the bank/MMA to send end-of-day reports on
                              payments and receipts which will enable the PAS to be able always to present an up-to-date
142
                              picture of the GOM’s cash and liquidity position.
                         •	   Interface to the MMA: This will be used for exchange of information on movements through
                              the GOM account at MMA.
                         •	   Interface to the Auditor General’s Office: This will provide consolidated information from
                              the core accounting systems to the Auditor General’s office (AG), to support external audit
                              purposes.
                         •	   Interface to other government systems such as debt management, customs, tax administration

                         Phasing

                         Under the proposed implementation plan for the Public Accounting System, the rollout of com-
                         puterization was envisaged to occur in three phases as shown in Figure 33, as proposed by the
                         project consultants

                         Phase 1 – Implementation at TRRF and Ministry of Finance and Treasury

                         Phase I(a) of the implementation of PAS will focus on covering 100 percent of the Tsunami
                         Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Fund (TRRF) to meet the immediate objective of improving
                         the FM arrangements for Tsunami flows (subject to proof of concept described below).

                         In Phase 1(b), vouchers would be batched by ministries and atolls and submitted to MOFT for
                         data entry to the computerized Central Ledger for payment. Output reports in hard copy would
                         be distributed back to ministries and atolls.

                         Phase 2 – Enquiry from Ministries

                         Vouchers would continue to be batched and submitted to MOFT for data entry, but ministries
                         and atolls would have an online enquiry facility replacing the hard copy reports.

                         Phase 3 – Online Data Entry from Ministries and Atolls

                         Ministries and atolls would have the facility to enter data direct to the Central Ledger, to replace
                         the batching and submission of vouchers. This would be introduced sometime after the PAS has
                         been fully implemented.

                         Implementation of the PAS was supposed to be completed in about 4 years.

                         The project also provided for financing for training staff and for consulting services required for
                         assisting the Government in implementation of computerized PAS. Specific activities will include:
                                                                                                 AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Figure 33: Maldives PAS Roll-Out Phases

                                PHASE ROLLOUT OF COMPUTERISATION

PHASE 1- Batching Process Ministry of Finance and Treasury

   Batched
 Vouchers from                                                                                       Output
                                                                  Computerised and
   Ministries                         Input Data                                                     Reports
                                                                  Centralised General
                                         Entry                          Ledger


PHASE 2 - Enquiry from Ministries
                                                                                                                                     143

                                Ministries and Atolls
                               online enquiring facility
                                  to Central Ledger

   Batched
 Vouchers from                                                                                       Output
                                                                  Computerised and
   Ministries                         Input Data                                                     Reports
                                                                  Centralised General
                                         Entry                          Ledger


PHASE 3 - Online Data Entry from Ministries



  Online data entry from                       Computerised and                        Output
   Line Ministries and                         Centralised General                     Reports
          Atolls                                     Ledger




•	      Assist the government in implementing policy reform initiatives envisaged as a part of the
        project.25
•	      Prepare the bidding documents including detailed technical specifications for the acquisi-
        tion of the hardware / software and associated implementation services26 required for PAS.
•	      Support tender selection of contractor responsible for providing accounting software, hard-
        ware and implementation services.
•	      Facilitate government in preparing financial statements of Republic of Maldives based on
        IPSAS (c-ash based) standards.
•	      Assistance to the government for monitoring the performance of the contractor and accep-
        tance of the systems. This will involve overseeing the execution, and reporting to GOM
        on progress of the entire project and associated components, particularly for hardware,
        network and connectivity installation and physical site preparation.




25	 This  would include those initiatives as recommended in the report by the Stanton partners, UK and other
     actions as may be needed like finalization of the Public Finance Instructions.
26	 Stanton  Partners have prepared a draft functional requirements for PAS on the basis of which this consultant
     will prepare detailed technical specifications.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Acquisition of application software, hardware, implementation support and training
                         The procurement of application software, hardware, implementation support and training for
                         implementation of the PAS was envisaged to be carried out on turnkey basis, under which the
                         successful consortium of firms will be expected to carry out all services and activities necessary
                         to achieve a fully-working system—covering all functionality in all applicable GOM locations—
                         according to an agreed Project Plan.

                         Project Management

                         MOFT was the Executing Agency for the Project, with overall operational responsibility for proj-
                         ect management. A project steering committee (PSC), chaired by the Minister of State for Finance
                         and Treasury or the Minister’s appointee, will be established prior to the commencement of the
144                      Project. The composition of the PSC will be small to avoid making it unwieldy and will include
                         representatives from MMA; Audit Office; NCIT, large spending ministries like Health/ Education,
                         Ministry of Atolls development, etc.

                         A Project Management Unit (PMU) was established in MOFT with day-to-day operational
                         responsibility for project management.

                         The total cost of the project was estimated to be about US$7.5 million.

                         Key Milestones during implementation:
                         •	   Appointment of the consultant (IMCL) by Early January 2006
                         •	   Preparation of bidding documents by late February, 2006
                         •	   Procurement of turnkey contractor (hardware, software, implementation service, training)
                              by November 2006
                         •	   Implementation of PAS – Phase I (a) and Phase I (b) by April 2007
                         •	   Implementation of Phase II – December 2007
                         •	   Implementation of Phase III – October 2009

                         Project Status:

                         The Functional requirements consultants (IMCL) were selected in 2006 and completed func-
                         tional requirements analysis and developed specifications for application software / hardware
                         required – 2007; Implementation Contractor (ATOS) was selected and systems implementation
                         started in 2008. This contractor, to be responsible for application software, hardware and imple-
                         mentation services was selected through an ICB. The Application software selected was SAP.

                         The centralized payment system for all Male based spending agencies started working in an
                         online real-time mode since May 1, 2009 using the new PAS with processing all transactions
                         against the single Public Bank Account (PBA).

                         At the start of the year, the approved budget is loaded into the system. In year changes and bud-
                         get releases are, however, still forwarded on paper (and not electronically through the system) to
                         the Public Accounting Division (PAD) by the National Budget Office and are thereafter entered
                         into the system using the financial module. Real time budget availability checks are performed
                         before funds are released for any budgetary expenditure through the PBA.

                         Initially, payment transactions from agencies in Male were forwarded manually to the MOFT
                         to be processed centrally. Now the Accounts Payable module of the PAS system has been suc-
                         cessfully implemented at spending units in Male and these transactions are entered directly
                         into the system by agency staff. This has eliminated the heavy transaction data entry load on the
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




central unit in the MOFT and also made the spending agencies fully responsible for all upstream
processes related to payments with increased end user involvement. The responsible unit in the
MOFT reviews these transactions and related documentation which is received electronically
from the line agency before the release of payment request. For approved payments, a check is
written in the name of the payee against the PBA. Since all spending agencies were connected
in Male and all payment and receipt transactions routed through the central server, 80 percent
of the transactions or more in terms of the money were being routed through the system even
though the Atoll offices have not been connected.

As of late 2011, the payroll module had been rolled out to a number (26) of spending agencies
and covers some 6000 staff out of a total public service staff of about 32,000. The Material Man-
agement module has been rolled out to 14 agencies.
                                                                                                                          145
Connectivity to Atoll Islands: The National Commission on IT (NCIT) assured the Bank that con-
nectivity at 256 kbps to the Atoll would be available. NCIT was in the process of entering into a
single agreement with commercial suppliers.

Connectivity and PAS performance was tested from one atoll site in January 2010. However, no
further implementation activity has taken place due to ongoing discussions related to decen-
tralization of the government in Maldives and impending agreement on the eventual model for
managing public finances in the regions and the atolls.

Establishment of regional treasury offices in the Atolls. A decision has been taken to establish
regional treasury offices in two Atolls to start with; others to follow.

Issues

Several key issues that were highlighted repeatedly by the Bank missions, and which have
adversely affected project progress and PAS implementation are:

•	   The involvement of National Budget Office (NBO): The NBO’s involvement continues to
     be minimal in operating the Budget module of PAS. This is a serious issue. The Bank mis-
     sions repeatedly urged that this situation needs to be rectified and the NBO needs to take
     on responsibility for performing its functions of budget monitoring, release and oversight
     directly through the system, instead of the current practice of passing on transactions to the
     PAD for entry to the system.
•	   Acute staffing constraints in the Public Accounting Division (PAD): This issue was high-
     lighted repeatedly by the Bank and, despite its urgency, nothing significant has been done
     to address the acute staffing constraints of the Public Accounts Division (PAD) of the MOFT.
     Pay policies and hiring practices have led to exodus of MOFT staff and prevented the hiring
     of new staff. The Division lost 8 out of 12 key business area experts that had been trained
     under the project and were responsible for implementing the system in their functional areas
     both at the Central Office and the end user departments. None of them have been replaced
     due to salary constraints on the public sector side. This has put further implementation of
     PAS at very high risk. Perhaps more importantly, this situation also puts the day to day opera-
     tion of this mission critical system (such as regular processing of government transactions
     and payroll payments through the system) into jeopardy and high risk of breakdown. The
     World Bank missions alerted the Government as to the criticality of the situation and urged
     the Government to address it but nothing significant was done. As an alternative the Bank
     urged the government to hire the services of International SAP experts. To get around the pay
     policies the Bank also agreed to finance local individual consultants who are conversant in
     the use of the SAP system for financial management and accounting at competitive salaries
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                              from the local market for a period of two years initially. This will provide the necessary impe-
                              tus and momentum to PAS implementation. The Government is moving on some of these
                              suggestions to address the situation. However, progress on this front remains slow.

                         Lessons Learned

                         •	   In addition to the lessons highlighted in other cases, the major take away from the Mal-
                              dives experience is that the day to day operation of a mission critical system on which the
                              government depends for its days to day financial operations can be put at risk if adequate
                              attention is not paid to address the staffing shortages for critical technical staff required for
                              operation of the system.
                         •	   Emphasis on policy reform issues is still paramount for island economies.
                         •	   Normally a major part of the transactions in terms of volume and amounts of money are at
146
                              the center with a small number of transactions at other islands; Therefore a good way to pro-
                              ceed is to set up a central system for the bulk of the transactions and locate it at the center
                         •	   Off-line processing arrangements can be used for remote islands using imprest accounts as
                              an interim step.
                                                                                          AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Annex II – Treasury Diagnostic Questionnaire

Introduction

Prior to start of a typical Treasury/IFMIS Development Project it is necessary to determine the
current status of the Treasury in terms of its legal and institutional arrangements, functional
processes, systems and procedures. Such an assessment would highlight any weaknesses in the
underlying legal and institutional arrangements and existing systems, provide a list of areas that
need attention, and a road map for further reform.

This annex presents a checklist of items that could be used to identify areas that need attention.
This checklist could also be used to assess the state of implementation of the Treasury function                              147
and associated systems in an ongoing Treasury project.

This checklist is intended to serve as a list of functions and features that need to be examined
covering various aspects of the Treasury function, ranging from the legal and institutional frame-
work to the characteristics of the specific systems adopted in order to determine its current status
and area of further reform.




A list of areas to be checked for assessing the status of Treasury implementation in
member countries

 Function/ Feature           Current Status
 Legal and Organizational Framework
    Legal Basis              •	 Treasury has not been set up as yet – Is the Central Bank performing
                                treasury functions?
                             •	 Treasury established under a Presidential or any other statutory decree
                                giving it the authority to monitor and control budget execution
                             •	 Comprehensive Organic Budget Law prepared that defines the roles
                                and responsibilities of the agencies involved in budget execution and is
                                in Parliament for approval
                             •	 Budget Law approved and implemented
    Treasury Organization    •	 No Separate Treasury organization exists.
                             •	 Treasury organization set up at headquarters
                             •	 Country wide Network of Treasury offices set up and in operation
                                                                                 (continue on next page)
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         A list of areas to be checked for assessing the status of Treasury implementation in
                         member countries (continued)

                          Function/ Feature        Current Status
                         Treasury Coverage
                             Treasury control      •	 MOF Transfers Budget funds to spending agency bank accounts in
                             over government          central/ commercial banks; spending units have direct access to bank
                             financial resources      accounts; Treasury has no ex-ante control over expenditure from these
                             (Budget resources)       accounts
                             and expenditure       •	 Spending agency bank accounts being progressively closed and
                             transactions             corresponding resources being brought under the control of the
                                                      Treasury.
                                                      •	 (Status to date <25%). A TSA has been set up at the Central bank
148                                                      where these resources are banked. These spending units send their
                                                         payment transactions to a designated treasury office for processing
                                                         against the TSA and payment.
                                                      •	 Most Budget funds are under control of the Treasury and banked
                                                         in the TSA (>75%). These spending units send their payment
                                                         transactions to a designated treasury office for processing against
                                                         the TSA and payment.
                                                      •	 All spending agency bank accounts under the control of the
                                                         Treasury.
                                                      •	 Bank accounts consolidated into a TSA held at the Central Bank
                                                         and under the control of the Treasury. All spending units send their
                                                         payment transactions to a designated treasury office for processing
                                                         against the TSA and payment.
                             Coverage of Central   •	 A Treasury has not been set up.
                             Budget                •	 Central government payment and receipt transactions originating at the
                                                      Center are routed through Treasury.
                                                   •	 Most central government payment and receipt transactions are routed
                                                      through Treasury. Includes those originating at the Center and in the
                                                      provinces
                                                   •	 All central government payment and receipt transactions are routed
                                                      through Treasury. Includes those originating at the center, the provinces
                                                      and districts.
                             Coverage of EBFs-     •	 EBFs operate accounts outside Treasury Control. Their accounts are not
                             accounts and             part of the TSA and transactions are not routed through the Treasury
                             transactions          •	 Some EBFs have been transferred under Treasury control and the
                                                      corresponding Bank accounts are under Treasury control (<25%). These
                                                      transactions are routed through the Treasury.
                                                   •	 Most EBFs have been transferred under Treasury control and the
                                                      corresponding Bank accounts are under Treasury control (>75%). These
                                                      transactions are routed through the Treasury.
                                                   •	 All EBFs have been transferred under Treasury control and the
                                                      corresponding Bank accounts are under Treasury control. All
                                                      transactions are routed through the Treasury.
                         Coverage of Technical     •	 Technical Revenue (spending unit earnings from fees, etc.) accounts
                         Revenue – accounts and       are outside Treasury Control. Their accounts are not part of the TSA and
                         transactions                 transactions are not routed through the Treasury
                                                   •	 Some technical revenue accounts have been transferred under Treasury
                                                      control and the corresponding transactions are routed through Treasury
                                                      (<25 percent).
                                                   •	 Most technical revenue accounts have been transferred under Treasury
                                                      control and the corresponding transactions are routed through treasury
                                                      (>75 percent)
                                                   •	 All Technical revenue Accounts EBFs have been transferred under
                                                      Treasury control and the corresponding transactions are routed through
                                                      treasury.
                                                                                                        (continue on next page)
                                                                                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




A list of areas to be checked for assessing the status of Treasury implementation in
member countries (continued)

 Function/ Feature             Current Status
Coverage of sub-national       •	 Sub-national government accounts are not part of the TSA Transactions
governments                       are not routed Through the Treasury
                               •	 Some sub national revenue transactions covered. Some Sub national
                                  revenue/expenditure transactions covered; and/ or some sub national
                                  treasuries have been set up but operate independently of central
                                  Treasury
                               •	 Sub national revenue and expenditure transactions covered; or, sub
                                  national treasuries have been set up and operate under a set of national
                                  guidelines and exchange information with the center
System Functionality                                                                                                             149
    Budget Management          •	 Budget classification Structure
                               •	 The Budget classification structure is not GFS(2001/1986) compliant
                               •	 A basic GFS compliant budget classification structure has been
                                  introduced with a Function and an economic classification segments
                                  (that are) GFS compliant, and an Organization segment.
                               •	 A comprehensive budget classification structure with capacity to also
                                  monitor expenditures on projects and programs is in use
    The use of the same        •	 The economic classification segment of the BCS is not a subset of the
    classification structure      COA.
    for budgeting and for      •	 The economic classification segment of the BCS is a subset of the COA
    accounting –
    The use of the same        •	 The BCS and the COA are not the same for all levels of government
    BCS and COA                •	 The BCS and the COA are the same for all levels of government
    across all levels of
    Government
    Budget Transactions
    Initial Budget Load        •	 No Treasury System
                               •	 Treasury loads budget in system
                               •	 Budget administrators are connected to the system and directly load
                                  budget in the system
    Apportionments/            •	 Treasury loads apportionment/allotment transactions in the system
    allotments/releases        •	 Budget administrators are directly connected to the system and load
                                  apportioned/ allotment transactions in the system
    Transfers/virements        •	 Treasury loads in year changes to the system
                               •	 Budget administrators load in year changes to the system
    Supplementary              •	 Treasury loads supplementary budgets in the system
    allocations                •	 Budget administrators load supplementary budgets in the system
    Commitment                 •	 No commitment control is practiced.
    management                 •	 Selective commitment recording is in place for major contracts or for
                                  selective line items, but payment control against these commitments is
                                  not automatic.
                               •	 Selective commitment recording in place and also used for payment
                                  control. Treasury loads commitments transactions in the system.
                               •	 Request for commitment checked against annual budget allocation;
                               •	 Request for commitment checked against periodic commitment ceilings
                                  (cash ceiling/funds ceiling)
                               •	 Comprehensive commitment control is in place. Spending units and
                                  line ministries enter commitments directly in the system Outstanding
                                  commitments automatically lapse at year end
                               •	 Outstanding commitments can be carried forward to future year(s)
                                                                                   (continue on next page)
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         A list of areas to be checked for assessing the status of Treasury implementation in
                         member countries (continued)

                          Function/ Feature        Current Status
                             Payments management   •	 Goods and Service related payments
                                                   •	 No control exercised by Treasury
                                                   •	 Payment requests sent to the Treasury along with PO/Contract/GRN/
                                                      Invoice. Treasury examines documents manually, system checks
                                                      payments requests against budget appropriations, and releases /warrants
                                                   •	 Treasury also enters PO contract/GRN and invoice in the system.
                                                      Treasury checks payment request against commitment/PO/GRN/Invoice
                                                      and releases for payment.
                                                   •	 Spending units have the capacity to enter PO/contracts/GRN directly in
150                                                   the system or via web portal. Treasury reviews and schedules payments
                                                   •	 Direct payments
                                                   •	 Payments requests sent to Treasury; Treasury enters payment requests
                                                   •	 SU enters payments requests directly in the system Treasury reviews
                                                      and schedules payment
                                                   •	 Payroll related payments
                                                   •	 Payment request based on a calculated payroll ( by SU) sent to Treasury;
                                                   •	 Changes to the payroll file sent to the Treasury. Treasury operates
                                                      central payroll
                             Receipts management   •	 Treasury has no role
                                                   •	 Some receipts routed through Treasury
                                                   •	 Most receipts are routed through treasury;
                                                   •	 All receipts routed through Treasury;
                                                   •	 Miscellaneous receipts
                                                   •	 Taxes and Duties
                                                   •	 Customs and tax receipts are deposited in bank accounts controlled by
                                                      tax and customs and deposited periodically to the TSA.
                                                   •	 Tax and customs receipts are deposited in bank accounts controlled by
                                                      Treasury. Treasury informs tax and customs departments of details of
                                                      receipts
                                                   •	 Time duration between collection of receipts and transferring the same
                                                      into Treasury
                             Cash management       •	 Treasury has no control over spending agency Bank accounts; Treasury
                                                      gets periodic information on balances in bank accounts from central
                                                      (TSA) bank
                                                   •	 Treasury has on-line access to balances in bank accounts; Treasury able
                                                      to monitor balances
                                                   •	 Treasury recommends level of spending limits / warrants/ borrowing.
                                                   •	 Treasury plays an active role in cash requirements forecasting
                             Fiscal reporting      •	 MOF relies on reports from line agencies which are submitted on
                                                      monthly/ quarterly basis, are late in coming and cannot be verified for
                                                      accuracy.
                                                   •	 MOF starts getting some information from Treasury on the status of
                                                      budget execution for payments and receipts that are routed through
                                                      Treasury
                                                   •	 MOF gets fairly comprehensive information on the status of budget
                                                      execution since most central budget transactions are routed through
                                                      Treasury
                                                   •	 The Treasury has complete and timely information on all budget
                                                      receipts and expenditures; Comprehensive set of fiscal reports
                                                      produced by Treasury for MOF.
                                                                                                       (continue on next page)
                                                                                          AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




A list of areas to be checked for assessing the status of Treasury implementation in
member countries (continued)

 Function/ Feature        Current Status
    Basis of Accounting   •	   Cash
                          •	   Modified Cash
                          •	   Modified Cash/Accrual
                          •	   Well documented accounting framework in practice;
                          •	   Multiple accounting models used at various level of Government
                               (national/subnational)
                          •	   Adoption of IPSAS;
                          •	   National body for setting Govt. accounting standards
                          •	   Preparation of financial statements;                                                           151
                          •	   Preparation of financial statements (national and sub-national)
    General Ledger        •	 Treasury maintains and updated single / unified general ledger
                          •	 Multiple General Ledgers are being maintained
    Advanced Budgeting    •	 Line Item
    features              •	 Program based
                          •	 Performance criteria introduced and are being monitored
Nature of Information     •	 No information systems support.
systems support for       •	 Rudimentary and partially manual information systems assist Treasury
Treasury Processes           in distributing limits, warrants and controlling payments. Patchwork of
                             systems is in use that are not connected to each other
                          •	 Basic IT systems at HQ and Treasury connected via
                             telecommunications and exchange summary information.
                          •	 Bespoke solutions with limited documentation
                          •	 Line ministries authorized to have their independent financial
                             management applications
                          •	 Treasury systems have functionality that enables Treasury to set up a
                             Treasury General ledger (TGL) and exchange transaction data between
                             Treasury HQ, regional offices and local treasury branches. However,
                             separate databases exist at each level.
                          •	 A full function Treasury system with capacity for budget management,
                             commitment management, accounts payable, accounts receivable,
                             general ledger, purchasing, fixed assets and fiscal reporting is in place.
                             System has capacity to implement accrual accounting.
Systems Architecture      •	   None
                          •	   Distributed architecture
                          •	   Partially distributed architecture
                          •	   Centralized architecture
Systems deployment        •	 None
                          •	 Treasury centric; No direct connections for Budget administrators or
                             other agencies
                          •	 Treasury and Line ministries and budget administrators are directly
                             connected to the system
                          •	 Budget administrators, line ministries, spending units and treasury
                             offices are connected. OR line ministries and SUs have access via a
                             web portal
Data Warehouse            •	 None
                          •	 A data-warehouse has been implemented and gives users the capability
                             to formulate queries against the system databases and produce a variety
                             of fiscal and budget execution and other analytical reports.
                          •	 Data maintenance
                             •	 Statutory requirement for keeping data – how many years for any
                                 specific kind of data
                                                                                 (continue on next page)
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         A list of areas to be checked for assessing the status of Treasury implementation in
                         member countries (continued)

                          Function/ Feature          Current Status
                         Use of Other Systems
                         Modules and interfaces
                         with other systems
                             Budget Preparation
                             Budget compilation      •	 Manual
                                                     •	 Partly automated but not integrated with Treasury system
                                                     •	 Automated and integrated with Treasury System
                             Full Budget             •	 Manual
152                          preparation including   •	 Partly automated but not integrated with Treasury system
                             calculation of the
                                                     •	 Automated and integrated with Treasury System
                             costs of programs and
                             projects
                             MTEF capability         •	 Operated separately from Budget preparation system
                                                     •	 Included in Budget preparation system
                             Payroll                 •	 Manual and calculated separately by Spending units
                                                     •	 Some SUs use an automated system but not integrated with Treasury
                                                     •	 A central automated payroll system is in use and integrated with
                                                        Treasury system
                                                     •	 An automated decentralized payroll system exists
                             Pensions for            •	 Manual and calculated separately by Pension department
                             Government              •	 Automated pensions calculation used but not integrated with Treasury
                             pensioners
                                                     •	 Automated pensions calculation integrated with Treasury system
                             Benefits calculation    •	 Manual and calculated separately by Spending units
                             for Government          •	 Some SUs use an automated system but not integrated with Treasury
                             employees (Provident
                                                     •	 A central automated payroll system is in use and integrated with
                             Fund and Gratuity)
                                                        Treasury system
                             Complement Control      •	 Manual and done off line
                                                     •	 Treasury checks availability of establishment budget off line before
                                                        running payroll.
                                                     •	 Integrated with Treasury. Prior to the payroll run Treasury checks for
                                                        availability of sanctioned posts from the establishment list.
                             Debt Management         •	   Manual
                                                     •	   Automated but not integrated with Treasury
                                                     •	   Automated and integrated with treasury system
                                                     •	   Sub-national debt management system
                             Fixed Assets            •	 Manual
                                                     •	 Automated and integrated with treasury system
                             Auditing                •	 Audit department has online access to Treasury databases
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Annex III – A Questionnaire to Assess the
Suitability of Application Software to meet
Treasury Functional Requirements
This Annex is intended to assist Treasury managers in the process of selecting appropriate appli-
cation software from the wide range of options that are now available in the market. The ques-
tionnaire focuses on Treasury-specific requirements that are not commonly found in a statement
of requirements for commercial accounting systems. It is intended to provide Treasury manag-
ers in client countries a benchmark to determine the goodness of fit of the major products on
the market with the core Treasury functional processes and requirements. In an actual software
selection process it would be used to supplement the normal set of requirements used in the
selection of accounting systems.
                                                                                                                            153

Specifically, Treasury managers would need to determine:

•	   How a specific package would be set up / operated in the institutional setting under which
     the Treasury Department has been set up in the country.
•	   Determine how the package would support/ perform the key functional processes involved
     in Treasury operations.
•	   Determine how the package would interface with the banking system (Interbank clearing
     system) to enable payments to be made by the Treasury from the Treasury Single Account,
     and record revenue receipts that are normally collected via the banking system and depos-
     ited in the TSA.



Part I – Implementation Arrangements and Technology Architecture

 Question                                                                             Response
 Describe how the application software package can be implemented in the specific
 institutional setting in this country. Specifically describe which modules need to
 be implemented at various locations – Spending Unit, MOF, Treasury head office,
 Treasury subordinate office, Line Ministry, Spending units.


Interface with the Banking System

 Question                                                                             Response
 Describe how the package will interface with the banking system to enable payments
 from the Treasury to be transmitted to the TSA Bank and to record information from
 the TSA bank on revenue receipts.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Technology Architecture

                          Question                                                                                  Response
                          Describe how the application software package will be implemented in each of the
                          following settings
                          Case I: The Treasury system operates in a centralized architecture with the application
                          software being resident at the central treasury and subordinate offices connected to
                          the central servers via on-line connections for transaction processing.
                          Case II: The Treasury system operates in a two tier partially centralized architecture
                          with the application software being resident on servers located at the Provincial/
                          Regional level. Lower level treasury offices connect to these servers via on line
                          telecommunication connections and transaction processing is carried out at the
                          provincial level.
                          Describe, in brief, the hardware/software platform required to operate the package as
154                       the Treasury system. (. Name and type of application software package, size of servers,
                          nature of operating system, DBMS, client operating system , nature of LAN/WAN, etc.)
                          Describe the nature of telecommunications connections required to transfer data or
                          for connections between different levels. (leased lines/dial up), (fiber optic,/copper/
                          satellite, etc.)
                          Is the system access web-based, so that access to the system can be obtained by
                          connecting to an ISP which, in turn, establishes the connection to the system?
                          What languages does the package support? Is a version available in the local
                          language?
                          Is full end user documentation / technical documentation available in these
                          languages?
                          What technical support arrangements and network are available for supporting the
                          application software in country?


                         Cost, Time Required for Implementation

                          Question                                                                                  Response
                          What is the license fee per user for the modules that would be necessary to operate
                          the Treasury functions described in this document?



                         Part II – Treasury Functional Processes

                          Question                                                                                  Response
                          What are the principal modules of the system required?
                          Budget management
                          Commitment management
                          Purchasing
                          Fixed Assets
                          Accounts Payable
                          Accounts Receivable
                          General Ledger
                          Fiscal reporting
                          Other.
                                                                                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Management of Budget Authority

Question                                                                                   Response
Budget Classification Structure
Can the software package support the budget classification structure in use?
Fund
Function
Organization
Program
Project
Economic classification (Object of Expenditure)
What are the limitations on the sizes of the various segments in the budget
classification structure?
                                                                                                                                 155
How easily can changes be made to the budget classification structure in the light of
changing country requirements?
How long will it take to make these changes?
Budget Load Facility
Is there a facility available to upload the annual approved budget into the system as
is normally required at the start of the year?
What is the required format of the input file, for example, can this upload be done
from an Excel file? What other formats are available?
Expenditure Plans Recording Facility
Does the system have a facility to record ministries / spending units expenditure
plans (prepared on e.g. a monthly or a quarterly basis) at the start of the fiscal year.
Is there a facility available to upload expenditure plans from external files? Any
restrictions on format?
Describe how changes to these expenditure plans can be made in the system.
Budget Apportionment and Allotment
Describe/Demonstrate how the process of budget apportionment (for ministries) and
allotment (for spending units) is carried out in the system.
Does the system have a facility to set spending limits (apportionments/ allotments)
equal to the ministry/ spending unit expenditure plans?
Can the limits be set by prorating the overall approved budget amount. by month, for
example?
Warrant and Sub Warrants
Describe how the system would support the warrant and sub-warrant processes.
Can the warrant/ sub-warrants be set equal to the Spending Unit expenditure plans?
What are the controls in place on the releases of warrants/sub-warrants?
What kinds of controls are imposed to ensure that total sub warrants do not exceed
total warrants and the total warrants do not exceed the apportionments/ allotments?
Are the controls imposed for every budget line item?


Budget Transfers

Question                                                                                   Response
What are the facilities in the system to make transfers of budget allocations from one
category to another?
What controls are in place?
Can specific agencies be given the authority to make these transfers, for example,
different authorities to be exercised at the spending unit level, at the line ministry
level, and the MOF?
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Supplementary Budgets

                          Question                                                                                Response
                          What facilities are in place to support the supplementary budget process?


                         Commitment of Funds

                          Question                                                                                Response
                          Can the system support the commitment process?
                          If yes, what are the controls in place for approving commitments?
                          Is the commitment request checked against the budget appropriation, apportionment
                          or against the available warrant allocation before approval?
                          Can thresholds/ other criteria be set for approval of commitment requests to be
156                       applicable at the spending unit, parent ministry and at the MOF level?
                          Does the system have a facility to review budget data on available funds and existing
                          commitments prior to approving new commitments?
                          Does the line ministry / spending unit making the commitment need to have direct
                          access to the commitment module of the Treasury system to record commitment
                          requests?
                          If not, how can commitment requests and approvals to and from line ministry/
                          spending agency be transmitted to the Treasury?
                          a. Computer compatible medium?
                          b. Manually by paper
                          c. Both
                          What is the stage during the procurement process that a commitment is recorded in
                          the system?
                          Is it at the stage of the procurement request or the actual placement of a Purchase
                          Order (PO).
                          Does the system have a facility to track the progress of a purchase order?


                         Payments Management – Verification of Goods Receipt

                          Question                                                                                Response
                          Please describe how the system supports the receiving process. Does the system
                          provide the receiving department viewing access to the PO for validation purposes?
                          Is the receiving department able to confirm receipt – enter data – directly into the
                          contract management module (against POs, contracts, authorization)?
                          How does the system confirm the receipt of goods/rendering of service?
                          Is there an interface between the receiving system and procurement system? Is it able
                          to flag discrepancies between existing purchase orders and actual receipts?
                                                                                             AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Payment Authorization

Question                                                                                   Response
Describe how the system supports the payment process. Is the system automatically
able to check total funds available against the budget prior to authorizing payment?
Does it check against budget authorization, apportionment or warrant before
authorizing payment?
How are payments authorized?
Signature
Secure ID code (electronic)
Both
Is there a requirement for an existing PO, contract or authorization prior to payment?
How can payment requests be tracked electronically?
                                                                                                                                 157
Are POs, contracts or authorizations available online?
What mechanisms are in place to flag authorizations that overdraw the budget?


Payments against Invoices

Question                                                                                   Response
Is there a facility for setting payment thresholds for various levels such as Ministries
or spending units?
Is there a facility for tracking payment requests?
Is invoice detail captured on the payment?
Is invoice detail captured when PO updates are made?
Is payment confirmation information accurately captured and available for viewing
by staff? How?
a. Electronically
b. Report
c. On request by line ministry / spending unit
d. Other?
How is payment progress tracked?
Are payments in different currencies pooled in the payment schedule?
What facilities are in place to record payment confirmations received from the Bank?
a. Instantly
b. Daily
c. Other
Do commitment and expenditure updates occur simultaneously as payment are made?


Payroll and Benefits Payments

Question                                                                                   Response
Does the system have a payroll module?
Does the system have facilities to accept input from another payroll system if one is
not available in the package?
What are the controls in place prior to making payroll payments?
(a) Can the total salary bill of a unit checked against available budget?
(b) Can the system check for existence of a sanctioned position for each position in a
spending unit prior to making the payment?
How can payroll payments be made?
a. Electronic deposit
b. Check
c. Cash
d. Combination of some or all of a, b, and c.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Scheduling Payments

                          Question                                                                                  Response
                          How can payments be prioritized (by size, by currency, recurring vs. one-time,
                          vendor, etc.)?
                          How are these priorities set can they be restricted to a specific agency e.g. Treasury/
                          spending unit?
                          Does the system have facilities for making the payment pipeline available to the line
                          ministry or spending agency for viewing?


                         Payment Processing

                          Question                                                                                  Response
158                       Does the system have facilities for making payments by:
                          a. EFT?
                          b. By check?
                          c. In cash?
                          How are payments monitored and tracked?
                          How is payment completion transmitted to the Treasury from the bank for
                          reconciliation against the budget, PO, payment authorization? What Bank
                          reconciliation facilities are available in the system?
                          Describe the nature of the interface between the system and the inter-bank clearing
                          system
                          Does the system have facilities to create a fixed asset record after the purchase of an
                          item from the procurement system? Describe these facilities.


                         Receipts Management

                          Question                                                                                  Response
                          What facilities does the system have to support the receipt management processes?
                          Describe how will the system enable the tax/ customs receipts information to be
                          recorded in the Treasury system in the following cases?
                          a. Tax Receipts are first deposited in Bank accounts controlled by the State Tax
                          Administration Department and are subsequently transferred to the Treasury Account
                          on a periodic basis. The TSA Bank informs the Treasury of deposits.
                          b. Tax receipts are directly deposited by tax payers into the TSA or accounts
                          controlled by the Treasury. The TSA Bank informs the Treasury of the deposits.
                          What facilities does the system have to transmit data on tax/ customs collections to
                          the tax/ customs departments?
                                                                                        AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Revenue Sharing

Question                                                                              Response
Describe the process of revenue sharing for example, computing, verifying request,
process payment order)
During the verification process does the system automatically check revenue sharing
requests against revenue rules?
How would the Treasury transmit/transfer shared revenue?
a. Check
b. EFT
How is revenue sharing information communicated?
a. Electronically
b. Printed report
                                                                                                                            159
c. Both
d. Not communicated


Cash Management
Revenue and Expenditure Forecasts

Question                                                                              Response
What facilities re available for preparing the revenue forecasts?
What facilities are available for preparing cash requirements forecast?
What kinds of tools are used to determine trends, compare data and arrive at
forecasts?


Monitoring Cash Balances in Treasury Accounts

Question                                                                              Response
What facilities are available for monitoring balances in Government Bank accounts?
Is it possible to receive TSA balance information electronically ?
Where is foreign currency reserve requirements information stored? Does the system
automatically flag when cash balance levels are approaching reserve requirements?


Reconciling TSA and sub Account Balances

Question                                                                              Response
What facilities are available for reconciling TSA and sub–account ?


Monitoring Payables

Question                                                                              Response
How are payables monitored and evaluated? Is this process automatic or manual?
Can payable information be compared with receivables?
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Monitoring Receivables

                          Question                                                                               Response
                          Please describe the receivables aging process.
                          Can receivable information be compared with payables?


                         Debt and Aid Management
                         New Debt Agreements

                          Question                                                                               Response
                          Is there an automated debt management system available?
                          Does the system automatically notify the responsible parties of approaching maturity
                          and payments due?
160
                          Does it generate payment transactions relating to debt servicing that can be entered
                          into the Treasury system?


                         Foreign Aid and Grants Receipts

                          Question                                                                               Response
                          What are the facilities for tracking foreign aid/grants terms and conditions?
                          How are aid/grants received by the Central Bank?
                          How are funds transmitted by the donor to the Bank?
                          a. EFT
                          b. Check
                          c. Cash
                          Describe the process of transmitting receipts information from the Central Bank/ TSA
                          Bank to the Treasury system?


                         New Debt Inflows

                          Question                                                                               Response
                          Describe how your system would support the process of transmitting receipts
                          information from the Central Bank/ TSA Bank to the Treasury system?


                         Debt Service Payments

                          Question                                                                               Response
                          Does the system have a facility to receive bills from lenders?
                          a. Electronically (SWIFT, etc.)
                          b. Paper (mail, fax, telex, etc.)
                          c. Both
                          Is there an automated debt management system in place?
                          Does the system automatically notify the responsible parties of approaching maturity
                          and payments due?
                          Does it generate payment transactions relating to debt servicing that can be entered
                          into the Treasury system?
                          Are payment and maturity terms for each instrument readily available?


                         Budget Review and Fiscal reporting

                          Question                                                                               Response
                          Describe the system’s fiscal reporting facilities.
                                                                                   AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




Revenue Monitoring

Question                                                                         Response
What facilities are available for revenue monitoring?
Is past collection data used in reviewing current year collections?
If so, how many years of past data is used in comparing trends?
Are there any specialized tools used in comparing current collections against
expected collections? If so, please provide details.


Expenditure Monitoring

Question                                                                         Response
What facilities are available for expenditure monitoring?
                                                                                                                       161
Is past expenditure data used in reviewing current year expenditures?
If so, how many years of past data used in comparing trends?
How many years of past data is stored in the system?
Are there any specialized tools used in comparing current expenditures against
expected expenditures? If so, please provide details.
      A HANDBOOK ON FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT




                         Annex IV – Functional Responsibilities of the
                         Technical Organization to support an IFMIS
                         The Technical support organization proposed for supporting the operation and maintenance
                         of an IFMIS will have significant responsibilities for the management, control, operation and
                         integrity of the applications and data, namely: system administration, database administration,
                         applications technical support, network administration, operating systems and help desk admin-
                         istration. An explanation of the key functions and activities to be performed is given below.

                         •	   Systems Administration: System Administrators are responsible for: setting up all user pro-
                              files and access rights on the production system; notifying all new users of their initial
162                           user-id’s and passwords and advising them to change the passwords immediately; maintain-
                              ing the system access rights after receiving appropriate authorization, including disabling
                              users, updating user access rights, and re-enabling users, managing security, concurrent
                              processing, and other ERP administrative functions.
                         •	   Database Administration: The Database Administrator should have a technical background
                              with thorough knowledge of the UNIX operating system, and ERP Database Administration
                              (DBA background) with knowledge of clustered environments. Key responsibilities would
                              include:
                              •	 Maintaining the various application environments and instances
                              •	 Creation of periodic backups
                              •	 Application of software patches
                              •	 Reporting Technical Action Requests to SAP
                              •	 Following troubleshooting paths
                              •	 Performing restores of a previous backup.
                              •	 Start-up/Shut down of the System
                              •	 Notify the implementation team and user community of potential loss of service
                                    periods.
                         •	   ERP Application Development and Support: An Application Developer is responsible for
                              developing code and fixing bugs that are found during testing, design of user interfaces,
                              reports, and any customization. The Application Developers would perform the following
                              tasks:
                              •	 Development work including but not limited to export programs from the existing
                                    applications (HR & payroll, FI etc.)
                              •	 Developing reports required for all the functional modules
                              •	 Taking over responsibilities for customizations developed by the Supplier and main-
                                    tain these in Production.
                         •	   Network Administration: The Network Administrators are responsible for the maintenance
                              of the FABS network connectivity ensuring that all users have the required connections to
                              the system, access to production and training. The Network Administrator is responsible for
                              the following tasks:
                              •	 Performing recurring operational tasks related to the support of the network infrastruc-
                                    ture, including LANS, WANS, routers, servers and workstations.
                              •	 Maintaining communication infrastructure, access to the internet and the WAN resources
                                    when neededSetting up and testing all users required connection and accesses to FABS
                                    Application Instances.
                         •	   UNIX Administration: UNIX Administrators are responsible for the maintenance, support
                              and upgrades of the operating software and utilities on which the Oracle Database and SAP
                              applications reside. The UNIX Administration works in close collaboration with the Data-
                              base Administration to ensure full applications availability and security to the end users. The
                              UNIX Administrators are specifically responsible for the following tasks:
                                                                                      AFRICA OPERATIONS SERVICES SERIES




     •	 Managing File Systems
     •	 Managing Users
     •	 Network configuration
     •	 Printer Management
     •	 Managing and analyzing system resources
     •	 Backup and recovery
     •	 Managing and monitoring processes
     •	 Development of UNIX scripts for management of specific tasks
     •	 Disaster Recovery.
•	   Help Desk Administration: Help Desk personnel are either selected from the competent
     Super-Users or trained by the Super-Users to perform the Help-Desk activities. Help-desk
     personnel must be specialized by Module/Track. Help-desk supervisors shall have more
     multiple module knowledge. Their role is to provide first line support to end-users as follows:
                                                                                                                          163
     •	 Receiving and responding to end-user queries and requests
     •	 Receiving and logging end-user trouble-tickets (report of a problem)
     •	 Relaying resolutions of trouble-tickets to the originating end-user
     •	 Establishing a knowledge base of FAQ’s (Frequently asked questions) and their tradi-
          tional troubleshooting and resolution paths
     •	 Escalating non-standard problems to second line support as to be outlined in the Help
          Desk Strategy, logging, and receiving resolutions
     •	 Communicating circulars and changes to the system operation mode if/when needed.
