                      100676




Aquaculture Sector Review
Armenia

IN PARTNERSHIP WITH
        This Review is developed in cooperation
with the Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Armenia




          MINISTRY OF ECONOMY OF THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA
   FOREWORD
                       The IFC Armenia Investment Climate Reform Project
                    (World Bank Group) is pleased to present Armenia’s
                    Aquaculture Sector Review, which details government
                    policies and regulations and considers challenges that
                    impact trade logistics, particularly pre- and post-farm
                    gate activities. While there are relevant on-farm activities
                    that impact the competitiveness of agribusinesses, the
                    report focuses on domestic and international standards,
inspections and certiﬁcation, duties and fees, customs clearance, and
documentation requirements.
   Armenia’s aquaculture sector is an important employer, a key food provider,
and an engine for export-driven economic growth, and this sector review aims
to help tap the country’s signiﬁcant potential and further Armenia’s economic
development.
    In addition to this report, the IFC Armenia Investment Climate Reform
Project plans to conduct capacity building trainings for relevant stakeholders
and publish promotional materials. Moreover, the Project expects to do a
value chain mapping of greenhouse agribusiness products in order to enhance
competitiveness and export performance.
    We look forward to continued cooperation with our partners to contribute
to strong economic growth in Armenia



                                                        Arsen Nazaryan
                 IFC Armenia Investment Climate Reform Project Manager
              World Bank Group Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice




                                       2
                       Dear Colleagues,
                       Improved       productivity       and      international
                    competitiveness are key preconditions for economic
                    development in any country, as is better export promotion.
                    To develop and implement related policies it is necessary
                    to engage all sectors with development potential, collect
                    information about factors contributing to or hindering
                    the development, and conduct a comprehensive analysis
of the issues.
    Armenia’s Aquaculture Sector Review, jointly developed by Armenia’s
Ministry of Economy and IFC’s Armenia Investment Climate Reform Project,
which is implemented by the World Bank Group’s Trade and Competitiveness
Global Practice, could make a signiﬁcant impact.
   A comprehensive analysis, including comparisons with international
experiences and recommendations for solutions, will be an invaluable tool
for developing Armenia’s ﬁsh industry and for improving and implementing
procedures to stimulate export performance.
   I am conﬁdent that both policymakers and relevant businesses will ﬁnd this
study of great value and use.


                                                          Sergey Avetisyan
                                                Deputy Minister of Economy
                                                   The Republic of Armenia




                                      3
   ACKNOWLEDGMENT
   This aquaculture (ﬁsh farming) sector review was prepared by Gagik
Gabrielyan, Consultant, World Bank Group, with the support of the team of
the IFC Armenia Investment Climate Reform Project, which is implemented
by the World Bank Group Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice. The
review was developed at the request of the Ministry of Economy and the
Development Foundation of the Republic of Armenia (RA).
   The authors would like to thank their World Bank Group (WBG) colleagues
for reviewing this aquaculture sector review and offering their valuable
comments and suggestions, particularly Heinz-Wilhelm Strubenhoff, Senior
Operations Ofﬁcer, Artavazd Hakobyan, Consultant, Gohar Gyulumyan,
Senior Economist, Loraine Ronchi, Senior Economist, and Emiliano Duch
Navarro, Lead Financial and Private Sector Development Specialist.
    The Project team would also like to thank all those organizations and
individuals that so readily gave of their time and expertise, thereby making a
signiﬁcant contribution to the Project: in particular, the Ministry of Economy
of the RA, the Ministry of Agriculture of the RA, the Development Foundation
of the RA, the State Food Safety Service of the RA, the State Water Resource
Management Agency under the Ministry of Nature Protection of the RA, the
Union of Armenian Fish Producers and Exporters, PUM, the Netherlands
Senior Experts Program, as well as a large number of business entities (ﬁsh
producers and exporters, importers of feed and others in the industry, and
customs brokers).




                                      4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive summary .................................................................................6
   A. Key ﬁndings ...................................................................................7
       Pre-production phase: ....................................................................7
       Production phase ..........................................................................8
       Export phase .................................................................................9
   B. Short- to medium-term recommendations .....................................10
       Short-term (12-18 months) ..........................................................10
       Mid-term (18 months-3 years) .....................................................12
Aquaculture export supply chain analysis ..............................................14
  1. Brief Aquaculture Sector Review ...................................................14
  2. Pre-production Phase ....................................................................18
      2.1 Water .....................................................................................18
      2.2 Fish feed ................................................................................19
      2.3 Land .....................................................................................22
      2.4 Main Issues ............................................................................23
  3. Production Phase ..........................................................................24
      Main issues ..................................................................................26
  4. Post Production Phase ...................................................................29
      4.1 Selling into the local market ...................................................29
      4.2 Export ..................................................................................29
      4.3 Main issues ...........................................................................35
  5. Supporting facilities and infrastructure ........................................38
      5.1 Warehouses and storage ........................................................38
      5.2 Financing and ﬁnancial institutions ........................................38
      5.3 Main issues ............................................................................39
  6. Government programs and policy .................................................40
      Main issues ..................................................................................41
ANNEX 1. Procedure for acquiring a water use permit ........................42
ANNEX 2. Feed import procedures .......................................................44
ANNEX 3. Reference sources and literature .........................................45




                                                5
    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
    This aquaculture sector review (with supply chain mapping) has
been implemented within the framework of the IFC Armenia Investment
Climate Reform Project implemented by the World Bank Group Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice, in partnership with Austria’s Federal Ministry
of Finance and Hungarian Partnership Funding/Hungary EXIM Bank.
     This Project aims to contribute to improving the country’s investment
climate and thereby to attract investments into selected branches of its economy.
One of the Project’s aspects is to increase the investment attractiveness of
Armenia’s agribusiness sector and to promote the export competitiveness of
selected agricultural products by identifying issues in export supply chains
and targeting interventions directed at solving these issues. The Ministry
of Economy of the Republic of Armenia (RA) has prioritized aquaculture
products as having great potential, especially for export.
   Consequently, this aquaculture supply chain review aims to:
1. Identify issues now present in the ﬁsh supply (export) chain, speciﬁcally
   pinpointing market imperfections as well as legal and regulatory obstacles;
2. Develop recommendations to resolve the problems/challenges so identiﬁed,
   and thus contribute to the improvement of the business and investment
   environment by reducing costs and increasing productivity;
3. Contribute to enhancing the competitiveness and investment attractiveness
   of the Armenian ﬁsh industry as a whole.
   This analysis focuses on both policy and market imperfections as well as
constraints along the aquaculture supply chain and the impacts these have.
Additionally, the mapping considers the agribusiness export supply chain
and its efﬁciency from the business perspective of exporters/importers,
farmers, retailers, transporters, and freight forwarders. In order to compile
the necessary information, discussions were held with private (and public)
supply chain stakeholders. Meetings were also held with those international
donor organizations active in the Armenian agribusiness sector in an effort
to learn from their relevant experiences and views. 1 The analysis used local
and international information sources, ofﬁcial statistical data, and local and

1   The meetings took place between January and May 2015.

                                       6
international reviews and analytical materials pertaining to aquaculture.2 The
draft report was discussed in (and revised based upon) a stakeholder workshop
organized at the request of the Ministry of Economy.
    The report comprises three sections: an Executive Summary, a Fish Export
Supply Chain Analysis, and their relevant Annexes. The Executive Summary can
also serve as a standalone document and summarizes key ﬁnding, along with
recommendations to resolve the challenges. Details regarding the aquaculture
export supply chain, and the key ﬁndings attending thereto, are presented in
the following section and annexes.
    The review’s key ﬁndings and recommendations are as follows:

    A. Key ﬁndings
    Aquacultural production in Armenia (including caught and/or captive bred
ﬁsh, crustaceans and products derived from them, collectively deﬁned as ﬁsh
product) is one of the dynamically developing sectors of Armenia’s economy,
high production and export growth potential and therefore attractive for
investors. The industry has already demonstrated a high growth rate and
marked proﬁtability. Over the past decade, average annual production growth
rate was 40 percent.
    Moreover, promoting the environment-friendly production and export
of ﬁsh products is an important focal point in the Government of Armenia’s
agenda, meaning that the government, as reﬂected by a number of its strategic
documents and programs (see the section of Fish Export Supply Chain
Analysis), aims to achieve sustainable development in this sector and enhance
of its international competitiveness. Nevertheless, a number of challenges need
to be met by the government as well as by private sector entities. Speciﬁcally,
these can be further broken down as follows:

    Pre-production phase:
1. The short duration validity of water use permits coupled with cumbersome
   permit procedures limit the possibilities in developing long-term business
   plans, and so have a contiguous negative effect on investments in Armenian
    aquaculture.

2   The list of used materials and sources is introduced in Annex 3.

                                          7
2. Similarly, ﬂaws in the importation process have an adverse impact on prices
   and the overall efﬁciency of the crucial supply chain of ﬁsh feed, medicines,
   and equipment. This is exempliﬁed by the application of “reference prices”
   used in the customs evaluation of imports, plus various slowdowns during
   the import process at the seaport in Poti (in Georgia), and the frequent
   unloading and re-loading of imported cargo.

   Production phase
1. There is a need to expand processed ﬁsh production and exports in parallel
   in order to minimize some risks inherent in focusing only on fresh ﬁsh,
   namely perishability and logistics issues. These led to difﬁculties in the
   Russian market in 2014.
2. There is also a need for improvements in productivity, output quality
   and safety standards to sharpen the Armenian product’s competitiveness
   and gain greater access in export markets for it. Essentially this entails
   establishing international best practices in tandem with the equivalent
   quality and safety systems (such as GMP, HACCP, BAP, GHP, among
   others).
3. The insufﬁcient clarity of ﬁsh product classiﬁcations in Republic of Armenia
   legislation has led to tax and administrative problems, which in turn creates
   extra obstacles for the broad development of the aquaculture sector.
4. Environmental problems bound up with the development of aquaculture in
   Armenia are related to:
    The drying up of artesian springs, which may trigger various adverse
       environmental effects and have social consequences for nearby
       settlements;
    The discharge of water polluted by ﬁsh farming into the natural habitat;
    Likewise the pollution of Lake Sevan (with ﬁsh feed residues).
5. There is also a need to strengthen business associations (unions) and/or
   cooperatives to enable them to work effectively in addressing the major
   needs/challenges of the sector.




                                       8
    Export phase
1. Resolving the insufﬁcient clarity and inconsistent application of procedures
   related to Russian export permits. The frequent restrictions and excessive
   inspections conducted by Rosselkhoznadzor3 create obstacles for exporters
   and producers.
2. Serious attention is required to address the challenges, as well as
   opportunities, associated with Armenia’s recent accession to membership
   in the Eurasian Economic Union (EEU), for instance concerning the
   uncertainty of clearance procedures, or the implementation of new food
   safety requirements such as the mandatory use of HACCP systems. These
   changes will require ﬁsh producers to either introduce new or improve
   existing safety systems in their production processes, which, in turn, will
   require investment and staff training.
3. At the same time, to enter the European Union (EU) market it is necessary
   to obtain the relevant authorization, which, before this can happen, will
   require recognition of a competent Armenian authority by the European
   Commission, along with certiﬁcation of the selected businesses and their
   inclusion in the list of third country economic operators permitted to
   export to the EU.
4. Expanding the export of processed products (see point 3 above).
5. Concomitant with all these items, is the need to strengthen broad industry
   knowledge and capabilities in marketing and distribution channels as part
   of any exploration of export opportunities; and more precisely what is
   needed is knowledge about requirements in potential export markets, and a
   thorough understanding of the techniques involved in entering into export
   markets and developing distribution channels.
6. There are also issues related to transportation and export procedures. These
   include, particularly, complicated and unpredictable customs clearance
   procedures at the Russian border (Lars border crossing point between
   Georgia and Russia), routinely leading to extra costs for businesses;
   abnormally high transportation costs; and difﬁculties related to VAT
   refunds after export.

3   Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance of the Russian
    Federation.

                                       9
   B. Short- to medium-term recommendations
   Short-term (12-18 months)
1. Improving export and import procedures will help increase the
   competitiveness of both raw materials and ﬁnished aquaculture products.
   Improvements can be achieved in the following ways:
    Improving risk management in the context of the customs formalities
      system, (for example enhancing risk proﬁling procedures), and
      improving/simplifying customs valuation procedures;
    Simplifying non-customs procedures concerning ﬁsh feed importation
      (speciﬁcally, simplifying phytosanitary control);
    Improving weighing procedures during the import of ﬁsh feed (based on
      effective risk assessment);
    Simplifying and accelerating the procedures around refunding VAT to
      exporters;
    Simplifying some export procedures, in particular the provision of food
      safety certiﬁcates (which are, for example, presently required for each
      batch of exported ﬁsh product).
2. Raising the awareness and speciﬁc skills-training of businesses regarding
   important ﬁsh production and exporting activities, as follows:
    Upgrading processed ﬁsh production and the relevant ancillary
      technologies (for example, slicing and packaging ﬁsh ﬁllets, dried or
      smoked ﬁsh products, caviar, et al), with a view to promoting the
      expansion of processed ﬁsh production. This can be achieved through
      seminars and workshops with the participation of ﬁsh industry experts
      and the development and dissemination of relevant materials;
    Assessing present production and supporting facilities/infrastructure
      (warehouses, cold storage facilities, refrigerated trucks, and the like)
      relevant to starting and developing the production of processed ﬁsh
      products, and ensuring the necessary awareness levels of businesses;
    Strengthening industry human resource capacity to integrate the
      advanced modern technologies that are now an important part of ﬁsh
      farming, handling and processing (particularly in terms of semi-closed
      and closed-cycle production), along with the use of GMP and GHP


                                     10
      practices, and HACCP systems;
    Likewise building the capacity to apply modern, effective marketing
      and supply chain management tools;
    Ensuring awareness of the know-how around effective production and
      export ﬁnance instruments and resources.
3. Conducting study/research to explore the business opportunities arising
   from Armenia’s membership in the EEU, as well as identifying and
   reducing the risks associated with the various uncertainties and problems
   associated with new procedures and requirements. Similarly ensuring a
   cogent awareness among the relevant public authorities and private sector
   representatives. This may relate pointedly to issues concerning customs
   procedures, food safety requirements, food safety control procedures,
   country of origin requirements applicable to exported food, or other issues
   of a similar nature.
4. Study, and where appropriate, reform the ﬁsh industry regulatory and
   legislative framework, including such areas as:
    Water use and water use-permit granting procedures (particularly in
       terms of simpliﬁcation and clariﬁcation of the various procedures,
       and setting out (in water use permits) the requirements leading to the
       necessary clearances for reducing environmental pollution;
    Clarifying and harmonizing agricultural product classiﬁcation, especially
       in regard to ﬁsh products, for agricultural, tax and accounting purposes;
    Introducing effective and environment-friendly technologies, and
       promoting the investments this entails;
    Ensuring fair competition;
    Considering the necessity of drafting and adopting a law on ﬁsh farming.
5. Making a thorough study and raising the awareness among businesses
   of potential export markets and their business environments, regulatory
   requirements and the procedures applied in those markets, plus the
   advantages and disadvantages of using of various modes of transport for
   exporting ﬁsh products from Armenia (particularly by air and trucks).4

4   In this regard, potential export markets of interest to Armenian businesses, as
    they identiﬁed during stakeholder discussions, are those in China, Japan and the
    Middle East. Additional market studies are needed to assess these and other export
    opportunities.

                                         11
   Mid-term (18 months-3 years)
1. Implementing steps towards completing the process of getting permission
   to enter the EU market. This has already started, in fact. Presently, the
   Republic of Armenia State Service for Food Safety has submitted a plan
   for monitoring residual amounts of chemical substances in ﬁsh products (a
   residue monitoring plan) for EU approval. Once this is approved, business
   entities will get a chance to apply and obtain authorization to export to the
   EU market. This sequence of steps is described in more detail in the main
   section of this paper (box 2, page 32).
2. Developing the instruments needed to promote effective marketing and
   supply chain management, while encouraging businesses to use such
   instruments.
3. Taking measures to simplify export procedures for EEU markets while
   expediting the transition to new requirements and procedures. Speciﬁcally,
   this refers to:
    Measures effecting a smooth transition while reducing or eliminating
       possible difﬁculties associated with the new food safety and sanitary
       control requirements and procedures. These will come into force after
       the one-year transition period;
    Developing comprehensive and simpler xport procedure guidelines for
       businesses pertaining to EEU markets (Russia in particular);
    Continuing collaboration, and reaching agreements, with the relevant
       Russian and Georgian authorities, the main goal being to ensure simple,
       clear and consistent procedures being applied at the Lars border crossing
       point.
4. Strengthening the associations (unions) and forging cooperatives of
   businesses involved in ﬁsh farming, processing and export. The intent here
   is to enable addressing strategic and practical issues, which businesses
   cannot address by themselves.
5. Developing and then using effective ﬁnancing instruments for export and
   investment, and, similarly, for environment-friendly technologies and
   advanced systems of food safety control in ﬁsh production; (these would
   include working on capital ﬁnancing, the funding of projects, and trade
   ﬁnancing instruments, such as credit lines and insurance).

                                      12
6. Introducing contemporary production technologies and advanced water-
   saving and environment-friendly systems in ﬁsh farming (for example using
   closed or semi-closed water circulation technologies).




                                    13
   AQUACULTURE EXPORT SUPPLY CHAIN ANALYSIS
    For mapping purposes, viewing the chain and assessing its effectiveness
from a business perspective, and in particular that of primary ﬁsh farmers,
exporters, retailers and wholesalers, along with processors, transporters,
and other relevant parties involved. This export chain includes both the pre-
production (meaning the acquisition and/or importation of raw materials, as
well as the relevant permits), along with the various post-production aspects,
such as product transportation, packaging, storing, and the various export-
related procedures. (See the diagram in Figure 1).

   1. Brief Aquaculture Sector Review
   Aquaculture production (including caught and/or captive-bred ﬁsh,
crustaceans and the products derived from them; in other words, the ﬁsh
product) in Armenia is an economic sector with both high production and
export growth potential, and, therefore, attractive for investors. The industry
has already demonstrated a high growth rate and marked proﬁtability. Over
the past decade, average annual production growth rate was 40 percent. (see


                                      14
Figure 1).5 In 2014, the production of ﬁsh products reached about 14,000 tons,
and from 2010 to 2014, the value of this production increased by 2.5 times -
from $27.4 million to $69 million. Businesses involved in the sector claim that
Armenia, with its current production capacity, could produce around 300,000
tons of ﬁsh product annually.
   From 2010-2013, the volume of ﬁsh product exported increased over ﬁve
times - from 1,265 to 6,578 tons, with a concomitant increase in export value
of over four times from $7.7 million to $32.5 million.
   The main export products are fresh chilled ﬁsh and crayﬁsh. The main
export destinations are Russia and European Union member states.
   Exports to the EU consist mostly of crayﬁsh. Table 1 illustrates ﬁsh product
exports by FEACN classiﬁcation6.

                              Figure 1. Fish production, tons
    16,000.0

    14,000.0

    12,000.0

    10,000.0

    8,000.0

    6,000.0

    4,000.0

    2,000.0

            -



5    Sources: RA National Statistical Service, RA Ministry of Agriculture,
     AmeriaGroup,“Industrial Agriculture in Armenia: Development Trends” 2014.
6    Products in the table are categorized according to their Foreign Economic Activity
     Commodity Nomenclature (FEACN) classiﬁcation, including their respective four-
     digit codes. FEACN is a goods classiﬁcation system applied in CIS (Commonwealth
     of Independent States) countries. It is similar to the HS classiﬁcation system applied
                                            15
      Table 1. Exports of ﬁsh products, in tons
EXPORT OF FISH PRODUCTS




                                         2004
                                                 2005
                                                         2006
                                                                  2007
                                                                          2008
                                                                                  2009
                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                   2011
                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                           2013
in tons




                                                                                  11.3

                                                                                          10.8

                                                                                                   13.0

                                                                                                            16.9

                                                                                                                           24.8
                                         0.0

                                                 0.0

                                                         5.4

                                                                  5.1

                                                                          6.1
    Live ﬁsh




                                                                                                            164.4 1662.8

                                                                                                                           2193.0
                                                                                          226.1

                                                                                                   728.5
                                         21.6

                                                 46.2

                                                         64.7

                                                                  41.5

                                                                          49.5

                                                                                  1.3
    Fresh ﬁsh




                                                                                          186.5

                                                                                                   567.3
                                         13.4

                                                 75.1



                                                                  13.0

                                                                          22.2

                                                                                  18.3




                                                                                                                           55.7
                                                         3.0
    Frozen ﬁsh


                                         0.0

                                                 0.1

                                                         0.0

                                                                  0.0

                                                                          0.5

                                                                                  0.0

                                                                                          0.1

                                                                                                   0.0

                                                                                                            0.0

                                                                                                                           3.9
    Fish ﬁllet

    Fish, dried, salted or in brine;




                                                                                                            56.0
                                         2.3

                                                 0.8

                                                         1.0

                                                                  1.0

                                                                          0.3

                                                                                  3.0

                                                                                          7.5

                                                                                                   4.3



                                                                                                                           0.2
    smoked ﬁsh




                                                                                                   1122.8

                                                                                                            1735.1

                                                                                                                           4300.0
                                         804.8

                                                 669.1

                                                         934.3

                                                                  793.5

                                                                          687.5

                                                                                  468.2

                                                                                          833.8
    Crustaceans
                                         0.0

                                                 0.0

                                                         0.0

                                                                  0.0

                                                                          0.0

                                                                                  0.0

                                                                                          0.0

                                                                                                   0.0

                                                                                                            1.7

                                                                                                                           0.0
    Molluscs
                                                         1008.4




                                                                                          1264.8

                                                                                                   2435.9

                                                                                                            3636.9

                                                                                                                           6577.6
                                         842.1

                                                 791.3



                                                                  854.1

                                                                          766.1

                                                                                  502.1


    TOTAL

      Source: National Statistical Service (NSS) of Armenia, www.armstat.am

    Promoting the production and export of ﬁsh products is an important
part of the government’s current agenda. Under the Government programs
cited below, the intention is to multiply ﬁsh production and export volumes
(by as much as three times from 2012-2017), while gradually introducing
advanced water-saving technologies and practices in ﬁsh farming. These goals
also include ensuring access to affordable ﬁnancial resources for businesses
involved in the sector.7
    Within this overall framework of aquacultural development, the government
has initiated a Program for the Recovery of Commercial and Endemic Fish

      internationally.
7     Government Program for 2012-2017 (Government Decision No 730-A of June 18,
      2012) and Government Annual Program of 2014 (Government Decision No 511-A
      of May 19, 2014).

                                           16
Species in Lake Sevan.8 Indeed, a pilot project using four nets has already been
implemented as a result of the government allocating three billion Armenian
dram (about $6.25 million) for that purpose. If the results prove positive, they
plan to move this production measure up to 70 nets, targeting 50,000 tons of
annual production by 2022. The estimated budget for this phase of the project
is 66 billion Armenian dram (about $137.5 million).
    Back in September 2013, the government took a decision requiring
businesses to introduce water- and eco-saving technologies in ﬁsh farming,
meaning semi-closed water cycle farming. As the businesses involved report,
introducing such technologies in a ﬁsh farm environment will require from
$700,000 to $1.5 million, depending on the size of the farm.
    To promote environment-friendly technologies and efﬁcient ﬁsh farming
practices, it is anticipated that a pilot ﬁsh farming project using semi-closed
water cycle technology will be tried in the Ararat Valley, in collaboration with
and funded by the UN Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO).9
    To promote the export of ﬁsh products to the EU market, the RA State
Service for Food Safety has taken measures to approximate the standards
set by the relevant EU legislation and thereby to set about getting Armenia
included in the list of third countries permitted to export to the EU.10




8  The Program was adopted by Government Decision No 1755-N of December 9,
   2010.
9 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
10 In particular, this approximation has been made pursuant to the following legal
   acts: (1) Council Directive 96/22/EC of April 29, 1996, concerning the prohibition
   of the use of certain substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of beta-
   agonists in stock farming, and (2) Council Directive 96/23/EC of April 29, 1996
   on measures to monitor certain substances and residues thereof in live animals and
   animal products. Based on those ddirectives, Government Decision N 898-N of
   August 21, 2014 deﬁned the maximum amounts of veterinary medicine residues in
   animal origin food exported from Armenia to the EU, as well as the procedure for
   acquiring the required sampling to assure effective control over residual substances
   in foodstuff of animal origin exported from Armenia to the EU.

                                          17
   2. Pre-production Phase
   2.1 Water
   To use water for ﬁsh production, EU from the Water Resource Management
Agency of the RA Ministry of Nature Protection.11 The maximum validity
period of this permit is three years; and after the lapse of this speciﬁed period,
the water use permit must be extended or renewed.12 The procedure for
obtaining water use permits is described in Annex 1.
   In Armenia, the payment for the use or extraction of fresh water (surface
and subterranean) is one Armenian dram per cubic meter of water used.13
Since January 1, 2014, nature utilization (water use) and the environmental
expenses attending ﬁsh farming have increased. In particular, for the Ararat
and Armavir regions, where most ﬁsh farms are concentrated, the base rate

11 Government Decision No 218-N of March 7, 2003, “On Approving the Model
   Water Use Form and Water Use Permit Forms, Procedures on Issuance and Extension
   of Water Use Permits, Passport Forms of Water Springs and Drilled Wells and Forms
   of Hydro-Technical Sectional Elevation of Hydrogeological Drilled Wells”.
12 According to Article 33 of the RA Water Code.
13 Fee charged are deﬁned by Government Decision No 864-N of December 30, 1998.

                                        18
used to calculate the water use payment has increased ten-fold.14 Thus, from
the perspective of increasing water use efﬁciency, the accurate measurement
and control of water use volumes is important for both government bodies
and businesses.15 However, from a technical perspective, the installation of
water meters and the introduction of a control system may require signiﬁcant
investment.

   2.2 Fish feed
    Fish production in Armenia largely relies on imported feed. There are local
sources of supply as well; with ﬁsh, feed start-up mills now being operated
in Yeghvard and Zovuni. Presently 10-12 businesses are engaged in ﬁsh feed
import, sourced from more than ten countries, including EU states, the USA,
and Chile.16 The feed is mainly imported through Georgia’s Poti seaport then
trucked through that country to Armenia. According to businesses engaged in
the trade, when importing feed from EU countries, once the cargo arrives in
the port, it takes at least ﬁve days for delivery. Vessels often queue for as long
as three days to enter the seaport and unload.17
    As to feed import customs formalities, as reported by these businesses, the
so-called “reference price method” (or the method four under the Customs
Valuation Agreement of the WTO) of determining the customs value is often
applied, instead of the transaction value method. 18

14 Changes in the sizes of environmental and nature management payments have been
   made by the RA Law “On Making Amendments to the Law of the Republic of
   Armenia on Nature Protection and Nature Utilization Payments”. According to
   that amendment, the base for calculation of the nature utilization payments in the
   Ararat and Armavir regions has increased from 5 percent of extracted subterranean
   water stock to 50 percent.
15 Government Decision No 1071-N of July 7, 2011 deﬁnes the procedure for
   installation of water-meters. At present, the possibility of introducing automated
   water use control systems is under government consideration. .
16 Fish feed is imported from such companies as “Coppens”, “Skretting”, “Aller
   Aqua”.
17 Shipment of ﬁsh feed in containers from Rotterdam seaport to Armenia takes,
   on average, 40-45 days (50-55 days in winter). The average cost of shipment to
   Armenia is $3,600 per 25-ton container.
18 This does not comply with the WTO Customs Valuation Agreement (precise name
   of the agreement is Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the General
   Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994). The agreement deﬁnes six methods of
   customs valuation and requires that the ﬁrst method of customs valuation should

                                        19
    The import of ﬁsh feed is subject to veterinary and phytosanitary control.
Before importation, it is necessary to obtain preliminary permission from the
RA State Service for Food Safety; and while importing, a veterinary certiﬁcate
issued by the competent authority of the exporting country must be submitted.19
    For phytosanitary control, it is necessary to submit a certiﬁcate of origin of
the product and a phytosanitary certiﬁcate issued by the competent authority
of the exporting country: based on these documents, the importer must obtain
an internal phytosanitary certiﬁcate. Further details of ﬁsh feed import are
described in Annex 2.
    It is worth mentioning that after joining the Eurasian Economic Union
(EEU), to import ﬁsh feed from an EEU member state, or from third countries
(meaning countries other than EEU member states), the ﬁsh feed manufacturing
organization is required to be registered in the respective third country, or in
the uniﬁed EEU register.
    In 2013, the average selling price of ﬁsh feed in Armenian market was 820
Armenian dram (about $2) per kilogram. Fish feed accounts for over the half
of the expenses entailed in ﬁsh production (on average, 1.2 of kg ﬁsh feed is
needed to produce 1 kilo of ﬁsh). The price of 1 kg of locally produced ﬁsh
feed is nearly 100 Armenian dram (or about $0.25 less than that of imported
ﬁsh food).20




   be the transaction value method. For cases in which there is no transaction value,
   or where the transaction value is not acceptable as the customs value because the
   price has been distorted as a result of certain conditions, the Agreement lays down
   ﬁve other methods of customs valuation, to be applied in the prescribed hierarchical
   order. The six methods of customs valuation are based on: (1) transaction value
   of imported goods, (2) transaction value of identical goods; (3) transaction value
   of similar goods, (4) deducted value; (5) computed value; (6) any other means
   consistent with the principles and general provisions of the Agreement.
19 The feed import procedure is regulated by the RA Customs Code, the RA Law on
   Feed, as per Government Decision No 1442-N of October 21, 2010 (Deﬁning the
   Procedure of Import, Export, Transit Shipment of Agricultural Animals, Animal
   Origin Raw Material, Food, Feed, Complementary Feed, Compound Feedstuff,
   Feed Additives, Foodstuff, Food Contact Substances, Nutritional and Biological
   Active Additives, and repealing the Government Decision No 1228-N of August
   19, 2004 and the Government Decision No 1901-N of November 9, 2004).
20 However, ﬁsh-breeding farms mainly use imported feed, mostly motivated by
   considerations of feed quality and safety.

                                         20
       Figure 2. Fish Export Supply Chain

            Fish feed               Fertilized egg           Ice                                                    Retail
                                     production           production                                                sales
     Fertilized eggs, juvenile                                                                                                       Export
                                      Hatchery            Handling                              Fish            Public food
           Medications                                                                                           serving
                                     and nursery          (cleaning,                          market,                              Transport
                                                            slicing,                          wholesale           entities
         Equipment/tools
                                                           chilling,
                                       Caviar                                                                                       Customs
                                                          packaging)                                                End
              Water                  production                           Transport          Processing                            formalities
                                                                                                                 consumer
              Land                 Fish production          Storing                            Storing




21
     • Import permit     • GMP               • GMP              • Transport costs   • GMP                • GHP               • Customs
     • Import:           • GHP               • GHP              • Refrigerated      • GHP                • Sanitary rules      procedure
       customs           • Sanitary rules    • Sanitary rules     trucks            • Sanitary rules       & norms           • Transport costs
       procedure           & norms             & norms          • Airport             & norms            • Certiﬁcation      • Refrigerated
     • Water-use         • Certiﬁcation      • Certiﬁcation       procedures        • Certiﬁcation       • Cold storage        trucks
       permit            • Electricity and   • Cold storage                         • Cold storage         facility          • Airport
     • Nature              other costs         facility                               facility                                 procedures
       utilization       • Financing                                                                                         • Trade ﬁnancing
       and nature
       protection fee
     • Land
       categorization
   2.3 Land
    The cadastral classiﬁcation of lands is essential in determining the charges
and taxes levied on businesses for the lands they use. Most of the land (meaning
water surface) that comprises ﬁsh farms is located in the Ararat and Armavir
regions (over 95 percent). And lands under ﬁsh farms are classiﬁed as “Other”
in terms of their grouping as agricultural lands.
    Over the last few years, the changed classiﬁcation of lands used for ﬁsh
farming – from “non-agricultural” to “production” - has been a topic of
discussion between the public and private sectors. That is because such a
change may signiﬁcantly increase the land price and land lease payments, as
well as the amount of land tax due. At present, the government has not yet
changed this land classiﬁcation, taking into consideration the development
potential of the ﬁsh industry and the ofﬁcial goal of promoting this industry’s
development.




                                      22
   2.4 Main Issues
    Water use and water use permits: (a) the 3-year validity of water use permits
limits the possibilities in developing long-term business plans and therefore
investments in ﬁsh sector. Which is to say it creates uncertainty, since in cases
of rejection of applications or re-applications to extend or renew their permits,
ﬁsh producers may lose their investments and businesses; (b) the permit
extension or renewal procedure needs simpliﬁcation or facilitation; (c) as well,
according to businesses, there are signiﬁcant amounts of informal “facilitation
fees” that need to be paid for provision or renewal of water-use permits.
    Raw material imports: There are a number of imperfections in the
importation process, which have an adverse impact on prices, and efﬁciencies
in the supply chain of ﬁsh feed, medicines, and equipment or tools. In particular,
these include:
 The application of “reference prices” in the customs’ evaluation of imports
    increases the customs value ascribed to imported feed, and hence, the
    customs duties and the VAT on imported feed are distorted. This, in turn,
    leads to an increase in feed prices on the domestic market, since Armenian
    ﬁsh producers mostly rely on imported feed;21
 The slowdown of the import process at Poti Seaport (in Georgia) due to
    vessel queues and port clearance procedures is another impediment to cost
    efﬁciencies in the industry;
 The same is true of the frequent unloading and re-loading of cargo during
    the process of weighing the ﬁsh feed imported to Armenia; time is wasted
    and additional costs are unnecessarily incurred.
    Water use technologies: Water-saving water-use technologies, such as closed
or semi-closed water recirculation technologies, have yet to ﬁnd widespread
application on Armenian ﬁsh farms.
    Investment and access to ﬁnance: The insufﬁcient availability (and
affordability) of investment funds and other ﬁnancial resources required for
production and export is an ongoing issue.


21 According to economic entities, the “reference price” applied by the Customs
   Service is usually higher than the average transaction price by around 36 percent.
   It is important to note that the share of ﬁsh feed vis-a-vis the overall cost of ﬁsh
   production amounts to more than half (around 70 percent), according to producers.

                                         23
   3. Production Phase
    There are nearly 40 species of ﬁsh in Armenian waters: 15 of these are used
for industrial purposes, in particular, salmonids (rainbow and golden trout,
Gegharkuni, river trout-Karmrakhayt), sturgeon (Acipenseridae, Siberian and
Russian), silurus, whiteﬁsh, carp, crucian carp. The majority of ﬁsh harvested
in the Armenian industrial ﬁsh farming and export industry are those from the
salmonid family (trout) and sturgeon (Siberian and Russian species).
    The water (and in particular the temperature of artesian springs in the
Ararat Valley) is favorable for trout and sturgeon ﬁsh aquaculture.
    In 2013, there were over 250 ﬁsh farms in Armenia: 83 percent were
located in the Ararat and Armavir regions. As well, there are 4-5 operating ﬁsh
farms in the Aragatsotn, Lori, Syunik, Vayots Dzor, Tavush regions. Total ﬁsh
farming operations covered 3,542 ha of total water surface, with 70 percent
located in the Ararat and 29 percent in the Armavir regions.22 The total surface
of the four largest ﬁsh- farms amounts to 2,000 hectares (or 57 percent of the
total).23

22 As of the summer of 2013, there were 3,314 functioning artesian wells (springs) in
   the Ararat Valley.
23 Source: RA Ministry of Agriculture: www.minagro.am: Last visited on July 15,
   2015.
                                        24
   There are a few ﬁsh farmer/producer associations/unions registered in
Armenia. However, they are either non-operational or have very limited
capacities and so are unable to address major challenges of the sector.24
   In the past decade, the average annual growth rate of production stood at
40 percent (see Figure 1).25 In 2014, the production of ﬁsh products reached
about 14,000 tons. In 2010-2014, the value of the production of ﬁsh products
increased by 2.5 times – from $27.4 million to $69 million. According to
businesses operating in the sector, Armenia can produce around 300,000 tons
of ﬁsh products annually with its current production capability.
   One of the important factors affecting the efﬁciency of the fresh ﬁsh supply
chain is the feed-weight gain ratio. After reaching a certain weight (for instance,
800 grams for trout), the feed-weight gain ratio begins to decrease, meaning
the ﬁsh eat more and grow less. From the point of productivity management
and the efﬁcient organization of the supply chain, it is important to catch
and deliver the fresh ﬁsh to the consumer within a speciﬁc short time period.
Otherwise, costs in the fresh ﬁsh supply chain go up, reducing proﬁtability.
   Meanwhile, environmental issues around the evolution of ﬁsh production
in Armenia are related to:
 The drying out of artesian springs, which may well trigger various
   environmental, as well as social consequences for nearby settlements; for
   example, peasant farmers may be unable to effectively irrigate or cultivate
   their lands due to water shortages;
 There is also the issue of the discharge of waters polluted due to ﬁsh farming
   into natural streams, aquifers and the like;
 Of particular concern is the pollution of Lake Sevan, as a result of ﬁsh feed
   residues;
 The Government Decision No 703-N of May 22, 2003 deﬁnes the
   procedures and environmental principles of using water resources for the
   needs of ﬁsh farms. In particular, the decision deﬁnes the following:
 Use of water by ﬁsh farms shall not impede or hinder the activities of other

24 For instance, the Union of Armenian Fish Farmers; Union of Fish Producers of
   Armenia; Union of Armenian Fish Producers and Exporters. Details can be found
   at: www.e-register.am, electronic registry of legal entities of Armenia.
25 Sources: RA National Statistical Service, RA Ministry of Agriculture, Ameria-
   Group, “Industrial Agriculture in Armenia: Development Trends” 2014.

                                       25
    businesses;
   Water use by ﬁsh farms shall exclude any change in the level of subterranean
    waters, and any swamping or drying of the terrain;
   The list of the aqua holdings to be used for commercial ﬁsh production is
    deﬁned by the government;
   Extraction of water in aqua holdings for commercial ﬁsh production shall
    be equipped with a ﬁsh passage barrier;
   Use of water resources for ﬁsh farm needs without artiﬁcial structures
    shall be permitted only for the farming of such species as are typical of the
    particular water-ecosystem.

    3.1. Main issues
    Product diversiﬁcation: At present, Armenian companies produce and
export mainly fresh (chilled) ﬁsh. This results in some weaknesses with regard
to marketing and especially export in the sense that: (a) fresh ﬁsh imply higher
storage and transportation costs; (b) fresh ﬁsh are very perishable so the shelf
life of the product is short, which leads to signiﬁcant constraints. For instance,
at the end of 2014, due to the ﬂuctuation of exchange rates, exporters intent
on preventing spoilage had to market the product in Russian markets at lower
than their usual prices. However, Armenian exporters could have avoided, or
signiﬁcantly reduced their losses, had the product been processed with a view
to giving it with a longer shelf life. The lesson learned was that, the production
and export of processed products (for example, sliced and packaged ﬁsh ﬁllets,
brined, dry-smoked or smoked ﬁsh products, and caviar),in parallel with fresh
products, and the more effective promotion of the investments required for it,
will be critical for the competitiveness of aquaculture production and exports
going forward. And discussions with business entities has revealed that there
is a knowledge gap concerning processed ﬁsh production and the relevant
technologies involved.
    Productivity and quality: To increase product competitiveness and to enter
export markets (in particular, the EU market, where strict food quality and
safety requirements apply), there is a need for improvements in productivity26

26 In parallel to a productivity increase, it is critical to pay due attention to ensuring
   that production is ﬁrmly backed by actual market demand and access to that
   market that is needed (whether export or domestic) to sell it.

                                           26
and product quality and safety. This can be achieved through: (a) the
introduction of modern ﬁsh farming, handling and processing technologies
(for example semi-closed or closed-cycle production), (b) the introduction
and application of internationally recognized best practices and systems such
as Best Aquaculture Practices (BAP) of the Global Aquaculture Alliance27;
Aquaculture Stewardship Council’s (ASC)28 standards; Global GAP (Good
Agriculture Practice), GMP (Good Manufacturing Practice),29 and GHP (Good
Hygiene Practice)30 and introduction of the HACCP (Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Points)31 system, and (c) the strengthening of the workforce’s
capability to use BAP, GAP, GMP, GHP and HACCP along with other
qualitative practices and systems.
    Classiﬁcation of ﬁsh products: As indicated by those business entities
engaged in ﬁsh production and export, the insufﬁcient clarity32 of ﬁsh product
classiﬁcation in the RA legislation leads to tax and administrative problems
and in general creates obstacles for the development of the aquaculture sector.

27 “The Global Aquaculture Alliance is an international, non-proﬁt organization
   committed to feeding the world through responsible, sustainable aquaculture.
   Representing dozens of individuals, associations and businesses associated with
   aquaculture and seafood around the world, GAA works to improve practices and
   increase output across the entire aquaculture production chain”. In 2004, the Global
   Aquaculture Alliance created BAP certiﬁcation, which deﬁnes the most important
   elements of responsible aquaculture and provides quantitative guidelines by which
   to evaluate adherence to those practices for processing plants, farms, hatcheries and
   feed mills. Website: http://gaalliance.org/what-we-do/bap-certiﬁcation/
28 The Aquaculture Stewardship Council (ASC) was founded by the World Wide
   Fund for Nature (WWF) and IDH (Dutch Sustainable Trade Initiative) in 2010. It
   is an independent, not-for-proﬁt organization with global inﬂuence. ASC aims to
   be the world’s leading certiﬁcation and labeling program for responsibly farmed
   seafood. The ASC’s primary role is to manage the global standards for responsible
   aquaculture, as developed by the WWF Aquaculture Dialogues.
29 In Armenian – Արտադրության բարեխիղճ գործելակերպ
30 In Armenian – Հիգիենայի բարեխիղճ գործելակերպ
31 In Armenian – Վտանգի վերլուծության և հսկման կրիտիկական կետերի համակարգ
32 In particular, deﬁnitions of agricultural products are unclear and lack harmonization
   in Article 36 of the RA Law on Proﬁt Tax, RA Law on Food Safety, and RA goods
   classiﬁcations (Decrees of the RA Economy Minister No 874 and 875 of September
   19, 2013), leaving room for differing interpretations. In international practice,
   particularly in the EU, (Regulation (EC) No 852/2004) and in the framework of
   World Trade Organization (WTO Agreement on Agriculture), sliced, chilled and
   frozen meat is considered agricultural product. This same approach is used in
   International Accounting Standard 41, Agriculture.

                                          27
For instance, there is confusion regarding the classiﬁcation of fresh ﬁsh and ﬁsh
ﬁllet (chilled or frozen), as a result of which they are considered to be “non-
agricultural”, meaning preferential tax treatment (for agricultural products) is
not applied to them. Obviously, this creates an additional, and in their view
unfair, tax burden.
    Environment: To ensure the sustainable development of the aquaculture
sector in Armenia, serious attention should be paid the environmental issues
cited above.
 The drying out of artesian springs, which may well trigger various
    environmental, as well as social consequences for nearby settlements; for
    example, peasant farmers may be unable to effectively irrigate or cultivate
  their lands due to water shortages;
 There is also the issue of the discharge of waters polluted due to ﬁsh farming
  into natural streams, aquifers and the like;
 Of particular concern is the pollution of Lake Sevan, as a result of ﬁsh feed
  residues.




                                       28
   4. Post Production Phase
   4.1 Selling into the local market
    Over the past several years, the average annual per capita consumption of
ﬁsh products in Armenia reached nearly 1.8 kg.33 Compared with international
norms, this level is rather low. For example, the same metric in Russia and
the European Union for 2010 was 20 kg and 21 kg, respectively.34 Partly
this reﬂects the fact that the consumption of ﬁsh products in Armenian diet
does not play as important a role as it does in Russia or the European Union.
Nevertheless, it also indicates that there is potential for the Armenian domestic
market for ﬁsh to grow; and therefore it is important that businesses prioritize
the promotion of local demand for ﬁsh products.

   4.2 Export
   Exported ﬁsh product varieties and volumes
   Armenian businesses predominantly export chilled ﬁsh and crayﬁsh. Caviar,
especially sturgeon caviar, is a product of great interest for export.
33 Source: RA NSS.
34 Fishing Industry: Russian and European ﬁsh market research, Armenian
   Development Agency, 2012.
                                       29
    Chilled ﬁsh is a perishable product (with a shelf life ranging from several
days to a month), which means that all processes pertaining to shipping,
logistics, and delivery (to consumers) must be highly organized, in other words
in a way where speed is of the essence. For example, the shelf life of trout
chilled in ice is 9-11 days. 35
   In 2010-2013, the export volume of ﬁsh product grew ﬁve-fold from 1,265
to 6,578 tons; this meant that the export value also increased over four times
from $7.7 million to $32.5 million.
   The main export products are fresh chilled ﬁsh and crayﬁsh. The main
export destinations are Russia and the European Union (EU) member states.
Exports to the EU were mostly crayﬁsh. Table 1 presents exported ﬁsh
products, by FEACN classiﬁcation36.
    Export markets
    The geographic scope of ﬁsh product exports included the CIS countries
(Russia, Ukraine, and Georgia) and the EU countries (Belgium, Germany,
Luxemburg, France, Italy, Austria, Poland, and the Czech Republic). The
major portion goes to Russia (92.6 percent). The export shares to Ukraine and
Belgium are 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively.37 It is worth mentioning that
Armenia exports mainly crayﬁsh to EU countries, since it only has permission
to trade in that one product. The issue of obtaining permission to export ﬁsh
to EU countries is expanded on below.
    The large size of the Russian market would seem to ensure practically
unlimited export possibilities for Armenian businesses. Annual ﬁsh product
consumption in Russia amounts to more than 3 million tons.38 In 2013, the
export of ﬁsh products from Armenia to Russia made up 0.2 percent of total



35 Source: FAO, 1995a: http://www.fao.org/docrep/006/y5013e/y5013e04.htm.
36 Products in this table are described according to Foreign Economic Activity
   Commodity Nomenclature (FEACN) classiﬁcation, including their respective four-
   digit codes. FEACN is a goods classiﬁcation system applied in CIS (Commonwealth
   of Independent States) countries. It is similar to the HS classiﬁcation system applied
   internationally.
37 Source: RA NSS
38 Fishing Industry: Russian and European ﬁsh market research. Armenian Development
   Agency, 2012; and USDA GAIN: Russia Fish and Seafood Production and Trade
   Update http://www.theﬁshsite.com/reports/?id=2275#sthash.OpUREGCw.dpuf

                                          30
consumption in that country.39
   Armenian products are competitive in the Russian market because the
main species exported there are sturgeon and salmonids (trout), the farming of
which in the cold climate (and cold waters) of Russia is more difﬁcult and so
economically less productive. Favorable water temperature can be achieved in
closed-cycle production. However using this means more expense.
   According to expert estimates, the price certain ﬁsh from Armenia can
command in the Russian market, namely sturgeon or trout, undercuts the
comparable Russian production price by at least $1 per kilogram. In terms
of competitiveness compared to production in other countries of the region
(Georgia, Azerbaijan), there is no signiﬁcant production of sturgeon in
Georgia. Georgian trout can successfully compete with the Armenian product,
though. Armenian sturgeon, on the other hand, is cheaper than the sturgeon
harvested from the Caspian Sea in Azerbaijan.
   Nevertheless, the difﬁculties faced by Armenian businesses in the Russian
market since the end of 201440 have clearly demonstrated that it is very
important for Armenian producers and exporters to diversify the geographic
reach of their exports.41
    Export permits
    At present, the procedure for authorizing export to the Russian market
is regulated under the respective interstate memorandum signed in 2009.42
To export ﬁsh products to Russia, ﬁsh farms/enterprises must be certiﬁed
and registered on the list of organizations, which have the right to export to
that market. These certiﬁcates and permits are issued by Rosselkhoznadzor

39 In 2013, the export of ﬁsh products from Armenia to Russia stood at about 6,100
   tons.
40 At the end of 2014, the Russian economy faced a high ﬂuctuation in exchange
   rates (due to the geopolitical situation and economic sanctions against Russia).
   As a result, to prevent spoilage, exporters had to market their products in Russian
   markets at lower than usual prices. However, Armenian exporters could have
   avoided or signiﬁcantly reduced their losses, had the product been higher value-
   added, meaning processed to gain a longer shelf life.
41 In this regard, potential export markets of high interest for Armenian businesses,
   as identiﬁed during stakeholder discussions, are the Chinese and Middle Eastern
   markets.
42 Memorandum on exporting ﬁsh products from Armenia to Russian Federation,
   signed in 2009.

                                         31
     Box 1. Export permits to Russia
     To be included in the list of Rosselkhoznadzor, Armenian economic
 entities must be recognized as enterprises acting in compliance with
 applicable Russian requirements and included in the corresponding list. For
 that purpose, economic entities must apply to the RA State Service for Food
 Safety Service (SSFS), and the latter, in its turn, must submit an application
 to Rosselkhoznadzor. There are two procedures for making a decision on
 inclusion in the list:
     (a) Based on the application of the SSFS, the particular economic entity
 is included in the list without prior on-site inspection; yet later, employees
 of Rosselkhoznadzor carry out on-site inspection, to check the compliance
 of operations with requirements applicable in Russia;
     (b) Based on the application of the SSFS, employees of Rosselkhoznadzor
 visit the business of the Armenian economic entity, carry out on-site
 inspection and, if no problems are detected, include the economic entity
 in the list.

(Federal Service for Veterinary and Phytosanitary Surveillance of the Russian
Federation). As of December 2014, the list of companies enjoying the right to
export to Russia includes 26 Armenian companies, of which 6 are subject to
restrictions, and another 4 are subject to strict controls.43
    It is expected that after 2015, due to Armenia’s membership to the Eurasian
Economic Union, a uniﬁed EEU list will be introduced, and procedures for
including businesses into the list will become more straightforward. However,
making these changes may take some time. Therefore anticipating immediate
improvements may be unrealistic.
    At this writing, Armenia has permission to export crayﬁsh to the EU
(wild caught, but not captive-bred ﬁsh). To this point, the country’s other ﬁsh
products lack the ofﬁcial permission required to market there. Since 2010,
however, the government has been taking measures directed at receiving EU
export permission, in accordance with the Government Decision No 835-N.44

43 Source: Ofﬁcial website of Rosselkhoznadzor: http://www.rosselkhoznadzor.ru/
   fsvps/importExport/armenia/enterprises.html?productType=7&_language=en, last
   visited on December 19, 2014.
44 Government Decision No 835-N of October 11, 2010 “On Approving the
   Timetable of Measures Regulating the Export of Fisheries and Other Aquaculture

                                       32
   Box 2. EU market export authorization
   To access the EU market, it is necessary to obtain the relevant
authorization in accordance with the 854/2004 EU Regulation of April
29, 2004.
   To obtain such authorization, the following is required: (1) recognition
of the Armenian competent authority by the European Commission, (2)
certiﬁcation of speciﬁc economic entities and their inclusion in the list of
economic entities or businesses holding such permission: in other words,
providing these economic entities with an EU export number.
   The process of obtaining such authorization includes the following
steps:
1. Submission of a request by the national authority of an exporting
   country (Armenia, in this particular case) to the Directorate-General
   for Health and Consumer Protection of the European Commission (DG
   SANCO) for permission to export ﬁsh products to the EU.
2. Submission of answers to the questionnaire sent by the DG SANCO on
   legal, institutional and other ﬁelds of the exporting country.
3. Submission of a residue monitoring plan tailored to Armenia’s ﬁsh
   industry vis-a-vis the EU, and its approval.
4. A visit to the exporting country and on-site inspections by the EU Food
   and Veterinary Ofﬁce in respect of fulﬁllment of EU requirements.
5. Based on the results of the paper work and on-site inspection, the DG
   SANCO submits a recommendation to the EU member-states as regards
   including the particular country in the list of countries holding an EU
   export authorization.
6. If the EU member-states do not object, the country in question is
   included in the list of countries authorized to export to the EU.
7. After the country is included in this list of eligible countries, it may
   apply for its economic entities to be included on the EU list of eligible
   establishments (economic entities) enjoying export permission; and
   such economic entities shall be subject to corresponding inspections and
   certiﬁcation.



 Products from Armenia to the EU and declaring invalid No 150-A Decision of the
 RA Prime Minister of March, 10 2010.”

                                    33
    The State Food safety service of has developed a honey and ﬁsh testing
program for 2015-201745 in compliance with the EU’s reference method of
testing.
    At this stage, the RA SSFS has submitted for EU approval a plan for
monitoring residual chemical substances in ﬁsh products (speciﬁcally, a formal
residue monitoring plan). Assuming this is approved, several other procedures
will be required before receiving the targeted EU authorization.
    In addition, in October 2014, the RA SSFS provided the Directorate-
General for Health and Consumer Protection of the European Commission
(DG SANCO) the answers required by their preliminary questionnaire, which
was an analytical survey of countries already holding permits to export ﬁsh
products to the EU.
    The sequence of steps required for obtaining EU market export authorization
are described in detail in Box 2.
   Transportation routes and means
   Most Armenian ﬁsh product is exported by air (passenger airplane) and
ground transportation (in refrigerated trucks).
   Air transports is fast, of course, which is a very important advantage in
the export of fresh ﬁsh. Fish shipped this way is packed in boxes with ice.
The average cost of air transport from Armenia to Russia (Moscow) is $800
per ton. It is important to note that this transportation price is for transport
by passenger (and not cargo) airplanes. Shipping costs via cargo airplanes
would be signiﬁcantly higher (according to businesses involved, at least 3-4
times). Export by passenger airplane has also limitations, especially in terms
of volume. There are 10 daily ﬂights from Yerevan to Moscow, which implies
a capacity limit 10-15 tons of fresh ﬁsh.
   In recent years, ﬁsh export businesses started using refrigerated trucks,
along a transit road through Georgia and entering Russia at the Lars border
checkpoint. It is signiﬁcantly slower than air transport, however, taking several
days instead of several hours. The average cost of transporting via trucks is
$400-500 per ton.46
45 The Program was approved by Government Decision N 700-N on July 30, 2014
   “On approving 2015-2017 Mid-Term State Expenditures Program”.
46 An additional $ 0.2, per each kilogram of unofﬁcial payments must be added to
   cross the customs border point in Russia (Lars BCP), as detailed below.

                                       34
    The storage and transportation of fresh ﬁsh products requires the use of
ice. As a rule, Armenian ﬁsh producers and exporters produce their ice in-
house, meaning they do not outsource their supplies of same. Ice is subject
to control to ensure compliance with food safety requirements. At meetings,
businesses did not identify any issues or difﬁculties related with ice production
or related food safety control procedures.
    As well, shipment by ferry through Georgian seaports is a future possibility.
But it is yet unexplored and unused. However, it could become important in
the export of processed ﬁsh products (for example, frozen).

   4.3 Main issues
    Russian export permits: Businesses report that the process of obtaining
Russian export permits (issued by Rosselkhoznadzor) is complicated and often
includes rules that are insufﬁciently clear and/or inconsistent in terms of their
application. Also, frequently applied restrictions and excessive inspections add
to uncertainties and unpredictability, and so create obstacles for exporters and
producers.
    Challenges and opportunities associated with the EEU membership: Since
January 1, 2015, Armenia has been a signatory to the Eurasian Economic Union
(EEU), which along with an expected improvement in export opportunities
has also brought uncertainty into export processes. And this, in turn, creates
hindrances for exporters from Armenia to EEU markets. As an example,
businesses are often unaware of expected changes in procedures affecting the
actual export ﬂow to Russia or other EEU markets.
    It is worth emphasizing that after the year already cited as a transitional
period, changes are expected in ﬁsh export procedures pertaining to the EEU,
and in particular ﬁsh production requirements:
 In addition to veterinary certiﬁcation, an additional mandatory sanitary
    certiﬁcation requirement for ﬁsh product will be introduced (which implies
    corresponding documentation requirements as well);
 Stricter food safety requirements will be introduced into the production of
    ﬁsh for export, and of particular interest, a new mandatory requirement to
    introduce the HACCP system in ﬁsh production.
    Incorporating these changes will require ﬁsh producers to introduce new,


                                       35
or improve existing, production safety systems; and this, in turn, will require
extra investment and staff training.
    EU market: To enter the EU market, it is necessary to obtain a relevant
permission (authorization), which requires: (1) recognition of a competent
Armenian authority by the European Commission, (2) certiﬁcation of
businesses and their inclusion in the list of third country economic operators
permitted to export to the EU (in other words, provision of EU export number
to the business entity).
    Product diversiﬁcation: (see under Production phase issues).
    Knowledge and capacity: There is a need to strengthen the knowledge,
marketing capacity and distribution channels early on, at the exploration stage
in search of export opportunities. This includes the key techniques needed to
gain entry to such export markets and developing distribution channels. As an
example, the difﬁculties faced by Armenian ﬁsh farmers and exporters due to
their shortage of cash are, among others, caused by the fact that exports are
concentrated in the Russian market, and distribution strategies rank low in
terms of their sophistication. In these circumstances, there are difﬁculties in
collecting payments from buyers (in the Russian market) on time, which leads
to an obvious deterioration in ﬁsh farmers’ ability to pay (for their ﬁsh feed
in particular). Over time, this cannot help but distort the performance of the
whole supply chain.
    To avoid such problems, Armenian ﬁsh producers and exporters need to
address new challenges, such as diversifying their export markets, being able
to effectively search out and enter new markets; and so prioritize the garnering
of information about new markets, as well as enhancing all existing marketing
and distribution capabilities and know-how.
  Transportation and export procedures:
 Clearance procedures at Russian border crossing points are both
  complicated and unpredictable; as evidenced at the Lars border crossing
  point. Businesses report that, when exporting to the Russian market, so-
  called informal “facilitation fees” are collected for customs’ work among
  other formalities.47
 Fish transportation costs are high; they are detailed on pages 22-231; but it
47 At the amount equal to $0.2, per each kilogram of product.

                                        36
  must also be noted that on top of those costs businesses report another levy
  of $200 of unofﬁcial fees per ton at Lars BCP.
 Exporters mention that in some cases procedures pertaining to the VAT
  refund on exported commodities is problematic and lengthy. Getting a VAT
  refund may take up to six months, 48 which again, considerably decreases
   availability of cash (working capital) and distorts opportunities of using
   cash effectively (and proﬁtably). There have been instances when the tax
   authority has initiated tax inspections in companies after they have ﬁled
   their VAT refund applications.




48 Articles 16 and 25 of the RA Law on Value Added Tax, Attachment 1 to RA Law
   on Taxes.

                                     37
   5. Supporting Facilities And Infrastructure
   5.1 Warehouses and storage
   Armenia’s present ﬁsh products supply chain lacks cold storage facilities and
warehouses, since the country mainly markets and exports fresh and chilled
ﬁsh products in ice. Thus, demand has never developed for such storage.
   However to spur ﬁsh industry development and the production of processed
ﬁsh products, Armenia will need to develop adequate handling, processing,
and cold storage facilities, which will in turn require (a) the attraction of
investments and resources, and (b) the training of a corps of relevant specialists
and a critical mass of capacity development.

   5.2 Financing and ﬁnancial institutions
   In general, the shortage of, and the difﬁculty of accessing long-term and
affordable ﬁnancial resources restricts the growth and development of all kinds
of businesses. Interviews with these companies show that the application of
improved export and investment ﬁnance instruments (such as turnover capital
ﬁnancing, funding of projects, trade ﬁnance instruments, and expedients like
credit lines, insurance, effective monitoring, among many others) needs to

                                       38
expand a good deal further still, if it is to really fuel quantitative and qualitative
increases, aquaculture production and export development. Doing so while
integrating environment-friendly technologies and advanced systems of food
safety control in ﬁsh production adds another layer of challenges.

   5.3 Main issues
   Investment and access to ﬁnancial backing: The insufﬁcient application of
improved investment instruments and the best available export ﬁnancing is
conditioned, among other factors, by the following:
 A shortage of, or insufﬁcient accessibility to, effective ﬁnancial instruments
   designed to promote investments; and the export and use of environment-
   friendly technologies and advanced systems of food safety control in ﬁsh
   production;
 Insufﬁcient knowledge, among economic entities, about improved modern
   ﬁnancial instruments.




                                         39
   6. Government Programs And Policy
    Promoting the production and export of ﬁsh products is an Armenian
government priority. Their program for 2012-2017 aims to triple the production
of, and export volumes of ﬁsh products sold, to promote the introduction of
water-save and water-use advanced efﬁcient technologies and practices, and
thereby secure the availability of the necessary ﬁnancial resources.49
    Within the framework of the ﬁsh industry’s development, the government
has adopted a Program for Replenishment of Industrial Fishstock and
Restoration of Endemic Fish Species in Lake Sevan.50 They are at present
implementing a small-scale ﬁsh farming pilot project that began with 4 nets. In
2014, they allocated 3 billion Armenian dram (about $6.25 million) for that
purpose). If the results of this pilot project prove positive, present plans call
for expanding production to 70 nets (meaning actually ﬁsh farming to scale),
with a target of 50,000 tons of annual production by 2022. The costs of this

49 Government Action Plan for 2012-2017 (Government Decision No 730-A, dated
   June 18, 2012) and Government Action Plan 2014 (Government Decision No 511-
   A adopted on May 19, 2014):
50 This Program was adopted by Government Decision No 1755-N on 9 December
   2010.

                                       40
project have been estimated at 66 billion Armenian dram (or about $137.5
million).
    In September 2013, the government took a decision to require businesses
to introduce water- and eco-saving technologies in ﬁsh-farming, in particular
semi-closed water recirculation production. In the opinion of businesses in the
sector, introducing such technology on a ﬁsh farm will require from $700,000
to $1.5 million, depending on the size of the farm.
    At present, the country does not have a law on ﬁsh farming in place.
Adoption of such a law would help to resolve a number of industry-related
issues, which along with other concerns, inﬂuences fundamental business
decisions as regards their making investments in the Armenian industry.

   6.1. Main issues
   Technology enhancement: In order to introduce technologies to comply
with implemented regulatory requirements to use environment-friendly
technologies as well as enhanced food safety and quality requirements,
businesses will have to address further challenges related to:
 Acquiring the additional ﬁnancial resources needed for the acquisition,
   installation and exploitation of these new technologies, and
 A growing need for additional knowledge and skills, and so for much-
   enhanced human capability development.
   Regulatory environment: There is a need for a study, and where appropriate,
regulatory reforms in areas such as:
 Water use and water use permit granting procedures;
 Introduction of effective and environment-friendly technologies and
   promotion of the investments required thereto;
 Ensuring a fair competitive environment;
 Considering the necessity of developing and adopting an updated law on
   ﬁsh farming.




                                      41
    ANNEX 1. Procedure for acquiring a water use permit
   Government decision No 217-N of 07.03.03 deﬁnes the procedure of
receiving water use permit (WUP).


              Submission of WUP application, attached with required
               documents, to the RA Ministry of Nature Protection

                   Preliminary evaluation of application at ARC*,
                                     (30 days)


                                    Application          NO
In case of necessity                conforms**
   conditioned by
      results of                  YES
     notiﬁcation             Notiﬁcation of the public
    of the public,                   (5 days)
                                                                       Rejection
     submission
                                                                     of application
    of application         Final discussion of application
to the consideration              at ARC (30 days)
   of the National
   Water Council
      (60 days)                     Application          NO
                                    conforms**
                                  YES
                        Documentation and issuance of the
                          WUP to the applicant (5 days)

                 Signing of WUP by the applicant and submission
                 to the RA Ministry of Nature Protection (30 days)

                               Signing and approval
                                 of WUP (5 days)

                        Registration of WUP at State Water
                                Cadastre (10 days)


*  “Application conforms” means the application conforms with (and does not
   contradict) the RA Water Code.
** Application Review Commission (ARC) - Commission for preliminary evaluation
   and ﬁnal discussion of water use applications.

                                        42
   Extending the validity term of Water Use Permits (WUP)
    According to Article 33 of the RA Water Code, if the terms and conditions
of the WUP have not been breached and its renewal does not contravene laws,
or other legal acts or water basin management plans, the Water Resources
Management and Protection Body shall renew the water use permit under the
same terms and conditions.
    A state duty of 1,000 Armenian dram (about $2) should be paid for
acquiring a water use permit for physical entities and 10,000 Armenian dram
(about $20) for legal entities.




                                     43
   ANNEX 2. Feed import procedures
INCOMING DOCUMENTS                                                PROCEDURE                           OUTGOING DOCUMENTS
     Transportation doc (CMR)                           CUSTOMS CONTROL (beginning)
                                              1. The lorry is weighted and the weight slip is provided
               Invoice                        2. The importer enters the T1 into the system
                                              3. The importer submits docs to the customs oﬃcer
         Entry of Form (T1)
                                              4. The customs oﬃcer checks the docs
                                              5. Where appropriate, the customs oﬃcer requires
                                              veterinary control                                         T1’s registration number



        Preliminary import                                     VETERINARY CONTROL
         permission (Vet.)                    1. The importer submits docs to VET inspector and
                                              applies for conducting control
    M - Conformity certiﬁcation               2. The VET inspector checks the docs
                                              3. the VET inspector carries out identiﬁcation                   Internal VET
      VET Certiﬁcate (internal)
                                              of cargo                                                    certiﬁcate (completed)
      VET control application                 4. If necessary, the VET inspector may carry out
                                              examination and sampling of the cargo                             Protocol of
          Payment receipts                    5. In case of sampling, a protocol shall be produced            taking samples
                                              6. If violations related to cargo are not detected,
     Transportation doc (CMR)                 the VET inspector makes relevant notes                       Certiﬁcate of origin
                                              in the VET import certiﬁcate and/or seals it.                  (original copy)
               Invoice
                                                                                                           PHYTO certiﬁcate,
    PHYTO certiﬁcate (external)                            PHYTOSANITARY CONTROL                              with note
                                              Procedure similar to veterinary control procedure
  Certiﬁcate of origin (original copy)
                                              All cargo of phytogenic origin is subject to physical             Testing
                                              check                                                             protocol


   PHYTO certiﬁcate, with note                                 CUSTOMS CONTROL
                                              1. The Customs Service conducts documentary
    PHYTO certiﬁcate, with note               checks
                                              2. The Customs Service conducts cargo identiﬁcation
 VET certiﬁcate with note and seal            3. If necessary, the Customs Service scans the cargo              Form (T1)
                                              4. If necessary, the Customs Service may open the
    C – Sample taking protocol
                                              lorry, conduct check, sampling and testing, by             Customs check protocol
     Transportation doc (CMR)                 making relevant notes in T1.
                                                                                                                Testing
         Certiﬁcate of origin                                                                                   protocol

               Invoice

   PHYTO certiﬁcate, with note


   PHYTO certiﬁcate, with note                         TRANSPORTATION TO DESTINATION
                                                              CUSTOMS WAREHOUSE
  Product/consignment certiﬁcate              1. If necessary, the Customs Service may accompany           The same docs pass
                                              the cargo/lorry from customs border to destination             to the next stage
 VET/PHYTO sample taking protocol             customs warehouse.                                          (customs formalities
     Transportation doc (CMR)                                                                             at the customs house)

               Invoice

              Form (T1)
                                                           PHYTOSANITARY CONTROL
             Weight slip
                                              For customs clearance and marketing of the product,
      Customs check protocol                  the importer must substitute the external PHYTO
                                              certiﬁcate with internal PHYTO certiﬁcate issued at          PHYTO certiﬁcate,
     C - sample taking protocol               the Phytosanitary Inspection.                                   with note

          Conventional signs
  VET/PHYTO control doc                  Customs control doc           Doc, if samples are taken           Not mandatory




                                                                44
     ANNEX 3. Reference sources and literature
     Analytical materials
1. “Fishing Industry: Russian and European Fish Market Research”, Armenian
   Development Agency, 2012, http://www.ada.am/ﬁles/984/publications/
   Fish.pdf
2. AmeriaGroup, “”Industrial Agriculture in Armenia: Development Trends”:
   http://www.ameria.am/img/Industial_Agriculture_presentation_arm.pdf
3. Glossary of Aquaculture, UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
   Rome, 2008: http://www.fao.org/docrep/006/y5013e/y5013e04.htm
4. Review of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Potentials in Armenia,
   UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, 2011, http://www.
   fao.org/docrep/014/i2103e/i2103e00.htm

     Ofﬁcial websites
1. RA National Statistical Service: www.armstat.am
2. RA Ministry of Agriculture: www.minagro.am
3. RA Ministry of Nature Protection: www.mnp.am
4. RA State Service for Food Safety: www.sfss.am
5. Rosselkhoznadzor       (Federal    Service    for Veterinary   and
   Phytosanitary Surveillance of the Russian Federation): http://www.
   rosselkhoznadzor.ru/fsvps/importExport
6. UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO): www.fao.org

     RA legal acts
     Water use
1.   RA Water Code
2.   RA Law on Rates of Nature Protection Payments
3.   Government Decision No 218-N of 7 March 2003, “On Approving the
     Model Water Use Form and Water Use Permit Forms, Procedures on
     Issuance and Extension of Water Use Permits, Passport Forms of Water
     Springs and Drilled Wells and Forms of Hydro-Technical Sectional
     Elevation of Hydrogeological Drilled Wells
4.   Decision No 687-N of the RA Council of Ministers, dated 19 December
     1991, “On Classifying Some Water Objects of the Republic in the Category

                                      45
   of Fishing Basins”
5. Government Decision No 864-N of 30 December 1998, “On Nature
   Utilization Payment Tariffs”
6. Government Decision No 1071-N of July 7, 2011, “On Approving the
   Procedure of Installing and Sealing Water Meters for Recording Water
   from Deep (Including Gushing) Wells by Means of Water Meters”.
     Fish Production and Fish Products’ Safety Technical Requirements and
     Standards
1.   Government Decision No 79-N of January 20, 2011: “On Approving
     the Technical Regulation on Speciﬁc Requirements to Hygiene of Fishing
     Product”
2.   Decree No 995-N of the RA Minister of Health, dated October 9, 2003:
     “On Approving the Plan of Measures for the Introduction of an HACCP
     system at Program of Actions N 2-III-4.1-06-2003 Sanitary Rules and
     Hygienic Norms: Requirements to Production and Marketing of Fish
     Products”
3.   Government Decision No 608-N of May 5, 2011: “On Approving the
     Plan of Measures of Introducing Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
     (HACCP) System at Fish Enterprises”
4.   RA Law On Animal Fodder
   Taxes applied to marketing ﬁsh products
1. Ofﬁcial clariﬁcation of the Chairman of the State Revenue Committee
   at Government, dated February 13, 2003: “About application of tax
   remissions for marketing ﬁsh product as deﬁned by Article 36 of the RA
   Law on Proﬁt Tax, Article 11 of the RA Law on Income Tax, effective
   until January 1, 2013, as well as Article 8 of the RA Law on Income Tax
   effective since January 1, 2013”
2. RA Law on Value Added Tax
3. RA Law on Taxes
     Import and export requirements and procedures
1. Government Decision No 1442-N of October 21, 2010: “On Deﬁning
   the Procedures of Import, Export, Transit Shipment of Agricultural
   Animals, Animal Origin Raw Material, Food, Feed, Complementary Feed,
   Compound Feedstuff, Feed Additives, Foodstuff, Food Contact Substances,

                                     46
   Nutritional and Biological Active Additives, and repealing the Government
   Decision No 1228-N of August 19, 2004 and the Government Decision No
   1901-N of November 9, 2004
2. Government Decision No 835-N of October 11, 2010: “On approving the
   timetable of measures regulating the export of ﬁsh and other aquacultural
   products from Armenia to the EU and declaring invalid No 150-A Decision
   of the RA Prime Minister of March 10, 2010”
   Government Programs
1. Government Decision No 511-A of May 19, 2014 on RA Government
   Program
2. Government Decision No 730-A of June 18, 2012 on RA Government
   Program (2012-2017)
3. Government Decision No 1755-N of December 9, 2010 on “Approving
   the Program for Replenishment of Industrial Fishstock and Restoration of
   Endemic Fish Species in Lake Sevan”




                                    47
