                                                                                                          100682
                                                                                                   November 4, 2015




The Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE) is a multidonor facility established in 2012 to strengthen awareness,
knowledge, and capacity for gender-informed policy making. The UFGE promotes results by equipping policy makers
and development experts with data, knowledge, and evidence. This is all made possible with generous support from
the governments of Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.


Value and Strategic Alignment
Value-added                  The UFGE seeks to maximize returns on investments by promoting ”gender-smart”
                             approaches in country-level policy dialogue, investment and lending, technical
                             assistance, and advisory services. It serves as a catalyst for innovation and explores the
                             frontiers of the gender equality agenda where evidence and data on what works is
                             lagging in areas such as gender based violence and the care economy. It complements,
                             but does not fund the Bank’s gender mainstreaming activities.

Strategic alignment          The UFGE plays a key role in providing predictable funding for investments that augment
                             implementation of the World Bank Group’s Gender Strategy and Regional Gender
                             Action Plans.


Advancing the Gender Equality Agenda
The UFGE recognizes the critical need for addressing knowledge and data gaps. In order to learn what works and
what doesn’t, rigorous evidence is critical. By investing in these activities, and acting as a catalyst for work that
pushes the frontiers of knowledge on gender equality, the UFGE equips policymakers and development experts to
deliver effective advice and smart development solutions at the country level. The UFGE promotes results in three
main outcome areas:

1) Influence policy dialogue at the country level by increasing the availability and use of gender data and
evidence in areas where gaps persist between males and females and in new areas where evidence about solutions
to address these inequalities is weak.

2) Improve design of operations and programs through knowledge and evidence leading to better-designed
operations with a sharper focus on implementation and results. Activities aim to strengthen and expand successful
approaches and translate new evidence into results on the ground.

3) Increase awareness and demand for gender equality interventions with efforts to broaden support across
a range of partners, and generating awareness and interest among country clients with new data, research and
evidence.
How the UFGE Works
The UFGE leverages funding to support investments in areas with potentially transformational impact. It provides
enhanced opportunities for learning across regions and for facilitating cross-sectoral approaches, along with its
unified governing framework, consolidated results reporting and streamlined administration.

Regional Block Grants

Multi-year block grants to regions provide critical funding in support of priorities identified in Regional Gender
Action Plans. This work contributes to better diagnosis of binding constraints and increased understanding and
capacity among our clients to address them at the country and regional level. For instance:

        The UFGE supported the launch of a regional gender-based violence program in South Asia to raise
         awareness, share knowledge, and forge partnerships with civil society, donors, and governments. In Brazil,
         select train stations are being equipped with electronic kiosks to help women access legal and social services
         on topics such as violence, and community-based violence prevention approaches are being tested in
         Honduras and Guatemala.
        Issues such as skewed sex ratios and unpaid care are being moved from the margin to the center of policy
         dialogue through new data and research in Europe and Central Asia.

Strategic Allocations

Strategic allocations provide targeted funding for larger, multi-year activities that are identified as areas where
investments are likely to have large returns. These include:

        Engaging the private sector by developing tools and cost-benefit analysis to help firms better analyze their
         workforces, procurement, and value chains from a gender perspective and develop steps to better integrate
         women into their business operations. This work is led by the International Finance Corporation (IFC).
        Supporting Gender Innovation Labs in Africa, East Asia and South Asia, and expanding the model to
         remaining regions to stimulate cross-fertilization on key interventions to adapt and test in different
         contexts, and facilitate dissemination and uptake of the results at the global level.

Governance

The World Bank Group’s Gender Leadership Council (GLC) comprises senior level representatives from each Regional
Vice Presidency, the Jobs Cross-Cutting Solutions Area, the IFC, Development Economics Vice Presidency (DEC), and
Global Practices. It is the main decision making body for the UFGE.

The UFGE Partnership Council provides upstream strategic guidance on the implementation of the UFGE, plays an
important role in the World Bank’s efforts to harmonize funding for gender equality, and constitutes a forum for
collaboration among the donor community. All UFGE donors are represented on the Council.

             The Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality (UFGE) is a multidonor facility administered by:
