                     100706



        Vietnam
Affordable Housing
        A Way Forward
                  October 2015




         A Way Forward           i
        Vietnam
Affordable Housing
        A Way Forward
              October 2015
Acknowledgements

This report was produced with advisory from the World Bank for the Government of Vietnam
(GoV), in collaboration with the Ministry of Construction (MoC), in particular, the Bureau of
Housing and Real Estate Markets and the Ministry’s Inter-Departmental Working Group on
Affordable Housing. Financial support was provided from the Government of Switzerland’s Federal
Department of Economic Affairs, Education and Research via the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for
Sustainable Urban Development and the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade via
the Australia - East Asia and Pacific Region Infrastructure for Growth Trust Fund.

The recommendations put forth in this report originated from a consultative planning process,
supported by the Ministry of Construction, and in close engagement with the State Bank of Vietnam,
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and Investment, and Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment, among others. Technical findings and policy recommendations also benefited from
the input from a team of international and national housing experts.

We are grateful to all the government counterparts and stakeholders who participated in this
process. In particular, we would like to express our special gratitude to the following individuals
whose facilitation and guidance has been essential to the development of the Roadmap:

Mr. Nguyễn Trần Nam, Vice Minister, Ministry of Construction

Mr. Nguyễn Trọng Ninh, Deputy Director General, Bureau of Housing and Real Estate Market,
Ministry of Construction

Mr. Vương Duy Dũng, Vice Director, Housing Development Division, Bureau of Housing and
Real Estate Market, Ministry of Construction

While the comments and inputs to this report have come from many contributors, all shortcomings
of the work rest solely with the authors.




                                                                                 A Way Forward        v
vi	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Contributors

Government of Vietnam
Ministry of Construction
Ministry of Finance
State Bank of Vietnam
Ministry of Planning and Investment
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment


The World Bank
Team Leads and Consultants
Taimur Samad, Task Team Leader, Senior Urban Economist, GSURR
Hoa Thi Hoang, Co-Task Team Leader, Senior Urban Specialist, GSURR
Meskerem Brhane, Former Task Team Leader, Program Leader, AFCE2
Josephine McVitty, Housing Specialist, GSURR
Huong Mai Nguyen, Urban Governance Analyst, GSURR
Dao Harrison, Senior Housing Policy Specialist
Matthias Nohn, Senior Incremental Housing Policy Specialist
Olivier Hassler, Senior Housing Finance Specialist
Geoffrey Payne, Senior Urban Land Policy Specialist
Duong Huynh, Housing Policy Analyst

National Contributors
Dang Hung Vo, Senior Land and Housing Policy Advisor
Nguyen Thi Thanh Tam, Sociologist
La Hai Anh, Statistician
Bui Van Khiem, Research Assistant
Tran Thi Cam Nhung, Research Assistant




                                                                     A Way Forward   vii
viii	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Glossary of Abbreviations

ACCA		    Asian Coalition for Community Action
ADB		     Asian Development Bank
AFD		     French Agency for Development
BOLUC	    Building Ownership and Land Use Right Certificate
BOT		     Build-Operate-Transfer
BT		      Build-Transfer
CAGR		    Compound Annual Growth Rate
CAM		     Constant Amortization Method
CDF		     Cities Development Fund
CDIA		    City Development Initiative for Asia
CG		      Central Government
CIDCO		   City and Industrial Development Corporation
CPF		     Central Provident Fund
CRA		     Commonwealth Rental Assistance
CRU		     Community Residential Units
CSP		     Commercial Sector Produced
CSC		     Central Steering Committee on Housing and Real Estate Market Policy
DFI		     Development Finance Institutions
DoC		     Department of Construction
DTI		     Debt to Income
EMI		     Equated Monthly Installments
FDI		     Foreign Direct Investment
FMR		     Fair Market Rent
GHB		     Government Housing Bank
GoV		     Government of Vietnam
GSO		     General Statistics Office
HBEE		    Home-Based Economic Enterprises
HCA		     Homes and Communities Agency
HOA		     Home-Owners’ Association
HCMC		    Ho Chi Minh City
HDB		     Housing and Development Board
HOREA	    Ho Chi Minh Real Estate Association
IMF		     International Monetary Fund
IZ		      Inclusionary Zoning
LG		      Local Government
LGAF		    Land Governance Assessment Framework
LHDF		    Local Housing Development Fund
LIHTC		   Low Income Housing Tax Credit
LDIF		    Local Development Investment Fund
LPLR		    Land Pooling and Land Readjustment

                                                                 A Way Forward   ix
     LTV		         Loan-to-Value
     LURC		        Land Use Rights Certificate
     LVT		         Land Value Taxation
     MFI		         Microfinance Institution
     MoC		         Ministry of Construction
     MoET		        Ministry of Education and Training
     MoF		         Ministry of Finance
     MoHA		        Ministry of Home Affairs
     MoJ		         Ministry of Justice
     MoLISA	       Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social Affairs
     MoNRE	        Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
     MoT		         Ministry of Transport
     MPI		         Ministry of Planning and Investment
     NASHO	        National Association of Social Housing Organizations
     NGO		         Non-Governmental Organization
     NHA		         National Housing Agency
     NPLs		        Non-Performing Loans
     NSC		         National Steering Committee
     ODA		         Overseas Development Assistance
     PC		          People’s Committee
     PCF		         People Credit Funds
     PPC		         Provincial People’s Committee
     PPP		         Public-PrivatePartnership
     RDA/RDAs	     Redevelopment Authority/ Redevelopment Areas
     RFP		         Request for Proposal
     RIR		         Residual Income Ratio
     SALGA		       South Africa Local Government Authority
     SBV		         State Bank of Vietnam
     SHRA		        Social Housing Regulatory Authority
     SOE		         State-Owned Enterprise
     SPPI		        Savills Property Price Index
     TDR		         Transferable Development Rights
     ULIHs		       Urban Low income Households
     URA		         Urban Renewal Authorities
     USAID		       United States Agency for International Development
     VAMC		        Vietnam Asset Management Company
     VBSP		        Vietnam Bank of Social Policy
     VDB		         Vietnam Development Bank
     VHLSS		       Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey
     VUUP		        Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project
     WEDS		        Women’s Economic Development Society
     WU		          Women’s Union




x	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Executive Summary

A. Summary
Affordable housing will be instrumental to helping Vietnam achieve its goals for increasing
productivity and inclusive urban growth. Since Doi Moi, the country has experienced impressive
economic growth, averaged at 7.4 percent per annum from 1990 to 2008, lowering to an average
of 6 percent per annum from 2007 to 2013. Strong economic growth has supported a substantial
reduction in poverty, from 58 percent in 1993 to 17 percent in 20121. Yet, the country has remained
largely rural, with more than half of its population working in the agricultural sector, which only
contributed 17 percent of GDP in 20142. In some countries, urbanization has been used as a tool
to accelerate economic growth and poverty reduction. As Vietnam aims to maintain a high growth
rate, supporting urbanization, where cities contribute a growing share of jobs and GDP, will be
an important measure. This structural shift will drive population growth and new demand for
housing in cities, for which quality and affordable housing options in well-serviced and connected
settlements will be needed.

There is an opportunity now for government to consolidate and refocus efforts in the housing sector.
Vietnam has gone through several phases of housing policy. Prior to 1988, the formal housing sector
was managed through central planning, which shifted to a reliance on market systems following the
Doi Moi reforms. This has led to tremendous growth in the housing sector, particularly in the high-
end segment for both the supply and demand sides. Yet, a market-based approach largely has not
delivered housing solutions accessible to the poor or near-poor. Growth spurred by FDI investment
and speculation led to significant home price increases in the high-end segment that eventually
resulted in a real estate bubble from 2009-2012. The 30 trillion stimulus package has helped to
reorient developers and lenders toward the affordable middle income housing sector with real
home ownership needs, yet at a high fiscal cost to the government. After these years of crisis, there is
an opportunity now to enter a new phase of housing policy, which is focused on better management
of market vulnerabilities, more efficient public spending and affordability for the lowest income.

The 2015 Housing Law sets the framework for reform in the housing sector. Areas of particular
importance in the Law is support toward self-built housing, the active participation of the private
sector, addressing the shortage of affordable rental housing as well as high demand for housing from
low income groups, especially workers in industrial zones of large cities. This report, which includes
a comprehensive assessment and roadmap for affordable housing in Vietnam, recommends the
following key messages moving forward:

     1.	Increase Investment: Consolidate and increase housing sector funding in a sustainable way to
        meet national housing objectives, targeting the lowest two income quintiles and high growth
        cities, where the need for housing is most urgent.


1
    World Bank. Taking Stock: An Update on Vietnam’s Recent Economic Developments. December 2014.
2
    McCaig, B. Pavcnik, P. Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Vietnam. 2013.

                                                                                     A Way Forward         xi
         2.	Prepare Three Flagship Initiatives under an umbrella National Affordable Housing
            Program: Develop a new generation of interventions in the housing sector and cultivate
            capable delivery actors, focused on efficient use of public funds and solutions catered to
            the bottom 40 percent of the population. These include:

            Initiative One. Housing Finance Assistance: Develop specialized housing finance
            products for formal and informal low-income households and shift to mortgage-linked
            subsidies to enhance affordability for the middle-class in a more cost-effective way.

            Initiative Two. Affordable Rental Housing: Increase private sector provision of
            affordable rental housing through a capital subsidy program targeting industrial workers
            and low income urban residents.

            Initiative Three. Starter Homes: Deliver core housing units that are incrementally
            expandable for the lowest income households in new urban, peri-urban and rural areas.

         3.	Undertake Two Structural Reforms: To effectively manage the housing sector, undertake
            two priority reforms, which ensure good coordination, cost recovery and long-term
            sustainability of policy initiatives.

            Reform One. Institutional Strengthening: Work towards strengthening an over-arching
            housing and real estate sector coordinating body, to prepare policy and programs, channel
            subsidies and to support local governments into becoming effective executing agents.

            Reform Two. Land Tax Reform: Make progressive adjustments in the land taxation
            framework to support local governments with additional local revenues for project funding
            and to allow better management of land markets.

         4.	Create an Enabling Environment for Affordable Housing: Invest in a suite of activities
            into the medium-term for strengthening housing sector governance and development
            of the affordable housing sector. This includes putting in place the building blocks of
            a functioning housing market, including real estate information systems, a common
            targeting framework, and strengthening M&E, as well as design of supporting regulatory
            or administrative reforms and new initiatives in priority action areas.

       Moving forward, design of the market-oriented measures described above will require intensive and
       careful consultation and engagement with all housing sector actors, particularly the private sector.
       Private sector will need to play an active role in the early preparation to ensure their participation
       and commitment that carries through to implementation of policy measures on the financing and
       supply side.

       B. Sector Assessment
       Despite economic growth, Vietnam still has a substantial deficit of quality housing. Today,
       almost 20 percent (approximately 4.8 million households) of Vietnam’s 24.2 million households
       live in poor conditions. Population growth and urbanization have exceeded the government’s ability
       to ensure its citizens have access to safe and affordable housing. The share of the urban population is
       expected to reach 50 percent by 2040 as Vietnam continues to promote industrialization as a means

xii	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
to facilitate economic growth and poverty reduction. This will mean that an estimated 374,000
additional units are needed in cities annually, with the number of urban households projected to
increase to 10.1 million in 2020 (from 8.3 million in 2015), as a result of urban population growth
and a decline in the average household size at 1.1 percent per annum3.

New demand for housing will be concentrated in a few major cities and industrial zones. The two
largest metropolitan areas, Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) will drive urban growth into
the medium-term. Spatial analysis shows that more than 50 percent of urban land in the country lies
within the boundaries of these two urban areas, as well as 75 percent of new urban spatial growth. The
Red River Delta Region (including Hanoi) and the South East Region (including HCMC) account
for around two-thirds of annual housing demand or an estimated 244,000 out of the 374,000 units.

Current supply has been dominated by self-built solutions. Approximately 75 to 80 percent of units
are produced by small-scale developers, micro-builders and households themselves. However, low and
middle income households still face many difficulties in obtaining the necessary resources for a formal
and decent self-built unit. First, access to formal land for self-built housing is often unaffordable
due to the costly and lengthy procedures to obtain formal tenure. Secondly, access to finance is a
constraint to many low income and informally-employed households, due largely to the low level of
financial inclusion. Technical capacity to ensure quality construction of housing is also a challenge.
Finally, certain regulatory and administrative requirements push households into informality, such
as minimum plot sizes (e.g. 50 m2 or more in some cities) and prohibitively costly infrastructure
requirements. The government has started to increase flexibility for self-builders, taking into account
sector needs. For example, Decree No. 64/2012/ND-CP allows for exemptions on construction
permits for small projects, which reflects the government’s willingness to support this sector.

The developer-built commercial sector has experienced strong growth, but has been vulnerable to
cyclical downturns. Following the Doi Moi Reform era, state-owned developers dominated housing
production until 1998. Since then, a growing number of private developers have entered and become
active in residential housing. Yet, Vietnam’s real estate sector has also experienced three major
downturns in this period, revealing the weaknesses of the housing system. A volatile market during
2009-2012 resulted in rising inflation, high interest rates and slowed growth, which deflated the real
estate bubble. Home prices decreased substantially, particularly in the middle and high-end market,
leading to a stagnation of housing production, scarcity of liquidity, consolidation of actors and a
sizable inventory of high-end housing stock needing completion or uptake. Prices for affordable homes
(priced at below VND16 million/m2) also decreased, but remained relatively stable during this period
due to continued consumer demand. Unmet market demand, supported by the 30 trillion stimulus
package, has led to stronger participation by developers in the affordable housing segment, in spite
of lower margins. As the market stabilizes and investment returns, this interest could be leveraged to
further increase private sector participation in lower market segments.

Demand for rental housing is high in urban areas and increasing. According to the 2009 Census, rental
housing makes up around 15 percent of Vietnam’s housing stock, or 3.3 million units nationwide.
Rental housing demand is concentrated in urban areas (up to 26 percent of households in HCMC),
among migrants (64 percent of migrants in HCMC and Hanoi live in rental housing), youths and low


3
 Authors’ calculations based on Vietnam’s Household Living Standards Survey (VHLSS), 2009 Census
and 2013 Inter-Censal Survey.

                                                                                    A Way Forward         xiii
       income households. The need for temporary housing or rental solutions can be expected to increase
       as Vietnam becomes more urbanized, the population of students and migrant workers rise and the
       average age of marriage continues to increase, with many young people choosing to settle later in life.
       Existing affordable rental housing in Vietnam is mainly informal, small-scale and substandard. The
       low level of formality faced by many tenants has a significant impact on livelihood opportunities and
       magnifies vulnerability to poverty, particularly for migrants. Despite rising demand, the supply of
       formal affordable rental housing is limited, due to the low payment capacity of tenants, legal hurdles,
       and the difficulties for private sector to prepare financially viable projects, which prevents their
       participation and incentivizes landlords to remain informal.

       Industrial zone workers contribute to a large share of rental housing demand. In Quarter 3 of
       2014, out of the 15.8 million people who are employed in urban areas, 3.05 million belong to the
       manufacturing sector, with 2.25 million people working in 295 industrial parks and 15 economic
       zones across the country4. Among industrial workers, roughly 40 percent are between the ages of 15
       and 29 and approximately 78 percent, or 1.75 million people, rent their dwellings. It is estimated that
       formal supply is only sufficient to respond to 10 percent of this rental housing demand, indicating
       that most people end up renting informally, and there is substantial unmet need in industrial zones
       for adequate rental and starter home options.

       Despite the need, formal housing solutions are largely not affordable to the low income. Affordability
       analysis based on income groups indicates that only the top income quintile can afford developer-
       built commercial units. The 30 trillion stimulus package has extended affordability to middle
       income households, albeit at a high cost to government, by significantly lowering and fixing interest
       rates below prevailing market rates. However, as exhibited by Table 1, standard housing units are
       not affordable for lower-income groups, particularly those below the 40th percentile of household
       income, as well as informal income or tenure groups.

           Table 1: Affordability based on Income Quintiles of Urban Households (in thousands, VND)

                                           Market Conditions			 	                     30 Trillion Program
            Income     Monthly     Loan                                       Loan       Down-Payment        Affordable
                                            Down-Payment       Affordable    Amount
            Quintile   Income     Amount                      Starter Home                                  Starter Home

              Q5       29,805 1,155,013 30% 495,005            1,650,018     1,507,588   30% 646,109        2,153,697
              Q4       14,272 414,811 20% 103,703               518,513       541,434    20% 135,359         676,793
              Q3       10,313 226,838 20% 56,709                283,547       326,031    20% 81,508          407,539
              Q2       7,322 106,315 0%        0                106,315       185,193    0%     0            185,193
              Q1       3,982   35,835 0%       0                 35,835       75,524     0%     0             75,524

           Source: Authors’ calculations based on preliminary income estimates (urban Vietnam 2014) from the VHLSS 2012
           short form and housing finance lending assumptions. Income data has been inflated by 13 percent CPI.


       Access to housing finance is a major barrier for increasing affordability. There are large underserved
       segments of the market that are unable to access housing finance. For example, 68 percent of the
       labor force have informal income and therefore do not qualify for mortgages. Neither do home-
       owners with informal tenure and the poor, who have low payment capacity. Innovations in housing
       finance and lending channels are required to respond to these market needs, which are supported


       4
           General Statistics Office. Report on Labour Force Survey. Quarter 3. 2014.

xiv	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
by long-term sources of funds. Furthermore, the real estate downturn in 2009-2012 exposed
systemic weaknesses in the mortgage sector. Lender underwriting standards are widely varied and
risk management practices are weak. There is also a need to improve the foreclosure system, develop
early-indicator tracking tools for the sector and consider counter-cyclical prudential regulations to
support sustained market stability. These will be important measures to guard against risks through
market cycles, as growth and investor interest returns to real estate.

Land supply is another key obstacle to affordable housing production. Annually, an estimated 11,500
hectares of urban land is needed for housing. Formal supply is failing to keep pace with demand,
which is forcing up prices and reducing affordability. The existing land administration framework is
complex and inefficient. Key challenges to the delivery of suitable serviced land include: (i) difficulty
for governments to mobilize vacant or underdeveloped land in cities; (ii) controversy in the State’s
land acquisitions and compensation practices; (iii) challenges enforcing and tracking the 20 percent
land contribution requirement stipulated in Decree 188; (iv) the lack of land value capture tools
to extract value from new development; and, (v) limited use of integrated land use planning and
coordination between relevant ministries (i.e. MoC, MoNRE, MoT, MPI).

Land tax rates in Vietnam are currently very low, which contributes to speculation and elevated
land prices. Land tax only accounts for 2 to 3 percent of total government revenues, due to minimal
tax rates and below-market valuations prescribed by People’s Committees in the Land Price
Framework. This significantly limits revenues for providing services, infrastructure and funding for
other public programs. Adjustments in the land taxation framework is expected to have a significant
impact on increasing land supply and improving affordability, by reducing incentives for investors
to hold vacant or underdeveloped land for speculation, thereby lowering land prices.

Existing housing programs have had some positive outcomes, however, most are still ongoing and
results are unclear. There are almost a dozen housing programs in implementation. They have largely
been successful at leveraging private sector and reaching a large number of households, notably the
30 trillion program, the Mekong River Delta flood mitigation program and home improvement
support to low income rural families. Yet, most programs are designed independently for different
target groups, using distinct delivery channels that are not coordinated with other efforts in the sector,
and without clear accounting mechanisms for public expenditure. Several of these programs have also
struggled to receive the necessary funding for implementation, while others have been implemented
at high economic cost to the government. Finally, there is a gap in housing policy focus for poor urban
households. Programs could be made more efficient through consolidating delivery systems and focus
on developing broad market segments, rather than delivering to independent target groups.

              Box 1 Examples of Vietnam’s Government Interventions in Affordable Housing


  30 Trillion Stimulus Package: GoV launched the 30 trillion stimulus package in June 2013 to stimulate the
  real estate market, while addressing the over-supply of high-end inventories, and reorienting lenders and
  developers toward real demand from middle and low income consumers. While SBV manages consumer
  eligibility criteria, loan disbursement and performance on the demand side, MoC is responsible for
  approving and overseeing projects on the supply side. Although the program has been largely successful at
  stimulating affordable housing production and lending, aimed to reach an estimated 45,000 households,
  it struggled initially with slow disbursement and largely benefits the formally-employed middle class at
  high economic cost to the government. The implicit economic cost of the subsidy for mortgage loans and
  developer loans is 23.8 percent and 7.1 percent of total capital, respectively.


                                                                                         A Way Forward        xv
         Decree 188’s 20 percent land contribution requirement: Decree 188’s requirement of land contribution to
         social housing production and provision of complementary development incentives are among the GoV’s
         first efforts to resolve supply-side housing blockages for urban low income segments. Low enforcement
         and underdeveloped procedures to manage and effectively utilize land reserves at the local level has
         resulted in developers’ reluctance to abide by stringent guidelines and limited supply of land released for
         social housing through this initiative. This experience demonstrates the need to introduce new procedures
         by engaging local governments so that they can have input into policy design early and are prepared to
         implement.

         VUUP’s Housing Upgrade Component: Funding for housing microfinance under the Vietnam Urban
         Upgrading Program (VUUP) helped to expand and deepen MFI sector activities around micro-loans
         for housing improvement in urban areas. In conjunction with urban upgrading, USD 15 million was
         provided to MFIs and community networks to provide preferential credit for home improvement to
         low income households in HCMC, Hai Phong, Can Tho, and Nam Dinh. Lending in this program reached
         90,000 households and demonstrated the interest of MFIs to deliver housing microfinance if the right
         government support is put in place.

         Low income Rural Housing Program: This program targets poor households in rural areas without existing
         homes. The Vietnam Bank of Social Policy (VBSP) provides low-cost credit for home improvement and
         incremental construction, as well as basic technical assistance for construction. The Women’s Union,
         Farmers Union, and Youth Union are among the community organizations that provide customer
         interface and operations, from origination and appraisal to disbursement and collection. The program
         reached 260,587 households by the end of Phase I in 2010 and Phase II aims to reach another 510,700
         households within 4 years.


       Difficulties in coordination weaken housing sector governance. The Ministry of Construction (MoC)
       plays a lead role in regulating and overseeing the housing sector. However, due to the interdisciplinary
       nature of housing, this role requires convening across almost a dozen separate concerned ministries
       (including, inter alia, MoC, MoF, MPI, MoNRE, MoT and SBV), which is a difficult task without
       the necessary tools and support. Many central government bodies act as institutional silos with ad hoc
       coordination and reporting mechanisms, which limits the ability of MoC to design and deliver cost-
       effective and integrated housing programs. There is a need to structure a more robust coordination
       framework, as well as invest further in management information systems in order to improve market
       information and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the effectiveness of public programs. This
       will allow the government to more easily measure and improve performance of policy initiatives.

       Fiscal constraints also restrict investment in the housing sector. Though housing was identified as a
       key development target in the National Socio-Economic Development Plan, there is very little fiscal
       space to expand budget allocation beyond other priority sectors, for example, education and health.
       Vietnam’s fiscal position has deteriorated since 2006, due to a rise in recurrent expenditures and a
       drop in government revenues from 25.6 percent of GDP in 2009 to an expected 20.1 percent of GDP
       in 2015. Public debt has reached above 60 percent of GDP, only slightly below the government’s legal
       limit of 65 percent and the budget deficit has remained consistently above 5 percent of GDP. As a
       result, there are constraints for the introduction of new programs, a focus on decentralizing resource
       commitments to local governments and on cost recovery possibilities for public investments.

       Some local governments have prepared innovative housing projects, yet most need support to become
       more effective in affordable housing provision in their cities. Local governments have the mandate
       for housing provision, but often do not prioritize housing despite the magnitude of the demand,

xvi	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
due to a lack of technical know-how and ability to plan and mobilize resources toward the sector.
Local Housing Development Funds, which were intended to act as a conduit at the provincial
level to implement the 2005 Housing Law, have failed to be established in most cities due to lack
of funding and guidance, and where they have been, have only had limited success. Subsequently,
government have decided to merge these bodies with the Local Development Investment Funds,
which have a new provision that allows for investment in public housing programs, yet still no
guidance on local interventions in the sector. Local governments also depend heavily on central level
regulatory approval, which can cause delays and restrict innovation in the sector. Nevertheless, there
has been innovation at the local level, including efforts to pilot land readjustment in the Mekong
Delta for flood-prone households and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) between employers and
local government for mixed-use worker housing in Da Nang’s industrial zones, which provide an
opportunity for replication and scaling.

The Central Steering Committee (CSC) on Housing and Real Estate Market Policy is an important
effort toward integration. Headed by the Deputy Prime Minister, this body was established to
advise the Prime Minister on real estate and housing market interventions. The multi-disciplinary
working group including all ministries relevant to the sector, as well as the directorates for agricultural
development, labor federation, and urban management and construction, among others, has the
mandate to advise and provide inputs into proposed housing programs and also to play a coordinating
role for respective line ministries, bureaus, and directorates. However, the CSC has yet to possess clearly
defined mechanisms for coordinating stakeholders, program implementation, and sector oversight.

The Housing Law presents the opportunity for government to consolidate and increase public
investment in the housing sector. The revised Housing Law, passed by parliament in November 2014
and effective as of July 2015, provides the legislative framework for government support and reform
in priority areas for affordable housing. This includes self-built housing, affordable rental housing,
redevelopment of old public housing blocks, improved sector management, real estate management
information systems, among other items. The challenge now is to operationalize the 2015 Housing
Law by building out a set of capable actors, effective delivery systems and initiatives that can be used
to more effectively manage the housing sector and increase affordability for the lowest income.

C. Roadmap Recommendations
The Roadmap outlines a strategy to inform and shape the government of Vietnam’s interventions
in the housing sector in the next five years. The primary recommendation is for the government to
structure a National Affordable Housing Program as a vehicle to realize the objectives of the 2015
Housing Law. This Program would have three Flagship Initiatives and two Structural Reforms, as
well as a package of supporting activities to strengthen management and regulation of the housing
sector and to better target housing support toward the lowest income. The proposed structure of the
National Affordable Housing Program is shown in Figure 2 and described in the following section.

1. Flagship Initiative: Housing Finance Assistance

The first initiative aims to expand access to housing finance to low income and informal households
and strengthen the overall lending environment. The main focus is to support development of
a set of specialized housing finance products to meet the different needs of low income urban
households, while reducing the market’s vulnerability to real estate speculation and the variability
of investment cycles.

                                                                                       A Way Forward          xvii
                                    Figure 2 and Figure 8.1

          Figure 1 Structure for a National Affordable Housing Program



                                     Housing                   A ordable
             Flagship                Finance                     Rental                 Starter Home
            Initiative              Initiative                  Initiative                Initiative



                                                     Institutional Strengthening
           Structural
            Reforms
                                                      Urban Land Tax Reform


         Firstly, it is recommended to use a more cost-efficient approach to expand access to mortgage finance.
         This requires restructuring the 30 trillion program by shifting toward a mortgage-linked buy-down
         subsidy and introducing a broader focus on building the financial sector’s capacity for lending and
         managing housing finance risks. Specific activities will include designing and introducing the buy-
         down subsidy, investigating the feasibility of a secondary mortgage facility to provide a solution to
         long-term funding for banks, as well as a suite of activities to improve mortgage sector management,
         such as improved lending standards, risk management tools and monitoring systems. These are
         described in more detail in the report.

         Secondly, expand the availability of finance for home improvement or incremental expansion with
         support towards a savings and subsidy-linked housing microfinance product. Please refer to Figure 3
         for the interaction between actors. In such a program, participating financial institutions will qualify
         eligible households for a housing micro-loan (e.g. loans up to VND 30 million, for around 3-5 years)
         that would be linked to a subsidy enhancement provided by government. Credit-worthiness of low
         income households may be established through a minimum period of savings (e.g. 12 months) or a
         pre-existing savings or lending history. Construction technical assistance would also be incorporated
         into the loan to lower costs and improve quality of construction. Home expansion could be used for
         own-use or for rental purposes, where small landlords will be encouraged to construct an additional
         room for rental.

         In the medium-term, another specialized housing finance product for development is a savings
         and subsidy-linked micro-mortgage. This product would target households with informal income
         for purchase of formal housing units and would also use a savings requirement for participating
         households (to help financial institutions to qualify people without a credit history or formal
         employment) and be linked to a government subsidy to enhance affordability for lower-income
         people. Micro-mortgages could be used in conjunction with the flagship initiative for starter homes.

         2. Flagship Initiative: Affordable Rental Housing

         It is recommended to invest in the development of an affordable rental program, driven by local
         governments, to increase private sector provision of quality and affordable rental housing in priority
         areas. This program would initially focus on supply-side support that is complemented by a set of
         reforms and activities to create an enabling environment for the formal rental market. In time,
         demand-side assistance can be introduced to assist the poorest and most vulnerable households.

xviii	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
 Figure 2 Example of Housing Microfinance Product

      National
                                                                               MFI’s &
      Housing
                                • Subsidy enhancement                         Other FI’s
      Agency
  • Program design                                                         • Housing micro nance
  • Program oversight                                                      • Construction support
                                                                            (for home improvement or extension)
  • Subsidy provision




       Local
                                                              Bene ciaries
    Governments

  • Flexible permitting                                        • Informal income with existing home
                                                               • Savings or lending history
                                                               • Home expansion for own use or
                                                                 ‘expand-to-rent’



To incentivize production, government is recommended to structure capital subsidies (e.g. in cash,
infrastructure or land, where appropriate) in order to engage a set of accredited actors (e.g. investors,
landlords, NGOs or employers) to provide quality rental housing to target groups. In order to access
subsidies, rental housing providers must make a commitment to maintain units at affordable levels
for a set length of time for the target population (e.g. 10 years). Local governments would oversee
projects, which could include mixed-use and mixed-income elements to support development
of integrated and well-serviced neighborhoods, as well as the financial viability of projects. The
initiative can be started with pilots in industrial zones to respond to existing demand, and after
testing, expanded to address other priority groups in urban areas, including low income households
(‘poor list’ households and those below the 40th income percentile), students and young families.

To reach the lowest income and most vulnerable households, rental housing vouchers may be needed,
in order to fill the affordability gap between the monthly payment capacity of the poorest families and
the rental income required by private sector to ensure adequate returns for the project investment.

3. Flagship Initiative: Starter Homes

The final initiative is focused on a program to support self-built housing with ‘starter home’ core units
targeted at the lowest-income households, located in well-serviced urban, peri-urban and rural areas.
Core units are typically one-floor with at least one room of 12 m2 or larger, are move-in ready and can
be extended incrementally over time by households, according to their changing needs, preferences and
payment capacity.

Core units allow the lowest income, who are unable to self-provide, to have a formal start in their
housing career, with basic infrastructure in place. Starter homes mitigate negative externalities that
arise from completely self-built solutions in slum areas, such as public health issues, and are more
cost efficient than ex-post neighborhood upgrading.


                                                                                        A Way Forward             xix
       Figure 3 Affordable Rental Housing Initiative


               NHA                                                Banks
                                                                                    • Savings account
                                                                                    • (in future) housing nance



                                                                                                             Bene ciaries
                   • Program design                                   • LT rental nance
                   • Program oversight                                                                        (Renters)
                   • Capital subsidy provision ($)



                                                                                  • Rental payments
                                                                 Investors
               Local
            Governments                                           PPCss
                                                                 Landlords
                             • Targeting & selection                              • Equity
                             • Capital subsidy allocation        Employers        • Operations             Integrated Housing Site:
                             • Land + Infrastructure          Rental Housing      • Commitment to             w/ minimum rental
                                                                Providers            a ordability        requirement (e.g. 40% rental)



      Core units can be developed on a large scale by a private developer, through a cooperative movement,
      or a mix of both. The ‘starter home’ initiative could involve partnership with an intermediary
      institution or association (such as MFIs, trade unions, worker unions, women’s groups), who
      would play a role in engaging and organizing groups of eligible low income households. Savings and
      subsidy-linked micro-mortgages can be used for the informally-employed, where households use
      regular savings to build up a credit-history (e.g. 12 months) to enable them to qualify for housing
      finance to purchase core house units.

      Local governments would play an important role to identify and develop appropriate land sites for core
      housing projects (either through land reserved under Decree 188, or other tools, such as land pooling
      and land readjustment etc.), engaging private sector contractors, and supervising offtake, where units
      are sold, rented or allocated to eligible households. In time, home-owners may elect to incrementally
      expand their units through housing microfinance and construction technical assistance.

       Figure 4 Starter Homes Initiative

                                                                                            Financial               Community
                NHA
                                                     • Subsidy enhancement                 Institutions             Organization

        • Program design
        • Program oversight                                                                                       • Pooling of HHs
                                                                                          • Housing loan
        • Subsidy provision                                                                                       • Savings conduit
                                                                                          • Savings
                                                                                                                  • E.g.: WU, trade
                                                                                            institution
                                                                                                                    unions




                                                            Contract or
               Local                                                                      Households/
                                                              Build-
            Governments                                                                   C ommunity
                                                             Transfer
        •    Targeting                                  • Equity                             • Savings commitment
        •    Site identi cation                         • Development loan                   • Input into starter home design
        •    Bidding/RFPs                               • Sales/transfer                     • Community support
        •    Infrastructure
        •    Interim o -take


xx	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
4. Structural Reform: Institutional Strengthening

It is recommended to: (i) develop an over-arching body to carry out sector coordination and
oversight; and (ii) focus on building capacity of local governments in at least five of Vietnam’s high-
growth cities, to support them to become effective executing agents of national housing initiatives.

An overarching body, hereby referred to as a National Housing Authority (NHA), would act as an
over-arching coordinating body, across ministries and local governments, to oversee housing sector
interventions. The NHA need not be a new institution, it could be anchored under a lead ministry,
determined by GoV, or by establishing a new executive body at a higher level of government, or by
expanding the mandate and capacity of the existing Central Steering Committee.

Such an agency could have the following specific set of functions:

     - Coordinate and convene public agencies
     - Carry out policy analysis and development
     - Channel subsidies and support to local governments
     - Monitor and evaluate programs
     - Develop a common targeting framework
     - Oversee housing and real estate market information systems

The NHA would also engage and support local governments toward preparation and execution
of the Flagship Initiatives. Local governments play an important role in carrying out local needs
assessments, identifying target households, facilitating land provision, administering subsidies,
engaging private sector and reporting back results for the monitoring of programs. By creating
common delivery systems, clear performance indicators and platforms for training and peer-to-
peer sharing, central government can support and incentivize local governments to become more
effective agents in affordable housing provision.


  Figure 5 Institutional Structure for Housing Sector Governance


                                             •	Convenes Ministries/Public Agencies
                                             •	Policy Analysis & Development
             National                        •	Channel Subsidies/Support to LGs
         Housing Authority                   •	Monitor & Evaluate Programs
                                             •	Targeting & Segmentation
                                             •	Housing Real Estate Information System


                                             •	Targeting & Selection
                                             •	Program Executing Agent
               Local                         •	Manage Land Resources
            Governments                      •	Deliver Infrastructure
                                             •	Streamline Admin. Steps
                                             •	Reporting Back to NHA



                                                                                    A Way Forward         xxi
        5. Structural Reform: Urban Land Tax

        To build out these housing initiatives in a sustainable way, the government is recommended to consider
        adjustments in the structure of land taxation.

        It is recommended that, in the short term, steps are taken to progressively increase the LPF so that it is
        in alignment with the market prices of land, as this can be undertaken within the existing legislation.
        Secondly, it is recommended that increases in the annual land tax rate or the addition of a levy or
        property tax5 be considered as part of the review of the implementation of the 2013 Land Law.

        The new structure would raise land tax revenues in a phased and progressive way, to enable local
        governments to better manage land resources, dampen speculation, raise revenues, and increase land
        supply for a better functioning market. In order to avoid any adverse effects on the low income, land
        right use holders may be charged with additional tax increments for multiple and larger land-holdings
        based on approved land use, whether developed or not.

        With proper implementation, land tax reform would be achieved without any negative consequences
        to low income households. On the contrary, increased land taxation will reduce incentives for investors
        to hold idle land and mitigate the inflation of land prices from speculation, thus facilitating affordable
        housing for the urban poor, and ultimately improving the affordability of new formal housing. Increases
        in the LPF will also improve the compensation of existing land use right holders whose land is acquired
        for state-approved development projects.

             Figure 6 Schematic of Urban Land Tax


                                                            Government
                                                              Actors


                                                                Subsidy




                               Land
                             Taxation

                                                                                                Increased
                                                                                                 Market
                                                                                                  Value




        5
         Any fee should be based on the land value (rather than the value of built property) and could be introduced as a
        surcharge to the land tax, possibly temporarily, in order to finance specific projects (e.g. a betterment levy) or may be
        considered an option to circumvent the tax rates that are fixed in the Land Law.

xxii	       Vietnam Affordable Housing
6. Creating an Enabling Environment for the Affordable Housing Market

Beyond the Flagship Initiatives and Structural Reforms outlined in the proposed National
Affordable Housing Program, the Roadmap outlines a detailed agenda of supporting regulatory and
investment activities in six areas of priority action. These will be critical to supporting the success of
policies and improving management of the housing sector. These are listed below and described in
the report in more detail.

Housing Finance:

  - Continue to support development of specialized savings and subsidy-linked housing finance
    products to address the gap in access to housing finance.
  - Ensure the safety and soundness of the mortgage sector by enhancing prudent lending
    standards, strengthening monitoring and risk management tools.
  - Facilitate access to long-term funding by assessing the feasibility of a secondary mortgage
    facility, in order to deepen the lending capacity of the financial sector.
  - Develop a framework for financial literacy and borrowers’ protection.
  - Support development of micro-finance regulations.

Access to Land:

  - Build systems to reclaim undeveloped land, which has been allocated to investors, if it is not
    developed within the specified period.
  - Introduce land pooling and land readjustment (LPLR) as pilot projects in three cities to
    improve efficiency and equity of land development and increase land supply.
  - Design clear bidding frameworks (i.e. Request for Proposals or RFPs) in order to create a
    more competitive and transparent system for selling and allocating development rights to public
    land holdings.
  - Strengthen the implementation guidance of land contribution decrees (e.g. Decree 188)
    with support to local governments to strengthen enforcement capacity, improve valuations and
    tracking of land contributions, and systems to release land for social housing programs.
  - Expand “one-stop-shop” model to streamline land-related services and provide local interfaces
    with district administration.
  - Replace one-off land use fee with a modest administrative charge to increase incentives for all
    land holdings and transfers to be registered.
  - Prepare a coordinating framework, for all land-related functions to improve coordination
    across involved ministries.

Affordable Rental Housing:

  - Improve market information for the rental sector to increase visibility and understanding of
    the sector.
  - Strengthen legislative framework for rental, including landlord-tenant relations, business
    registration, income tax waivers for rental providers, and introducing more flexibility into rental
    housing regulations.
  - Support innovation in rental housing finance e.g. long-term financing for landlords and investors.
  - Scale the capital-subsidy program to support affordable rental in more priority areas for
    target groups.

                                                                                      A Way Forward          xxiii
         - Introduce time-bound rental vouchers to enhance the payment capacity of the lowest income,
           which could be coupled with supply-side support.

        Self-Built Housing:

         - Expand urban upgrading programs with delivery of infrastructure to under-serviced areas.
           Upgrade or redevelop in-situ, or voluntarily resettle, as per preferences through community
           participation.
         - Scale flagship initiatives for incrementally self-built and core housing.

        Developer-Built Housing:

         - PPPs to improve old housing stock. Develop and implement a model to incent developer
           participation in redevelopment of public housing blocks (e.g. through development bonuses).
         - Promote shared tenure models, including condos and coops, with an emphasis on improved
           Home-Owners’ Associations.
         - Explore transferable development rights and strengthen mechanisms for payment in lieu of land
           contributions.

        Housing Sector Governance:

         - Invest in the building blocks of effective governance, including improved management
           information systems for the housing sector, development of good targeting frameworks and
           program monitoring and reporting procedures.
         - Improve regulatory and administrative environment. Assess and standardize administrative
           processes for land and housing development (e.g. e-systems, simplifying or minimizing steps).
           Carry out a regulatory audit and make necessary adjustments toward clear and consistent
           legislation.




xxiv	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Table of Contents
Executive Summary								                                                                      xi
A. Summary	                                                                                    xi
B. Sector Assessment	                                                                         xii
C. Roadmap Recommendations	                                                                   xii
   1. Flagship Initiative: Housing Finance Assistance	                                       xiii
   2. Flagship Initiative: Affordable Rental Housing	                                       xviii
   3. Flagship Initiative: Starter Homes	                                                     xix
   4. Structural Reform: Institutional Strengthening	                                         xxi
   5. Structural Reform: Urban Land Tax	                                                     xxii
   6. Creating an Enabling Environment for the Affordable Housing Market	                   xxiii

Chapter 1: Country Context	                                                                    2
1.1 Macro-Economic Situation	                                                                  2
1.2 Urbanization and Poverty Trends	                                                           3
1.3 Real Estate and Construction Sector	                                                       4
1.4 Priorities of Government Development Policy	                                               5

Chapter 2: Housing Sector Governance	                                                         7
2.1 Institutional Framework	                                                                  7
2.2 Legislative and Policy Framework	                                                        11

Chapter 3: Housing Need, Demand and Affordability	                                           14
3.1 Housing Need	                                                                            14
3.2 Housing Demand and Affordability	                                                        15
    3.2.1 Household Income and Savings Capacity	                                             15
    3.2.2 Access to Housing Finance	                                                         16
    3.2.3 Housing Demand and Affordability for Q3-Q5 Income Segments	                        17
    3.2.4 Housing Demand and Affordability for Q1-Q2 Income Segments	                        19
3.3 Housing Policy Implications	                                                             20

Chapter 4: The Housing Supply and Delivery System	                                           21
4.1 Overall Context for Housing Supply	                                                      21
4.2 Commercial Housing Sector	                                                               23
    4.2.1 Overview of the Commercial Housing Sector	                                         23
    4.2.2 The Cost Structure of Commercial Housing Development	                              25
    4.2.3 Policy Challenges and Opportunities in the Commercial Housing Sector	              26
4.3 Rental Housing Sector	                                                                   28
4.4 Self-Built Housing Sector	                                                               33

Chapter 5: Housing Finance	                                                                  38
5.1 Housing Finance Sector Assessment	                                                       38
    5.1.1 Overall Sector Context	                                                            38
    5.1.2 Housing Finance Demand	                                                            38
    5.1.3 Housing Finance Delivery Actors	                                                   39
    5.1.4 Systematic Sector Challenges	                                                      42
5.2 Assessment of the 30 Trillion Stimulus Package	                                          47

Chapter 6: Land Management and Urban Planning	                                               52

                                                                                  A Way Forward     xxv
        6.1 Overall Context For Urban Land	                                                     52
        6.2 Management and Administration of Urban Land	                                        52
            6.2.1 Legislative Framework	                                                        52
            6.2.2 Land Administration	                                                          53
            6.2.3 Land Use and Urban Planning	                                                  54
        6.3 Economics and Taxation of Urban Land	                                               55
            6.3.1 Land Taxation	                                                                55
            6.3.2 Economics of Urban Land Challenges	                                           55

        Chapter 7: Government Housing Interventions	                                            57
        7.1 Existing Government Initiatives	                                                    57
        7.2 Housing Policy Looking Forward	                                                     60

        Chapter 8: Objectives of the Roadmap	                                                   62
        8.1 Introduction to the Roadmap for Affordable Housing Policy	                          62
        8.2 Roadmap Goals	                                                                      62
        8.3 Roadmap Recommendations	                                                            63

        Chapter 9: A Framework for Housing Policy Reform for Vietnam	                           64

        Chapter 10: Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform	                                  65
        Chapter 10.1: Housing Finance	                                                          65
           10.1.A Develop Specialized Housing Finance Products to Reach Underserved Segments    65
          10.1.B. Strengthen the Housing Finance Sector’s Capacity for Lending	                 69
          10.1.C. Other Market-Making Measures to Improve Access to Housing Finance	            72
        Chapter 10.2: Land Management and Urban Planning	                                       73
          10.2.A Adjust the Land Taxation Framework	                                            73
          10.2.B. Adopt an Integrated Urban Development Strategy	                               75
          10.2.C Other Market Making Measures to Support Land Supply	                           78
        Chapter 10.3: Affordable Rental Housing	                                                79
          10.3.A. Invest in Supply-Side Support for Affordable Rental Housing	                  79
          10.3.B. Demand-Side Rental Housing Assistance	                                        81
          10.3.C. Other Market-Making Measures to Support Affordable Rental Housing	            83
        Chapter 10.4: Self-Built Housing	                                                       85
          10.4.A. Develop a Program for Expandable Starter Homes	                               85
          10.4.B. Neighborhood Development and Improvement of Substandard Homes	                87
          10.4.C. Other Market-Making Measures to Support the Self-Built Housing Sector	        89
        Chapter 10.5: Developer-Built Housing	                                                  91
          10.5.A. Structure PPPs for Affordable Housing Delivery	                               91
          10.5.B. Explore Introduction of Development Right Incentives	                         93
          10.5.C. Other Market-Making Measures to Support Developer-Built Housing	              95
        Chapter 10.6: Housing Sector Governance	                                                96
          10.6.A. Institutional Strengthening	                                                  96
          10.6.B. Building Blocks of Housing Sector Governance	                                 98
          10.6.C. Other Measures to Strengthen Housing Sector Governance	                       99

        Chapter 11: Strategic Implementation Plan	                                             101

        Annex A Reference Data for Affordability Analyses	                                     103
        Annex B Overview of Public Housing Programs	                                           109
        Annex C List of Key References	                                                        116

        Figure:
               Figure 1 Structure for a National Affordable Housing Program	                   xviii

xxvi	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
         Figure 2 Example of Housing Microfinance Product	                                       xix
         Figure 3 Affordable Rental Housing Initiative	                                           xx
         Figure 4 Starter Homes Initiative	                                                       xx
         Figure 5 Institutional Structure for Housing Sector Governance	                         xxi
         Figure 6 Schematic of Urban Land Tax	                                                  xxii
         Figure 1.1 Composition of FDI Commitments 	                                               2
         Figure 1.2 Share of GDP by Sectors, 1986 - 2009	                                          3
         Figure 1.3 Gross Output of the Construction Sector by Segment in 2013	                    5
         Figure 2.1 Institutional Structure of Vietnam’s Housing Sector	                         10
         Figure 2.2 Housing Financing in Ho Chi Minh City	                                       11
         Figure 2.3 The Evolution of Vietnam’s Housing Policy	                                   12
         Figure 3.1 Type of Housing Deprivation by Region as Compared Against
                    Regional Household Distribution	                                             15
         Figure 4.1 Changes in Housing Production over Time	                                     21
         Figure 4.2 Share of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Real Estate	                     23
         Figure 4.3 Secondary Prices for HCMC and Hanoi	                                         24
         Figure 4.4 Total Accumulative Supply from 1999 to Quarter 3, 2014	                      24
         Figure 4.5 Distribution of Industrial Companies across Provinces	                       29
         Figure 5.1 The Structure of Vietnam’s Banking Sector	                                   40
         Figure 5.2 NPL Ratio in Vietnam, Compared to other Asian Countries	                     43
         Figure 5.3 Bank Loan and Deposit Break-down by Term, 2011	                              44
         Figure 8.1 Structure for a National Affordable Housing Program	                         63
         Figure 10.1 Categorization of Household Type and Matching Housing Finance Products      66
         Figure 10.3 Level of NPLs of Different Market Segments and Actors in India	             69
         Figure 10.2 Affordable Rental Housing Initiative	                                       80
         Figure 10.3 Proposed Structure for Housing Sector Governance	                           97
         Figure A.1 Urban Population by Province (thousand persons)	                            104
         Figure A.2 Urban Household Size by Area	                                               105
         Figure A.3 Qualitative Housing Deficit by Area	                                        105
         Figure A.4 Low-End Commercial Housing	                                                 106
         Figure A.5 Low-End Social Housing	                                                     106
         Figure A.6 Low-End Tube Housing in Hanoi	                                              107
         Figure A.7 Low-End Tube Housing in HCMC	                                               107
         Figure A.8 Lowest-Cost Self-Built Housing	                                             108
         Figure A.9 Existing Rent levels in Various Cities in Vietnam	                          108
         Figure B.1 Budget Allocation for Public Housing Programs since 1995	                   115

Table:
         Table 1 Affordability based on Income Quintiles of Urban Households	                   xiv
         Table 1.1 Poverty Levels in Urban Areas by Class of City and Rural Areas, 2012	          4
         Table 2.1 Role of Key Government Entities on Housing	                                    7
         Table 3.1 Number of Urban Households by Year and Geographic Region	                    14
         Table 3.2 Qualitative Housing Deficit by Type of Housing Deprivation, Urban Vietnam	   15
         Table 3.3 Average Savings Capacity by Household Income Quintiles, 2014	                16
         Table 3.4 Effective Demand for Housing by Household Income in Urban Vietnam,
                   excluding Hanoi and HCMC, 2014 	                                              17
         Table 3.5 Effective Demand for Housing byHousehold Income in Hanoi, 2014	               17
         Table 3.6 Effective Demand forHousing by Household Income in HCMC, 2014	                18
         Table 3.7 Housing Demand by Household Income in Vietnam,
                   excluding Hanoi and HCMC, 2014 	                                              19
         Table 3.8 Housing Demand by Household Income in Hanoi, 2014 	                           19
         Table 3.9 Housing Demand by Household Income in HCMC, 2014 		                           20
         Table 4.1 Average Annual Housing Production in Urban Areas	                             21
         Table 4.2 Share of Housing of Each Typology	                                            22

                                                                                   A Way Forward       xxvii
                 Table 4.3 Example of Various Common Housing Typologies	                                    22
                 Table 4.4 Housing Months-in-Inventory	                                                     25
                 Table 4.5 Affordability Analysis for Hanoi and HCMC	                                       25
                 Table 4.6 Example of Cost Structure for Two Developers 	                                   26
                 Table 4.7 Affordability of Monthly Rent Levels	                                            31
                 Table 4.8 Labor and Construction Costs of Tube Houses and Grade 4 Houses	                  33
                 Table 4.9 Average Home Size in Urban Vietnam		                                             34
                 Table 4.10 Example for the Costs of a New Self-Built Homes	                                35
                 Table 4.11 Examples of Low-End Tube House Prices in Hanoi and HCMC	                        36
                 Table 4.12 Access to Basic Services for the Urban Population, by Quintile	                 37
                 Table 5.1 Real Estate Loan Outstanding in the Banking System	                              38
                 Table 5.2 Standard Mortgage Product offered by Commercial Banks	                           39
                 Table 5.3 Housing Finance Actors by Income Type and Urban/Rural	                           41
                 Table 5.4 Comparison of Housing Micro-Loan Products	                                       42
                 Table 5.5 Examples of Capacity-to-Pay Guidelines by Select Lending Institutions	           45
                 Table 5.6 Key Characteristics of the 30T Package		                                         47
                 Table 5.7 Implicit Subsidy Rate in the 30T Program and Sensitivity Analysis	               49
                 Table 5.8 National Program Status as of February 28, 2015	                                 49
                 Table 5.9 Status of the 30T Package Disbursement	                                          50
                 Table 7.1 Overview of Government Housing Programs	                                         58
                 Table 10.1 Risks Related to the Development of Specialized Housing Finance Products	       68
                 Table 10.3 Risks Related to Adjusting the Land Taxation Framework	                         74
                 Table 10.4 Risks Related to Integrated Land Development	                                   77
                 Table 10.5 Risks for the Rental Housing Capital Subsidy Program	                           80
                 Table 10.6 Risks Related toRental Housing Vouchers	                                        82
                 Table 10.7 Risks Related toSupporting the Self-Built Sector	                               90
                 Table 10.8 Risks for PPPs for Affordable Housing Delivery	                                 92
                 Table 10.9 Risks Related toTransfer Development Rights	                                    95
                 Table 10.10 Risks Related toInstitutional Reforms	                                         97
                 Table 10.11 Risks Related to the Housing Sector Building Blocks	                           99

          Box:
                 Box 1 Examples of Vietnam’s Government Interventions in Affordable Housing 	               xv
                 Box 4.1 Industrial Zones in Vietnam	                                                       29
                 Box 4.2 Characteristics of Housing Preferences 	                                           34
                 Box 5.1 List of Relevant Regulations Issued by SBV 	                                       45
                 Box 10.1 International Examples of Specialized Housing Finance Products	                   68
                 Box 10.2 Moroccan Example of a Guarantee Fund for Informal Sector Segments	                72
                 Box 10.3 Lessons from International Experience in Land Value Taxation	                     74
                 Box 10.4 International Examples of Integrated Land-Use Planning and
                           Land Value Capture 	                                                             77
                 Box 10.5 International Experiencein Supply-Side Rental Housing Programs	                   81
                 Box 10.6 International Experiencesin Rental Housing Vouchers	                              83
                 Box 10.7 Thailand’s Long-Term Credit for Rental Housing Investors	                         85
                 Box 10.8 International Experience in Sites and Services and Incremental Housing Programs   86
                 Box 10.9 International Experiences in Urban Poverty Reduction and
                           Home Improvement 	                                                               88
                 Box 10.10 Participatory Frameworks for Neighborhood Development	                           90
                 Box 10.11 International Experience in PPPs for Affordable Housing Delivery	                92
                 Box 10.12 Examples of Development Right Incentives for Social Housing	                     93
                 Box 10.13 International Examples of Development Right Incentives	                          94
                 Box 10.14 Urban Renewal Areas and Redevelopment Authorities (RDAs) in the U.S.	            96
                 Box 10.15 International Examples of Housing Governance Structures	                         97
                 Box 10.16 Thailand’s Real Estate Information Center (REIC)	                                99

xxviii	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
           Vietnam affordable housing




          I
         Part




     A Comprehensive
 Assessment of Vietnam’s
Affordable Housing System




                           A Way Forward   xxix
       1
     Chapter


               Country Context

               1.1 Macro-Economic Situation                                              address distortions in the state enterprise and
                                                                                         banking sectors. Vietnam has largely managed
               Over the past two decades, Vietnam has                                    to bring under control chronic inflation,
               maintained one of the fastest growing economies                           which peaked at 23 percent in August 2011
               in the world and achieved a substantial                                   and has since fallen to a low of 2.6 percent in
               reduction in poverty. Vietnam’s economy                                   November 2014, with a set of policies focused
               was transformed through a series of market-                               on maintaining macro-economic stability,
               based reforms carried out under Doi Moi since                             addressing the banking sector’s vulnerabilities
               1986. Since then, the country has experienced                             and reforming state-owned enterprises
               impressive economic growth, averaged at 7.4                               (SOEs). The State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) has
               percent per annum from 1990 to 2008, lowering                             overseen a number of merger and acquisitions
               to an average of 6 percent per annum from 2007                            to remove weaker players and manage bad
               to 2013. This growth has been associated with a                           debts. There were 74 SOEs equitized in 2013
               substantial reduction in poverty levels, from 58                          (thrice the number of 2011 and 2012) and a
               percent in 1993 to 17 percent in 20126.                                   target of another 200 for 2014. The Vietnam
                                                                                         Asset Management Company (VAMC) has
               Market volatility from 2009 until 2012                                    absorbed around VND90 trillion or around
               highlighted the need for further reforms to                               US$4.2 billion worth of non-performing loans
                                                                                                      (NPLs), as of October 2014, yet
                                                                                                      the total volume of NPLs in the
                   Figure 1.1 Composition of FDI Commitments
                                                                                                      market is still unclear and VAMC
                   FDI Commitments                                                                    is still to implement a strategy to
                   (In billions of USD)                                                               actually resolve these7.
                   30
                           Manufacturing/processing   Wholesale/retail     Rael estale     Others

                   25                                                                                 The outlook is positive with
                                                                                                      continued         macro-economic
                   20
                                                                                                      stability and strong performance
                   15                                                                                 of       the      foreign-invested
                                                                                                      manufacturing export sector.
                   10
                                                                                                      Vietnam has attracted large
                   5                                                                                  inflows of Foreign Direct
                                                                                                      Investment (FDI) for export
                   0
                             2009	        2010	         2011	            2012	           2013	
                                                                                                      production due to favorable
                                                                                                      investment conditions and its
                   Source: Adapted from IMF Article IV, 2014.	 	                   	                  low-cost and high-quality labor


               6
                 World Bank. Well Begun, Not Yet Done: Vietnam’s Remarkable Progress on Poverty Reduction and the
               Emerging Challenges. Vietnam Poverty Assessment. Hanoi. 2012.
               7
                 World Bank. Taking Stock: An Update on Vietnam’s Recent Economic Developments. December 2014.

2	             Vietnam Affordable Housing
force. Positive macro-economic developments                                              which has played an important role in sustaining
and steps to resolve NPLs have contributed to                                            Vietnam’s economic growth9.
an improvement in the government’s sovereign
risk rating from B2 to B1 by Moody’s and from                                            1.2 Urbanization and Poverty Trends
B+ to BB- from Fitch, boosting investors’
confidence. This enabled the government                                                  The structural transformation of Vietnam’s
to recently issue US$1 billion of bonds on                                               economy will be supported by urbanization
international capital markets, which was ten                                             and new employment opportunities in cities.
times oversubscribed, at a favorable annual                                              Currently, 32 percent of the total population,
interest rate of 4.8 percent. Liquidity injections                                       or 29 million of 89 million people, live in urban
have brought some relief to issues that have                                             areas. The growth rate of the urban population
reduced the lending capacity of the banking                                              has averaged 3.5 percent per annum since 2000,
system and contributed to a sharp slowdown in                                            one of the highest in the region. For every
domestic credit, from a height of 31.9 percent                                           additional percentage of urbanization, Vietnam
of GDP in 2010 to below 15 percent in 2015,                                              has achieved 8 percent in GDP growth, which is
yet recovery has been slow8.                                                             reasonably strong compared to other countries
                                                                                         in the region (6 percent for China, 10 percent
Vietnam has been undergoing a major structural                                           for Thailand and only 2 percent for Indonesia).
shift away from agriculture toward services                                              Continued rural-to-urban migration will be
and manufacturing. Between 1990 and 2014,                                                important to sustain Vietnam’s large gains in
agriculture’s share of GDP dropped from 39 to                                            economic production and poverty reduction,
17 percent, and its share of total employment                                            with a shift in employment from informal and
decreased from over 70 percent to close to half                                          low-productivity areas to formal jobs in the
of the total workforce. Most of these jobs were                                          services, industrial and manufacturing sectors.
taken up by the manufacturing and service
sectors, where new job creation has increased Population growth is increasingly concentrated
the share of the workforce employed in services in a few high-growth regions. Spatial analysis
from 18 to 32 percent, and those employed in shows that more than 50 percent of urban
manufacturing from 8 to 14 percent. There has land in the country lies within the boundaries
also been movement
of labor away from          Figure 1.2 Share of GDP by Sectors, 1986 - 2009
household businesses            60%
toward firms in the
enterprise sector and a         50%

reallocation from state-        40%
owned firms toward
                                Share of GDP




                                30%
private        domestic
and      foreign-owned          20%
firms. These large
                                10%
structural changes in
employment toward               0%
                                               1986
                                                      1987
                                                             1988
                                                                    1989
                                                                           1990
                                                                                  1991
                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                1993
                                                                                                       1994
                                                                                                              1995
                                                                                                                     1996
                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                        2001
                                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                      2003
                                                                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                                                                    2005
                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009




higher value and                -10%
productive       sectors
has led to an overall
growth in aggregate                                     AGR	       MAN	       MIN	        SER

labor      productivity,
                            Source: McCaig, B. Pavcnik, P. Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in
at an average of 5.1        Vietnam. 2013. AGR: Agriculture, MAN: Manufacutring, MIN: Mining; SER: Services.
percent        annually,


8
    Ibid. 2014.
9
    McCaig, B. Pavcnik, P. Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Vietnam. 2013.

                                                                                                                                                                        Country Context                                3
     of Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC),                   measure for inequality, has risen from 33 in 1993
     as well as 75 percent of new urban spatial              to 43 in 2008, which is above the warning level.
     growth10. Meanwhile, the population in rural            One major focus going forward will be ensuring
     areas has stagnated, with outmigration at               there is space for the urban low income in cities
     13.3 percent, exceeding the rate of natural             and maintaining such a high level of inclusive
     population growth. Industrial zones are another         urban growth in Vietnam’s large cities.
     area of high growth, with currently 2.25 million
     people working in 295 industrial parks and 15           Continued economic development, increases
     economic zones across the country. Attracting           in income and urban population growth will
     further investment and stimulating job creation         result in high demand for housing in cities.
     in industrial zones is an important part of             GNI per capita has increased from US$400 in
     Vietnam’s long-term development strategy,               2000 to US$1,740 in 201311. This economic
     with a target under the national master-plan of         growth has been associated with rising
     reaching 7.2 million industrial workers by 2020.        incomes and increased appetite for housing
                                                             consumption. Housing makes up 27.1 percent
     These high-growth regions have contributed              of total expenditures for the highest income
     substantially to spearheading poverty reduction,        quintile, while only 7.5 percent of expenditures
     yet increasing inequality remains a concern.            for the bottom income quintile (with food
     Income growth has been concentrated mainly              accounting for 58.3 percent). Also, income
     around the large cities and in areas with export-       changes and socio-cultural preferences are
     oriented economic activities. Poverty levels are        reducing the average size of urban households
     substantially lower in cities and in particular,        from 4.36 persons in 1999 to 3.64 persons
     large cities, than rural areas, where the poverty       in 2014. These factors, in additional to the
     rate is still elevated at 22 percent of the rural       urban growth patterns described earlier, are
     population. Only 1.9 percent of the population          contributing to a high growth in the number
     of the Special Cities, Hanoi and HCMC, are              of urban households which will translate into
     classified as poor, and only 3.8 percent in the         strong demand for urban housing, particularly
     Class 1 cities, compared to the average poverty         in Vietnam’s large cities and industrial zones.
     rate of cities at 5 percent, with small cities and
     towns accounting for 55 percent of the total            1.3 Real Estate and Construction
     urban poor or an average of 11.2 percent of their       Sector
     population. Economic development has enabled
     significant progress, but the benefits have not         Since the late 1990s, the state’s recognition of
     always been shared equally. The Gini coefficient, a     the market price of land and housing has led to


          Table 1.1 Poverty Levels in Urban Areas by Class of City and Rural Areas, 2012

                                                 Special   Class 1   Class 2   Class 3     Class   Rural
                                                  City                                      4,5
           Number of cities in category             2        7         14        45         634
           Average population (000)               4,075     467       225        86          11
           % of total population                   9.5      3.8       3.7       4.5         8.1     70.4
           % of urban population                   32.1     12.9      12.4      15.3       27.3
           Poverty rate (%)                        1.9      3.8       4.2       5.8        11.2     25.6
           Poverty gap (%)                         0.4      0.6       0.7       1.1         2.4      6.8
           Share of urban poor (%)                 11.0     8.8       9.2       5.9        55.0
          Source: Vietnam Poverty Assessment 2012.




     10
           World Bank. East Asia’s Changing Urban Landscape. Washington, DC. 2015.
     11
          Calculated using the Atlas Method. World Bank Databank.


4	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
extremely high profitability in the real estate                and economic growth. The construction sector
market, attracting a high level of investment.                 has experienced a compound annual growth
Between 2007 and 2008, foreign direct                          rate (CAGR) of 10 percent from 2005 to 2013,
investment (FDI) in the real estate sector has                 peaking at 25 percent in 2013. The private sector
increased from 35 percent of the total USD 20                  plays a major role in driving the growth of the
billion registered FDI in 2007 to 54 percent of                construction industry. The share of gross output
USD 64 billion of FDI in 200812. This substantial              in the sector generated by the private sector
inflow and over-investment contributed to                      reached 84 percent in 2013 mainly in residential
uncontrolled credit growth, inflated prices and                construction and infrastructure development via
subsequently the real estate bubble that led to                Build-Transfer (BT) and Build-Operate-Transfer
a high number of NPLs, which were primarily                    (BOT) financing models. The residential segment
caused by defaults on developer financing, and                 grew from 27 percent of gross outputs in 2005,
over-supply of unsold or uncompleted stock. The                to 40 percent in 2013. Not only did the sector
boom and bust was detrimental to both financial                weather the impact of the country’s real estate
stability and the real economy.                                market slump and the global economy’s stagnant
                                                               growth, it has also created employment for 5.2
Nevertheless, the construction sector has                      percent of the population.
become an important source of employment

     Figure 1.3 Gross Output of the Construction Sector by Segment in 2013

      (VNDtn)                              2005	       2009	      2010	       2011	   2012	     2013E
     300

     250

     200

     150

     100

      50

       0
                      Residential 		                   Non-residential		                Infrastructure
     Source: Data from General Statistical Office (2013), adapted from VPBS 2014.


1.4   Priorities of                     Government             the National Target Program for Poverty
Development Policy                                             Reduction, the National Target Program for
                                                               Employment, the National Target Program
Government’s national priorities are outlined                  for Rural Water Supply and Sanitation, among
in the five-year National Socio-Economic                       others, with varying levels of success. These
Development Plans and have been largely                        priorities have now been consolidated into
focused on social security, poverty reduction and              only two main programs, Sustainable Poverty
infrastructure development. In the 2011-2015                   Reduction and New Rural Development that
Plan, there was a set of 16 national programs                  will be the focus of Vietnam’s Socio-Economic
launched to address a wide-range of socio-                     Development Plan for 2016-2020.
economic issues, such as education, health and
rural development, for different target groups.                Public spending has focused largely on investment
These programs were the responsibility of                      in infrastructure and social development.
different executing ministries and have included               Vietnam’s level of capital expenditure, at around


12
     VPBS. Vietnam Construction Sector: Industry Coverage. Hanoi. March 2014.

                                                                                              Country Context      5
     6.5 percent of GDP, is moderate compared               important tool to leverage financial resources
     to other countries in the region (around 8 to          and expertise from the private sector, while
     10 percent of GDP in China and Thailand).              improving the quality and coverage area for
     There is also a strong focus on investment             infrastructure services. Though, the legal and
     in social development sectors, such as health          regulatory framework guiding PPP transactions
     and education, which have minimum budget               is still in a stage of iterative development.
     allocation rules, for example, not less than 20
     percent of total spending on education. Although       Local governments play a key role in public service
     housing has been identified as a key social policy     delivery. Vietnam has 4 tiers of government:
     target, there is very tight fiscal space to expand     central, 63 provinces or cities, 700 districts or
     budget allocation beyond existing commitments.         cities and towns, and 11,145 communes. Share of
                                                            local government spending has been increasing, as
     Vietnam’s fiscal position has deteriorated             Vietnam continues a process of decentralization,
     over the past decade. Vietnam relies heavily on        from 47.5 percent in 2003 to 55.6 percent
     consumption taxes with revenues from VAT               in 2012, which is relatively high compared
     and excise tax accounting for 33.4 percent of          to other countries. There has been a rapid
     total revenue in 2013. Given the slow-down in          expansion in capital spending at the local level,
     domestic credit and consumption, government            from below 60 percent in 2003 to 74 percent
     revenues have declined from 25.6 percent of GDP        of total capital expenditures in 2014. This rapid
     in 2009 to a projected 20.1 percent in 2015 and        increase has created concerns over the efficiency
     total expenditures have been been rising steeply,      and consistency of spending with national-level
     reaching 28.4 percent of GDP in 2013 and with          objectives, capacity of local governments and
     a continued rise of 11.5 percent (year-on-year) in     the strength of monitoring mechanisms. Focus
     the first nine months of 2014. This is largely due     of the 2015 State budget law includes increasing
     to an increase in recurrent expenditures, which        fiscal autonomy of local governments, improved
     made up 68 percent of the budget in 2013, and          linkage between inter-governmental transfers and
     is relatively high compared to other countries         strategic development objectives, shifting from
     in the region. Government debt has also risen          a input-based budget to performance-oriented
     to above 60 percent of GDP, slightly below the         system and improving budget accountability.
     legal limit of 65 percent. Although sovereign
     debt risk is considered low, the legal limit for the   In the medium term, government will focus
     national debt, as well high and continued budget       affordable housing policy toward supporting
     deficits (5.3 percent in 2013 and 2014), are           other national targets and high-priority
     prompting a commitment to fiscal consolidation         development programs. In particular,
     and conservatism toward new initiatives without        affordable housing will be an important
     a clear cost recovery strategy13.                      component to complement the development of
                                                            higher-productivity jobs in cities and industrial
     As part of a long-term financing strategy,             zones, alleviating poverty of the poorest 40
     the government is in the process of fiscal             percent of the population, as well as facilitating
     consolidation and exploring ways to leverage           achievement of the national targets for higher
     alternative sources of funds for investment in         levels of urbanization. In the environment
     priority areas. One strategy being employed            of fiscal consolidation and the government’s
     by government has been decentralizing                  commitment to macro-economic stability,
     responsibilities to local governments and              there is also a focus on interventions that can
     another is developing a favorable framework to         improve the efficiency of public spending
     attract private sector interest in infrastructure      or enable cost recovery, as well as policies or
     investment. Among financing options, public-           instruments to mitigate the risks of volatility in
     private partnerships (PPP) is seen as an               the real estate market.


     13
       Tuan, T.B. PFM Reforms: The Lessons Learnt-Promises and Tears. Asian Regional Seminar on Public
     Financial Management. Phnom Penh. 26 November 2014.


6	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                    Chapter


                   Housing Sector Governance

2.1 Institutional Framework                       different housing-related activities based on
                                                  guiding decrees, decisions and circulars. The
In terms of housing sector governance,            key central-level actors include the Ministry
the Ministry of Construction (MoC)                of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Planning and
plays a lead role, at the central level, in       Investment (MPI), Ministry of Environment
regulating and setting national policy and        and Natural Resources (MoNRE), State Bank
investment objectives for housing. Due to the     of Vietnam (SBV), Vietnam Bank of Social
interdisciplinary nature of housing, this role    Policy (VBSP) and Ministry of Transport
requires convening across around a dozen          (MoT), among others. The activities of each of
central-level ministries and government           these government bodies, as related to housing,
bodies, which are involved in implementing        are described in more detail in Table 2.1.


  Table 2.1 Role of Key Government Entities on Housing

              Entity                              Housing-Related Functions

   Central Steering Committee     The Central Steering Committee (CSC) is the Prime Minister’s
   for Housing and Real Estate    advisory body for housing, led by the Deputy Prime Minister.
          Market Policy           The CSC assesses market dynamics and trends and guides
                                  development of laws and policies related to housing and real
                                  estate markets.

     Ministry of Construction     MoC is the lead agency responsible for housing, construction
                                  and urban development. MoC develops national housing
                                  policy, strategies and programs and oversees and guides
                                  program implementation and enforcement of regulations.
                                  MoC also leads the development of a housing sector database
                                  and collects housing sector performance data from local
                                  government and other actors.

     Ministry of Planning and     MPI is the coordinating ministry that develops national
           Investment             development plans, strategies for development investment,
                                  and tracks growth and investment statistics. In housing,
                                  MPI collaborates with MoC, related ministries, and local
                                  governments to develop housing development goals,
                                  investment policies, program incentives, and housing
                                  finance plans. MPI also provides oversight on all industrial
                                  development zones.




                                                                 Housing Sector Governance                    7
       Table 2.1 Role of Key Government Entities on Housing   		                            (Continued)

                    Entity                                Housing-Related Functions

             Ministry of Finance        MoF manages the state budget and property, and oversees
                                        development of fiscal policies related to housing. For local
                                        governments, MoF reviews and approves annual budgets and
                                        manages inter-governmental fiscal transfers. MoF oversees
                                        SBV’s annual performance reports, including interest rate
                                        subsidy and credit support programs, as well as managing
                                        bond market development and appraisal industry certification.
                                        MoF also determines policies related to land tax and tax-
                                        related subsidies for housing.

                                        SBV is responsible for the financial stability and soundness of
           State Bank of Vietnam        the housing finance sector with lending standards, prudential
                                        regulations and management of interest rates. SBV engages
                                        commercial banks and non-bank financial institutions
                                        (e.g. microfinance institutions) in housing sector lending
                                        and supports development and manages housing finance
                                        subsidy programs. SBV also develops measures to encourage
                                        commercial banks to scale and diversify housing finance
                                        products and provides oversight toward the national credit
                                        information aggregator, the Credit Information Center.

                                        MoNRE’s General Department of Land Administration manages
             Ministry of Natural        and administers land across the country. Related to housing,
             Resources and the          MoNRE coordinates with MoC to conduct land use planning
               Environment              and large-scale land use conversion, gathers land and housing
                                        registration and ownership statistics, issues land use rights,
                                        develops and operates the land information system, and
                                        carries out resettlement compensation and support.

                                        MoT makes investment and planning decisions over roads
            Ministry of Transport       and public transit systems that directly affect the demand and
                                        pricing for land and housing near transport corridors and nodes.

                                        VBSP lends to community groups, co-ops, and households to
           Vietnam Bank of Social       implement national social policy priorities, with emphasis on
                  Policy                rural, low income and poor segments. Funding comes from the
                                        state budget and other deposits. VBSP’s programs for housing
                                        lending involve small loans for sanitation improvement,
                                        housing renovation, and flood prevention. These programs
                                        utilize a community-based lending framework.




     Effectively managing such a large number             effective and integrated housing programs.
     of actors requires clear mechanisms for              As a result, many housing programs are
     coordination, which is difficult without the         fragmented and it has been difficult to
     necessary tools. Currently, many government          monitor and assess their performance.
     entities still act as silos in the housing sector,
     with only ad hoc coordination and reporting          Reliable information on the housing sector
     systems, which limits the ability of MoC to          is not yet readily available to support policy
     promote collaboration and prepare cost-              formulation and decision-making. Within

8	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
the MoC’s Bureau of Housing and Real                At the subnational level, local governments
Estate Market, the Institute of Construction        have the mandate to ensure the provision of
Economics is responsible for monitoring             affordable housing, yet often do not prioritize
housing markets and government programs.The         housing in spite of local needs. Many local
Bureau collects annual reports from subnational     governments lack the technical know-how
governments and analyzes sector performance         and ability to plan and mobilize resources
to propose new policies and guidelines on policy    toward the housing sector. Regulatory efforts
implementation. However, GoV has recognized         to require local governments to commit local
that much more can be done to facilitate the        funding and resources to housing have largely
availability and sharing of up-to-date and          not succeeded due to limited budget flexibility
accurate housing information. MoC has now           at the local level, lack of political buy-in, as
been charged to develop and manage the              well as limited guidance from central-level on
housing and real estate information system. A       how national programs can be implemented
new decree has been drafted to define the scope,    and maintained locally.
the principles and the role of key stakeholders
in contributing to its establishment and            Creation of the Local Housing Development
maintenance. This would cover market data as        Funds (LHDFs) offers an example of the
well as account for public spending in housing      mismatch between national-level policy
to allow better monitoring of the real estate       objectives and local-level implementation.
sector’s movements and development of more          Intended as a conduit to implement the
effective housing policies and program.             2005 Housing Law and structured by Decree
                                                    90/2006/ND-CP, LHDFs were designed to be
The Central Steering Committee on Housing           established at the provincial level and funded
Policy and Real Estate Market (CSC) is a            through sales of public housing, rental fees, land
noteworthy effort to consolidate and guide the      use fees, and local budget allocation. Eight years
sector. Created in 2008 to provide advisory         of implementation resulted in little uptake, with
on housing policy, the CSC was expanded             only 9 LHDFs being established, only 2 of which
to cover the real estate market in 2009 and is      carried out any major operations, due to limited
headed by the Deputy Prime Minister. The            budget set-aside by local governments14. In
CSC consists of a multi-disciplinary working        2014, MoF proposed consolidation of LHDFs
group from all relevant ministries, along with      into the Local Development Investment Funds
directorates for agricultural development,          (LDIF), which have become more established
labor federation, and urban management and          and funded local implementing agents. In
construction, among others. The CSC has             comparison, LDIFs have a clear regulatory
potential to act as a platform for dialogue on      mandate, including income tax waivers, and
proposed housing programs and to play a             are managed through close coordination with
coordination role for respective line ministries,   Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs),
bureaus, and directorates. However, CSC has         MPI and MoF on standards for procurement,
yet to possess the capacity or clearly defined      financial planning and project execution. Several
mechanisms for managing stakeholders,               LDIFs have already been active in social housing
program implementation, and to carry out            projects, for example, student dormitories.
other sector oversight activities.




14
   According to reports from 41 provinces, there were only 9 housing development funds: 1 with
independent operating structure (HCMC and Hue); 3 (Dong Nai, Lam Dong and Khanh Hoa) as part
of the local development investment fund); 2 relegated housing responsibility to local development
investment fund (Dak Lak, Binh Dinh); and 2 with fund established but not yet capitalized (Ca Mau, Ninh
Thuan). In addition, 2 provinces (Ba Ria-Vung Tau, Dong Thap) set aside 183 billion VND at an account
at the local treasury under the management of the Department of Finance (Report by MOF, mimeo
received 8 January 2015).

                                                                    Housing Sector Governance             9
       Figure 2.1 Institutional Structure of Vietnam's Housing Sector

                              MoF
                National and local budgetting
                                                                          Budget Allocation
                  Budget             Policy
                 Allocation      Collaboration
                                            Check on progress toward
                                            national housing strategy
                          MoC                                                  PPC
             Housing policy & development plan                          Executive decision body
                                                                               local level
                           Policy                                          Development of               PRODUCTS                           FINANCING                         TARGET USERS
                       Collaboration                                          Local SEDP

                                                                                                       Public Housing *
                          SBV                                                  DoC
                 Banking sector regulations                                                               O cial
                                                                               DoF                        housing                                                                 O cials
                          MPI
           Socio-economic planning & investment
                                                                               DPI                      Civil servant
                                                                                                          housing                                                                   Civil
                        MoNRE                                                                                                               1. State                              servants
                                                                                                                                     budget (e.g. public
           Land management & land use planning                               DoNRE                     Housing for                     revenues, gov’t
                                                                                                      policy groups:                  bonds, municipal                             Policy
                        MoLISA                                                                           vets, the                                                                 target
                                                                                                                                      bonds, and ODA)
                                                                             DoLISA                    disabled, etc.                                                              groups
                    Social welfare policy                                                                                               2. Contracted
                                                                                                                                     developer’s capital
                          MoET                                                                            Student
                                                                               DoET                       housing                                                                Students
                   Support for students
                                                    Policy
                                                   Guidance        *Public housing is often contracted out to contractors or developers via public auction; developer contributes project capital

                                                                                                  Resettlement Housing                 1. Cross-subsidy
                                                                           Authorities
                                                                                                                                         from new use
                                                                              & PMU                   Resettlement                                                              Resettled
                                                                                                                                     2. Developer equity
                                                                        for infrastructure              housing                                                                households
                                                                                                                                        3. Bank nance
                                                                              project
                                                                                                                                   4. Multi-lateral donor $
                                                                                                  Private Sector Housing

                                                                                                       Commercial                    1. Developer equity                            All
                                                                                                         housing                    2. Pre-sales proceeds                         people
                                                                           Developers                                                   3. Bank nance
                                                                                                           Social                    (low rate for social                      Low income
                                                                                                          housing                           housing)                           households

                                                                                                                                       1. Industrial zone
                                                                           Industrial                   Industrial                                                               Industrial
                                                                                                                                          companies $
                                                                           developers                 worker housing                                                              workers
                                                                                                                                        2. Bank nance
                KEY:
                                                                                                     Self-built Housing
                  Central Gov’t                                                                                                     1. Household savings
                                                                                                         Self-built                    2. Informal loans                         Owner
                                                                                                          housing                      3. Bank nance                            household
                   Local Gov’t                                               People                                             (low rate by gov’t for some)
                                                                                                          Disaster             4. MFI’s nance (low-income)                       Disaster
                                                                                                          a ected                   5. Local gov’t budget                        a ected
                  Non-Gov’t /                                                                             housing                                                                  HH’s
                    Other                                                                                                         for disaster a ected HH’s



       Source: Authors’ adaptation from ALMEC, 2006.


      Mismanagement at the local-level can increase                                                           or streamlining administrative requirements,
      costs of housing development and restrict private                                                       will allow local governments to enhance their
      sector participation. People’s Committees                                                               support of affordable housing delivery and a
      can be inconsistent and non-transparent in                                                              well-functioning local housing market.
      carrying out administrative procedures related
      to housing, which introduces uncertainty for                                                            There have been cases of local government
      market development and difficulties to carry                                                            innovation in the housing sector, yet
      out affordable housing projects. Timelines and                                                          dependency on central regulatory approval
      costs associated with the local construction                                                            can create hurdles. Some examples of local
      inspectorate in issuing development rights                                                              innovation includes land pooling and land
      and enforcing construction permits are usually                                                          readjustment (LPLR) schemes in Can Tho or
      unclear and can vary widely. This incentivizes                                                          integrated planning in Vinh City for mixed-
      people to remain informal and makes it                                                                  income and mixed-use housing in partnership
      difficult for new market entrants or private                                                            with the private sector. However, both of these
      sector developers to plan and manage their                                                              initiatives have needed central-level approvals
      development costs. Better coordination and                                                              and legislative changes that have created
      transparency, such as utilization of online systems                                                     implementation delays and made it difficult to

10	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
scale pilots. The Da Nang Housing Company is                             policy implementation and experimentation,
another example that provides an opportunity                             due to their more substantial local budgets
for replication and scaling. In this case, Da Nang                       and the high capacity of the local government.
carried out Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs)                           For example, HCMC has developed schemes
between employers and local government                                   to provide finance for both large-scale rental
for mixed-use worker housing in Da Nang’s                                housing providers and small landlords to expand
industrial zones. The Special Cities, Hanoi                              local supply of quality rental housing, although
and HCMC, have also had more autonomy in                                 uptake has been limited.


 Figure 2.2 Housing Financing in Ho Chi Minh City

                                                      People’s Committee
  Legend:
  Oversight
                                        l   Researches regulatory and policy development
  Financing ow                          l   Supports development of public housing and
                                            housing markets
                                        l   Manages land reserves



                     Public Sector                                                            Private Sector
                      Production                                                               Production



     Housing                                                                       Private Sector Financing Resources
   Development      Local Development Investment Fund
      Fund                                                                (formal nance, bonds, informal nance, pre-sales)




      Housing                                     Saigon                                         Limited             Citizen
                        RESCO                                             JS Company
    Development                                Construction                                     Liabilities        households
       Fund                                     Company                                         Company




     O cial        Civil         Military           Public                                       Private
     Housing      Servant       Personnel          Rental                                        Housing
                  Housing        Housing           Housing



 Source: Authors’ illustration based on interviews with the DoC of HCMC.



2.2 Legislative and Policy Framework                                     first time, effectively enabling the start of a
                                                                         market-based real estate sector.
Vietnam has gone through several waves of
housing policy over the past three decades.                              In the decades since 1994, the real estate market
Vietnam’s approach to housing policy has                                 has experienced robust growth. A large number of
shifted from a centrally planned public housing                          enterprising private sector developers and lenders
approachto a market-oriented system following                            have emerged to respond to consumer demand.
Doi Moi. Under the old system, housing was                               This has provided many benefits, including an
considered a form of social welfare and provided                         overall improvement in housing conditions in
mostly for free by government institutions and                           the market and an increase in the availability and
state-owned enterprises, scarcely responding                             diversity of housing products, in terms of location,
to need. There was little incentive and means                            configuration and price points, to suit different
for housing investment and improvement, as                               household needs. However, this market-based
nominal rents collected did not cover the cost                           approach has not resulted in adequate supply for
of basic maintenance. On July 5, 1994, the                               lower income groups and has pushed up house
government issued Decree 61/1994/ND-CP                                   prices beyond the reach of many, keeping the level
which allowed the trading of property for the                            of informality at a high level.

                                                                                                Housing Sector Governance       11
 Figure 2.3 The Evolution of Vietnam’s Housing Policy

                   Public housing allocation in the         1991 Housing Ordinance                           1994 Decree 60                         2005 Housing Law              2015 Housing Law
                   North targets public officials and        Allowed private housing            Established BOLUC system, providing              Provide legal framework           Provision for social
                 civil servants. Self-built and existing    ownership on state owned            combined legal title for and use rights         for housing development,          housing, foreigners’
                 private housing makes up majority              land. Establish legal          and housing property. Formalization via          inclu. commercial houses,         ownership; housing
                            of housing stock.                 framework on human               notarization of many previously informal          self-built houses, public        transaction; housing
                                                                 rights to housing.          transactions. During formalization process,           service houses, social          data & information
                                                                                              many illicit transactions were notarized at                 houses.                       system;
                                                                                                      the de facto legal authority.


                                                                                 •	 Removal of housing subsidy            •	 1996- Housing for           •	 2009- Mechanisms to promote students
                                                                                    Establish lease price and                meritorious people             and workers housing
                                                                                    housing support in wages              •	 1998- Incentives for        •	 2010- Guidelines for housing
                                                                                 •	 Sell state-owned houses to               investment in houses           development projects, especially
 State-run, collective                                                              existing tenants.                        for sale& lease.               condos and social houses.
    and subsidized                                                               •	 Still ban on land transactions           Recognized rights of        •	 2013- Dev’t & mgnt of housing
       economy                                                                      affected trading of housing              housing investors.             development investment in urban areas
      through a                                                                     on state-owned land plots.            •	 2001- Exemption of             & resettlement housing, social housing.
      production                                                                    Cases in which tenant of                 land fees for condo.           Provision for inclusionary zoning for
   plans and foods       Multi-sector and                                           transacted house is not               •	 2002- Sell land                social housing in commercial projects.
  distribution. Strict reformed economy.                                            the same owner of the                    and houses with
    regulations on      Price deregulation.                                         plot allocated by the state.             deferred payment to            Self reliant economy &
 pricing andinterest     Market oriented                                            Uncertain property rights                households in flood-           integration with global
  rates. Isolatedfrom    monetary policy.                                           created room for illicit                 prone residential              economy. Privatization
   global economy,      Controlled capital                                          construction in peri-urban               clusters in Mekong;              of inefficient SOEs.
 except Soviet Union      flow. Increased                                           and rural areas.                         Central Highlands.                  Emergence of
  and East European external economic                                                                                                                           large scale state
       countries.            relations.                                                                                                                           corporations.
         1975	                    1986			                                  1991			                                    1994			                                      2005-2015	



                                                   Land Law 1987		                          Land Law 1993		                                 Land Law 2003
                                             Land is not a commodity.                     Land onwed by the                           Land allocated to
                                               Owned by the people &                        people by state                         domestic enterprises
                                               managed by the state.                      determines values.                        and lease to private
                                                Transactions between                    LURCs include rights to                       enterprise. LURCs
                                               individuals prohibited.                   transfer, lease, inherit,                   -main instrument in
                                              LURCs transferred only in                  and mortgage. Public                         real estate market.
                                                   public systems.                         land allocation for
                                                                                               SOEs only.

 Source: Authors’ illustration




                                          Experience over the past decade has led to the                                   local governments to set aside land plots for
                                          2015 Housing Law. Ratified by parliament in                                      social owner-occupied and rental housing and
                                          November 2014 and effective July 2015, this                                      include these in spatial plans. The development
                                          Law re-commits government into the role of                                       of a more advanced housing information system,
                                          ensuring that low income Vietnamese are not                                      which would be led by MoC and linked to
                                          excluded from the market and are supported                                       the land cadaster and registry database, is also
                                          to access affordable and adequate housing.                                       outlined as an activity to improve management
                                          This Law has re-oriented the focus of housing                                    of the sector. On rental housing, there are new
                                          policy toward urban areas, in particular, self-                                  stipulations on support for social housing for
                                          built housing and affordable rental, as means                                    rent and rent-to-buy options for urban residents.
                                          to support the target grounds access suitable                                    This includes a clearer legal framework on tenant
                                          housing solutions. The Law has made progress                                     and landlord rights, directions on home-owners’
                                          in clarifying definitions related to social housing                              associations, as well as for determining prices
                                          and broadened target groups. It maintains                                        for social rental housing (e.g. restricting private
                                          support to the private sector in terms of tax and                                sector profits to 10 percent). Finally, the self-
                                          land-use fee waivers and specifically mentions                                   built or incremental housing sector is identified
                                          the direct use of government budget, among                                       as an important source of affordable housing
                                          other sources, to contribute toward ensuring                                     supply and an eligible product for social housing
                                          housing access for all.                                                          support, such as tax exemptions and credit at
                                                                                                                           preferential terms.
                                          Other key aspects of the new housing law include
                                          land management, information systems and                                         The 2015 Housing Law opens up a number of
                                          housing delivery. There is a new mandate for                                     opportunities for the Government of Vietnam

12	                                        Vietnam Affordable Housing
to develop new programs and refine existing
ones. The Law has created a strong foundation,
supported by the national assembly and other
important public sector stakeholders for
Vietnam’s housing policy in the coming years.
However, there is still much work to be done
to plan and prepare specific interventions in
the housing sector and to ensure efficient use
of public funds. To start with, it is important
to clarify where the most urgent needs are to
direct government support toward affordable
housing, which is discussed in the next chapter
on Housing Needs, Demand and Affordability.




                                                  Housing Sector Governance   13
      3
      Chapter

                Housing Need, Demand
                and Affordability

                3.1 Housing Need                                         Urban areas will dominate demand for new
                                                                         housing between 2015 and 2020. The net
                There are two main sources of housing need: (i)          migration rate for the urban areas of 23.7
                the quantitative deficit of approximately 374,000        percent, compared to the out-migration of
                units per year due to new urban household                the rural population at 13.3 percent per year,
                formation; and, (ii) an additional 320,000 to 1          demonstrates the critical need for housing in
                million units per year that need improvement or          urban areas. The South East and the Red River
                replacement due to the qualitative deficit.              Delta regions, where HCMC and Hanoi are
                                                                         located, are expected to account for 66 percent
                Population growth and household formation                of total urban housing need between 2015
                trends are the key contributors to the                   and 2020. More specifically, the South East
                quantitative deficit. The population of                  region has had a very high rate of migration
                urban households is projected to increase by             over the last five years due to the region’s rapid
                approximately 1.9 million, from 8.3 million in           economic growth and its concentration of
                2015 to 10.1 million in 2020. This results in an         industrial zones, which exist in four of its six
                average annual need for housing of 374,000 units         provinces (Binh Duong, Dong Nai, Vung Tau
                in the next five years. This increase is driven by a     and HCMC). The situation is similar for the
                projected urban population growth rate of 3.03           Red River Delta region, where a high demand
                percent per annum and a decline in the urban             for labor has made it a destination for migrants
                household size of 1.1 percent per annum, based           over the last five years.
                on recent trends.


                 Table 3.1 Number of Urban Households by Year and Geographic Region (in 1,000 units)

                     Year       Urban    Hanoi      HCMC     Red        Northern   North    Central      South Mekong
                               Vietnam Extraction Extraction River      Midlands Central & Highlands      East  River
                                Total                        Delta         &      Central                       Delta
                                                                        Mountain Coastal
                                                                         Areas     Areas
                    2009        6,470     715         1,441     1,572      521        1,155       362    1,952    932
                    Actual
                     2015       8,269     911         1,766     2,026      642        1,429       440    2,619   1,143
                  Estimated
                    2020        10,138    1,123       2,084     2,507      759        1,698       515    3,358   1,350
                   Forecast
                   Average       374       42           64       96         23         54          15    148      41
                    Annual
                   Increase
                    Annual      100%      11%          17%       26%       6%         14%          4%    40%     11%
                   Increase
                   (% Total)

                 Source: Authors’ extrapolations based on data and trends in Census 2009 and GSO data.



14	             Vietnam Affordable Housing
Vietnam will need to service, upgrade or rebuild
                                                         Table 3.2 Qualitative Housing Deficit by Type
an estimated 4.8 million housing units to address
                                                         of Housing Deprivation, Urban Vietnam
the qualitative deficit. On an annual basis, this
means an additional 320,000 to 1 million units             Census                                         Urban
each year, depending on whether the deficit                 2009                                     Vietnam (100%)

is reduced by 2030 or 2020. This includes the             Crowding         <6m2 per capita                     4%
housing deficit that is attributed to lack of access                         Sharing units                     8%
to basic infrastructure, aging stock, overcrowding,        Quality         Non-permanent                      46%
and construction with substandard materials.                                  Before 1975                      7%
                                                            Basic            No safe water                    23%
The qualitative housing deficit can be largely             Services       No safe sanitation                  12%
attributed to two main categories of housing: (i)        Source: Census 2009. Figures for water and sanitation
non-permanent houses and (ii) houses that lack           are imputed based on probabilities from the VHLSS
                                                         long-form and total population in the 2009 Census.
basic services. Non-permanent units account for
46 percent of the total deficit and are defined as
units lacking anyone or multiple of three durability
elements (structural frame, roofs or walls) made of      Figure 3.1 Type of Housing Deprivation
sturdy materials. Houses that lack basic services,       by Region as Compared Against Regional
such as safe water or sanitation, account for 35         Household Distribution (HH Distribution of
percent of the total deficit. Non-permanent units        6 Regions = 100%)
are concentrated in the South East and Mekong
                                                          40%
Delta regions, (as shown in Figure 3.1 below),
                                                          30%
where non-sturdy materials are commonly used.
While this categorization is in accordance with           20%

international standards set by the UN Habitat, the        10%

lack of permanent roofing material (3.7 million            0%
                                                                South East Red River    North    Mekong    North Mid    Central
units) is likely not a priority, given the more                                        Central    Delta                  High
                                                                   Household       Crowding      Quality   Basic Svcs
moderate climate conditions in the South. On
the other hand, the lack of access to basic services,    Source: Census 2009. Figures for water and sanitation
                                                         are imputed based on probabilities from the VHLSS
such as safe water or sanitation, which is common        long-form and total population in the 2009 Census.
throughout the regions, is a major concern.

Specific priorities to address the qualitative
deficit include the following:                          3.2 Housing Demand and Affordability
a.	 Installation of low-cost infrastructure and
    utilities to address the 2 million units that       3.2.1 Household Income and Savings Capacity
    lack access to basic services, such as water and
    sanitation.                                         An analysis of housing affordability shows
b.	 Home improvement for units made of                  which households and income segments
    substandard materials, which account for 46         struggle to access a housing unit to meet their
    percent of the total housing deficit.               needs. Housing demand is determined by
c.	 Targeted upgrading and incremental                  a consumer’s purchasing power, measured
    expansion of pre-1975 housing stocks, which         by their disposable income for housing
    accounts for approximately 643,000 units,           after satisfying other basic needs (e.g. food,
    to address overcrowding and substandard             transport), savings and ability to access credit
    materials.                                          to purchase a property. Housing affordability
d.	 Extension or new supply for over-crowded            assesses if a household’s demand or purchasing
    units, which make up 12 percent of the              power is sufficient to access a property,
    housing deficit.                                    considering the available supply and the prices
e.	 Resettlement for housing on unsafe sites may        of different housing products in the market
    need to be considered in consultation with          (e.g. typologies, sizes, locations, etc.).
    the community.

                                                        Housing Need, Demand and Affordability                                    15
      Savings or down-payment capacity is extremely                  20 percent down-payment for a housing loan.
      limited for low income households. Based on                    However, the lowest two income quintiles
      short-form data on household income and                        have a savings rate close to zero, or with higher
      expenditures from the Vietnam Household                        expenditures than household income, hence
      Living Standards Survey (VHLSS), it is                         limited ability to save for a down-payment,
      estimated that the top three income quintiles                  at least on average. These households may be
      have the capacity to save for a down-payment                   able to accumulate savings from other sources,
      to purchase a home (see Table 3.3). On average,                as empirical evidence indicates that some Q1
      it is expected that households will need to save               and Q2 segments are still able to mobilize
      approximately five years to achieve the standard               substantial funds toward housing projects.


           Table 3.3 Average Savings Capacity by Household Income Quintiles, 2014 (thousand, VND)

             Urban Vietnam                            Avg               Avg HH                         Avg
                                                   HH Income          Expenditures          Different (incl. Savings)
                                        Q5            29,805              21,330                      8,475
            Household Income            Q4            14,279              12,628                      1,651
                 Quintiles              Q3            10,315              9,353                        963
                                        Q2             7,325              7,270                        55
                                        Q1             3,982              4,338                       -356
                   Total                              13,134              10,979                      2,155

           Source: Authors’ calculations based on 2012 VHLSS short form, adjusted for inflation (13%, 2012 - 2014).



      3.2.2 Access to Housing Finance                                    full documented income can obtain access to
                                                                         mortgage finance.
      Different income segments are able to access                   b.	 VND 30 trillion package is a subsidized
      different types of housing finance products.                       mortgage program currently available at a
      Higher income segments have more flexibility                       maximum fixed interest rate of 6 percent
      in accessing housing finance while lower                           per annum, with a maximum tenure of 15
      income segments rely mostly on microfinance                        years and an LTV of 70 to 80 percent for
      institutions (MFIs) for smaller housing loans                      those households who meet strict eligibility
      for incremental construction. It should be noted                   criteria, such as first-time home purchase.
      that lending institutions in Vietnam generally do                  Refer to Chapter 5.2 for more details on the
      not lend to informal income borrowers without                      eligibility criteria of the 30T package.
      proper income and employment documentation                     c.	 Housing microfinance is available mainly
      or to those borrowers that intend to purchase                      for Q1 and Q2 income segments. As an
      properties with no formal tenure (i.e. LURC/                       example of a product, the effective interest
      BOLUC). The main types of housing finance                          rate amongst microfinance institutions
      available in Vietnam are described below:                          (MFIs) participating in the Vietnam
                                                                         Urban Upgrading Program (VUUP) is
      a.	 Mortgage finance is currently available                        approximately 15 to 20 percent per annum15
          at the prevailing floating interest rate of                    with loan tenure of 3 to 5 years.
          approximately 10 percent, Loan To Value                    d.	 Savings reportedly finance 50 to 75 percent
          (LTV) of 70 to 80 percent, with a loan                         of the self-built low income housing
          tenure of 15 to 20 years. Generally, only                      market. Cash is mobilized from household
          consumers with formal employment and/or                        savings, extended families and friends. In

      15
         The effective rate is calculated based on a loan term of 18 months (average) to 60 months (official
      term), 0.60 percent monthly interest rate calculated on a flat balance, and the effect of forced savings
      of 1.00 percent per month, on which the MFIs pay 3.00 percent interest. Further fees may apply, which
      have not been included in the effective rate calculation.

16	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
      contrast, money-lenders appear not to play            capacity and access to finance. Shown in Tables
      a significant role, due to unaffordability (e.g.      3.4, 3.5 and 3.6, a household’s purchasing power
      high interest rates).                                 is determined by the average monthly income
                                                            of households in each income quintile, their
3.2.3 Housing Demand and Affordability for                  payment capacity and the availability of different
Q3-Q5 Income Segments                                       housing finance products of different interest rate
                                                            and loan terms, which are prevalent in the market.
The effective demand for housing or purchasing              Calculations have been carried out for all urban
power of households in each income quintile                 areas in Vietnam, excluding Hanoi and HCMC,
has been calculated based on income, payment                as well as for Hanoi and HCMC separately.


     Table 3.4 Effective Demand for Housing by Household Income in Urban Vietnam, excluding
     Hanoi and HCMC, 2014 (thousand, VND)
      Financial Income Monthly           Payment      Term Rate     Loan       Down-Payment      Housing
      Scenario Quintile Income           Capacity                  Amount                        Demand
       Market-       Q5       23,750   40%   9,500     20   10%   760,008      30%    325,718   1,085,726
        based
      (constant      Q4       12,753   30%   3,826     20   10%   306,077      20%    76,519     382,596
       amort.)       Q3       9,308    25%   2,327     15   10%   167,537      20%    41,884     209,421
       Market-       Q5       23,750   40%   9,500     20   10%   984,444      30%    421,905   1,406,349
       based         Q4       12,753   30%   3,826     20   10%   396,464      20%    99,116     495,580
       (EMI16)
                     Q3       9,308    25%   2,327     15   10%   216,535      20%    54,134     270,669
         30 T        Q5       23,750   40%   9,500     15   5%    977,153      30%    418,780   1,395,933
       package       Q4       12,753   30%   3,826     15   5%    393,527      20%    98,382     491,909
      (constant
       amort.)       Q3       9,308    25%   2,327     15   5%    239,338      20%    59,835     299,173

     Source: Authors’ calculations.




     Table 3.5 Effective Demand for Housing byHousehold Income in Hanoi, 2014 (thousand, VND)

      Financial Income Monthly           Payment      Term Rate     Loan       Down-Payment      Housing
      Scenario Quintile Income           Capacity                  Amount                        Demand
       Market-       Q5       38,096   40%   15,238    20   10%   1,219,062    30%    522,455   1,741,517
        based
      (constant      Q4       22,007   30%   6,602     20   10%   528,174      20%    132,043    660,217
       amort.)       Q3       16,093   25%   4,023     15   10%   289,679      20%    72,420     362,099
       Market-       Q5       38,096   40%   15,238    20   10%   1,579,060    30%    676,740   2,255,800
       based         Q4       22,007   30%   6,602     20   10%   684,148      20%    171,037    855,185
        (EMI)
                     Q3       16,093   25%   4,023     15   10%   374,400      20%    93,600     467,999
         30 T        Q5       38,096   40%   15,238    15   5%    1,567,365    30%    671,728   2,239,093
       package       Q4       22,007   30%   6,602     15   5%    679,081      20%    169,770    848,851
      (constant
       amort.)       Q3       16,093   25%   4,023     15   5%    413,827      20%    103,457    517,284

     Source: Authors’ calculations.




16
     EMI = Equated Monthly Installment

                                                             Housing Need, Demand and Affordability               17
       Table 3.6 Effective Demand forHousing by Household Income in HCMC, 2014 (thousand, VND)

         Financial Income Monthly          Payment      Term Rate     Loan        Down-Payment      Housing
         Scenario Quintile Income          Capacity                  Amount                         Demand
          Market-      Q5       41,306   40%   16,522    20   10%   1,321,786    30%     566,480    1,888,266
           based
         (constant     Q4       15,639   30%   4,692     20   10%    375,335     20%     93,834      469,169
          amort.)      Q3       11,760   25%   2,940     15   10%    211,681     20%     52,920      264,601
         Market-       Q5       41,306   40%   16,522    20   10%   1,712,120    30%     733,766    2,445,885
         based         Q4       15,639   30%   4,692     20   10%    486,174     20%     121,544     607,718
          (EMI)
                       Q3       11,760   25%   2,940     15   10%    273,590     20%     68,397      341,987
            30 T       Q5       41,306   40%   16,522    15   5%    1,699,439    30%     728,331    2,427,770
          package      Q4       15,639   30%   4,692     15   5%     482,574     20%     120,643     603,217
         (constant
          amort.)      Q3       11,760   25%   2,940     15   5%     302,401     20%     75,600      378,001

       Source: Authors’ calculations.



      Effective demand for housing for the top three          home valued up to 30 percent higher than under
      income quintiles range from VND 1-2 billion             the Constant Amortization (CA) method. The
      for the Q5 segment, and VND 200-800                     traditional mortgage product that banks in
      million for the Q3-Q4 segments. This consists           Vietnam offer to mortgage borrowers uses the
      of the following:                                       CA method. While some banks do offer EMI
      -	Q5 income segments can afford housing                 products, most consumers are familiar with and
        solutions of approximately VND 1.8 to 2 billion       prefer the CA method, despite the limitations
        in Hanoi or HCMC. Households living in cities         to affordability.
        outside of Hanoi and HCMC are able to afford
        homes in the range of VND 1 to 1.2 billion.           Housing affordability is concerned with the
      -	Q3 and Q4 income segments can afford                  availability of supply of suitable housing
        housing solutions between VND 300 to 700              products that are within the purchasing power
        million in Hanoi and HCMC. With the 30                of households. Considering this, housing
        trillion package, the Q3 and Q4 segments are          affordability is excellent for households in the Q5
        able to stretch their purchasing power and            income segment and acceptable for households in
        afford homes in the range of VND 400 to               Q3 and Q4 income segments, with the support
        800 million. Ignoring the likely inflationary         of the 30T package. Without the 30T package,
        effect of subsidies, the 30T package expands          affordability for the Q3 segment would be tighter
        a household’s nominal purchasing power by             in urban areas outside of HCMC, where the
        approximately VND 100 million through the             supply of low-cost housing is more constrained.
        subsidized interest rate. However, depending
        on inflationary pressures, the real affordability     -	 For the Q5 income segment, there is ample
        improvement may be significantly less.                   supply of housing at various price points that are
      -	Q3 and Q4 income segments living in urban                affordable to this group, from developer-built
        areas outside of Hanoi and HCMC can afford               condominiums, villas or high-end tube houses.
        housing products in the range of VND 200 to           -	 For the Q3 and Q4 segments, the supply of
        400 million. With the support from the 30T               housing that households could afford varies
        package, households are also able to stretch their       greatly, depending on the region.
        purchasing power by approximately VND 100                l	 In HCMC, developers have begun building

        million, to the range of VND 300 to 500 million.            smaller and lower priced units, starting
                                                                    at VND 400 million to attract first-
      Assuming the same interest rate, an Equated                   time home-owners in the Q3 segment.
      Monthly Installment (EMI) approach to                         Affordable housing supply, priced at
      the mortgage repayment schedule extends                       below VND 16 million/m2, has now
      affordability significantly, allowing the                     reached approximately 40 percent of total
      households across all incomes to purchase a                   developer-built supply in HCMC17.

18	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
     l	 Developers in Hanoi have been slower to           Incremental housing construction appears to be
        address this under-served market sector due       the only affordable housing option for the urban
        to the higher price of land. Thus, supply of      poor. MFIs in Vietnam generally support low
        low-cost housing only makes up ~20 percent        income households with shorter-term loans for
        of total developer-built supply in Hanoi and      incremental home expansion or improvement at
        units that are affordable to first-time home-     an effective rate of approximately 15 to 20 percent
        owners in the Q3 income segments are likely       for loan amounts of around VND 10 to 30 million.
        to be located far from centrally-located areas.   Tables 3.7, 3.8, 3.9 highlight that households in the
     l	 Besides developer-built condominiums, low-        Q1 and Q2 segments could generally repay a loan
        end tube houses with prices in the range of       of VND 15 million to MFIs within 18 months
        VND 400-500 million in peri-urban areas           on average. Penalty-free pre-payments benefit
        exist. The trade-off then revolves around         households by allowing for more flexible payment
        individual preference between accessibility,      schedules, despite longer loan terms (typically 5
        livability and affordability.                     years). This flexibility also accommodates the needs
                                                          of the poorest households who typically require
3.2.4 Housing Demand and Affordability for                the entire loan period for repayment. In addition,
Q1-Q2 Income Segments                                     convenient community-based collection systems
                                                          promote repayment discipline. Should households
For the bottom 40 percent of the income pyramid           be able to rely on own savings and/or kinship
(the Q1 and Q2 income segments), housing                  networks for funding, a household’s purchasing
demand is more constrained. Lower purchasing              power and affordability can be stretched much
power amongst the low income reflects a                   further depending on the generosity of the loan
household’s lower share of disposable income,             term and rate. If so, a starter home of VND 100
savings and ability to access housing credit.             million, or even above, may be within reach.


     Table 3.7 Housing Demand by Household Income in Vietnam, excluding Hanoi and HCMC,
     2014 (thousand, VND)
      Financial    Income      Monthly    Payment Capacity       Term   Rate       Loan         Housing
      Scenario     Quintile    Income                                             Amount        Demand
         Kinship      Q2         6,643     20%       1,329        5       0%      79,715          79,715
                      Q1         3,559     15%        534         5       0%      32,028          32,028
                      Q2         6,643     15%        996        1.5     20%      15,386          15,386
          Micro-
         finance      Q1         3,559     15%        534        3.2     20%      15,051          15,051
                   near-poor     2,717     10%        272        5.0     20%      10,255          10,255
                     poor        2,090     10%        209        5.0     20%       7,889          7,889

     Source: Authors’ calculations.



     Table 3.8 Housing Demand by Household Income in Hanoi, 2014 (thousand, VND)
      Financial    Income      Monthly    Payment Capacity       Term   Rate       Loan         Housing
      Scenario     Quintile    Income                                             Amount        Demand
         Kinship      Q2         11,245    20%       2,249        5       0%      134,944        134,944
                      Q1         6,612     15%        992         5       0%      59,509          59,509
                      Q2         11,245    15%       1,687       0.8     20%      14,850          14,850
          Micro-
         finance      Q1         6,612     15%        992        1.5     20%      15,315          15,315
                   near-poor     4,180     10%        418        5.0     20%      15,777          15,777
                     poor        3,135     10%        314        5.0     20%      11,833          11,833

     Source: Authors’ calculations.



17
     CBRE reports for Quarter 3, 2014.

                                                             Housing Need, Demand and Affordability               19
       Table 3.9 Housing Demand by Household Income in HCMC, 2014 (thousand, VND)
        Financial    Income      Monthly   Payment Capacity        Term    Rate      Loan         Housing
        Scenario     Quintile    Income                                             Amount        Demand
         Kinship        Q2         8,721    20%       1,744          5      0%      104,652       104,652
                        Q1         4,904    15%        736           5      0%       44,136        44,136
                        Q2         8,721    15%       1,308         1.1     20%      15,386        15,386
          Micro-
         finance        Q1         4,904    15%        736          2.1     20%      15,036        15,036
                    near-poor      7,315    6%         439          5.0     20%      16,566        16,566
                       poor        5,573    5%         279          5.0     20%      10,518        10,518

       Source: Authors’ calculations.




      Households in Q1 and Q2 segments, without               c.	 Supply of affordable units for the Q3
      existing plot or homes, face the largest                    income segment. Continued support and
      affordability gap. This group includes migrant              encouragement for developers to produce
      workers and newly-formed families. Home                     an adequate supply to satisfy the Q3 first-
      purchase for these segments would be difficult              time home-owners with purchasing power
      considering both supply and demand sides. On                in the VND 300 to 400 million range is
      the demand side, their limited ability to save              critical, in Hanoi in particular, where supply
      for a down-payment and their low and volatile               is still inadequate.
      income are key obstacles to access adequate             d.	 High-growth cities and industrial zones.
      credit to purchase a starter home or self-build.            Industrial zones and urban regions with a
      In addition, supply of low-priced incrementally             high rate of growth, including the South
      expandable starter homes for this segment is also           East and Red River Delta regions, should be
      limited and self-built solutions would depend               the focus of housing policy given the high
      on the ability to access low-cost land, which is            demand for housing.
      not in ready supply. Identifying, designing and
      producing a suitable, formal housing solution
      for this market is considered critical to prevent
      the need for informal urbanization.

      3.3 Housing Policy Implications

      The key focus areas for housing policy based
      on the analysis of housing need, demand and
      affordability are as followed:

      a.	 Low income Q1 and Q2 income segments
          with no housing, such as migrants and
          newly-formed families, have the most
          urgent housing need given their limited
          savings, income and credit capacity to fully
          self-provide. These groups will need support
          for a diverse range of solutions, including
          rental, rent-to-own and core starter homes,
          particularly in urban areas.
      b.	 Low income Q1 and Q2 segments who
          need housing upgrades will need support
          to supplement their capacity to self-build
          through the use of housing microfinance and
          access to construction technical assistance.

20	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                         Chapter

                                    The Housing Supply and
                                           Delivery System

4.1 Housing Sector Context                                      formal production when it introduced land
                                                                use rights in 1994, leaving production to the
Housing production can be segmented                             commercial sector and households themselves.
into several sub-markets: state-driven,                         State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) were the
commercially-produced, and self-built housing                   dominant source of housing supply from 1994
development. Between 1975 and 1994, the                         to 1998, at which point supply from private
state produced all formal housing, which                        developers overtook and has led in total volume
only accounted for a minor fraction of total                    of new housing produced from 1998 onwards.
production, an estimated 5 percent. Self-built                  Currently, it is estimated that the share of
housing was the most common form of housing                     commercial and state-supported production
supply, produced mostly informally by both                      accounts for approximately 20 to 25 percent
households and emerging micro-developers,                       of total output. The majority of housing
as commercial production was not legally                        production, or around 75 percent, is still in the
permitted. The government stepped away from                     self-built or citizen-initiated sector.


  Figure 4.1 Changes in Housing Production over Time

                  0%      20% 40%          60%      80% 100%
   before 1994                                                            state-driven
   before 1998
                                                                          commercial (incl. SOEs)
         2008
         2014                                                             self-build

  Source: Author’s illustration, based on anecdotal findings.




Average annual housing production has increased                  Table 4.1 Average Annual Housing Production in
by over 50 percent from 320,000 units per year                   Urban Areas
in 2009 to 500,000 units per year in 2014. MoC
relies on data from the General Statistics Office                 Housing Indicators for Urban	     2009	    2014

(GSO) to obtain information on housing stock,                    Housing Stocks (in MM M2)          476       689
average size and typology mix. Table 4.1 shows                   Per Capita M2                      19.2      23.0
the estimated average annual production for                      Average No. Persons/ HH            3.66      3.64
urban housing between 2009 and 2014. Annual                      Average Home Size (M2)             70.3      83.7
housing production for urban areas has averaged                  Avg Annual Production (in MM M2)    23        35
at 500,000 units between 2009 and 2014, with                     Avg Annual Production (in units) ~320,000 ~ 500,000
the average home size increasing to 84 m2 per unit               Source: GSO 2009 Census and 2014 Inter-Censal Survey.
and 23 m2 per capita by 2014 (compared to 70 m2                  Note that average production = (urban housing stocks
                                                                 2014 – urban housing stocks 2009)/average home size.
per unit and 19 m2 per capita in 2009).
                                                                The Housing Supply and Delivery System                             21
      Housing stock in Vietnam is
                                                   Table 4.2 Share of Housing of Each Typology
      relatively new, with 59 percent of
      housing being built since 2000. As            Area                    Permanent    Non-   Temporary Simple
                                                                                      Permanent
      per the 2014 Inter-Censal Survey,             National Total 2009       46%        38%         8%     8%
      there has been a significant increase         National Total 2014       47%        44%         6%     4%
      in new stock over the last five years as      Urban Split 2014          42%        54%         2%     1%
      the newly built stock since 2000 has          Rural Split 2014          49%        39%         8%     5%
      increased from 50 percent in 2009 to
                                                   Source: GSO 2009 Census and 2014 Inter-Censal Survey
      59 percent of overall stock in 2014.
      The remaining 41 percent of housing
      is divided as followed: 37 percent built and in use real estate agencies already carry out data
      since 1975, and only 4 percent of stock that was collection of developer-built supply and home
      built prior to 1975.                                        price indices (HPIs). CBRE, Savills, Knight
                                                                  Frank, and Jones Lang LaSalle have experience
      The number of homes categorized as ‘temporary’ in collecting developer housing supply data
      and ‘simple’ have decreased significantly over the for Hanoi and HCMC. Introduced in 2009,
      last five years. The GSO classifies housing into four the Savills Property Price Index (SPPI) is
      typologies, permanent, non-permanent, temporary the first private home price index based on
      and simple, as shown in Table 4.2. Temporary and customer surveys, housing advertisements and
      simple homes have decreased significantly over the public auction contracts as a proxy to actual
      last five years from 16 percent to only 10 percent of transaction price. There have also been efforts
      total housing stock by 2014. Not surprisingly, rural by local governments. The Hanoi Department
      areas have far worse quality of housing, with only of Construction (DoC) has started to publish a
      49 percent categorized as permanent. Table 4.3 home price movement report on the developer-
      describes the common housing typologies that are built apartment segment for ten main districts.
      found around Vietnam in more detail.                        Likewise, HCMC’s DoC is expected to publish
                                                                  its first home price movement report in 2015.
      Current housing related data, when available, Meanwhile, MoC is in the process of developing
      are somewhat fragmented and not fully reliable a system for collecting housing and real estate
      for public policy development and investment information, as outlined in the 2015 Housing
      decisions. In the private market, international Law and the Prime Minister’s Decision 134.

       Table 4.3 Example of Various Common Housing Typologies
        Permanent Construction
        Accounts for 42 percent of total urban housing stocks
        Tube house           Narrow and long plot, with typical plot size of 4 x 25 meters. Typically 100 percent plot
                             coverage and 3-4 floors, but can be 6 floors or more. Houses with good frontage typically
                             feature a commercial ground floor.
        Alley house          Tube house typology, but smaller and located in small alleys. Typically 100 percent plot
                             coverage. Accounts for more than 50 percent of total permanent construction stocks.
        Apartment block      Type 1: Older social or collective housing built between 1960s and mid-1980s with funding
                             from the Soviet Union. Mostly exists in the North and much stock is in poor conditions.
                             Typically ground floor, plus 7 stories (G+7).
                             Type 2: New high quality blocks built by developers. Average G+18. Typical starting price
                             of VND 12M/ m2. Starting unit size of 40 m2.
                             Type 3: New resettlement housing and social housing. Typically G+5 to G+12. Average
                             unit size of 40 m2.
        Villa                Type 1: Older colonial style built during French era. Typically with garden or surrounding
                             grounds. Refurbished for rental.
                             Type 2: New luxury villas. Can be built by individuals and located within private compounds,
                             or be part of large housing projects built by developers.




22	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
     Table 4.3 Example of Various Common Housing Typologies 			                                               (continued)
      Non-Permanent Construction
      Accounts for 54 percent of total urban housing stocks
      Alley house          A precursor to the permanent construction alley house. Located within deeper areas of
                           alleys. Average plot size of 3 x 20 meters. Poor construction quality. Typically G+1. Typically
                           old and in need of upgrade.
      Small single-        Average size of 3 x 20 meters. New informal buildings with single rooms. Typically for rent
      story                and located in urban fringe areas.
      Temporary and Simple Construction
      Accounts for 3 percent of total urban housing stocks
      Rural old house      Older rural houses located in urbanizing villages in urban fringe areas.
      Squatter house       Precarious squatter housing located on undesirable and non-residential areas, such as
                           canals, roadsides, unused industrial areas, or open-air market spaces.

     Source: Adapted from UN-Habitat



4.2 Commercial Housing Sector                                     bubble from 2009-2012 has led to a stagnation
                                                                  of housing production, scarcity of liquidity, and
4.2.1 Overview of the Commercial Housing                          a sizable inventory of high-end housing stock
Sector                                                            needing completion or uptake. Developers who
                                                                  have remained active benefited from particular
After Doi Moi, Vietnam’s real estate sector                       competitive advantages, such as land reserves,
as a whole, and the residential real estate                       strong product propositions, solid branding,
in particular, has experienced three major                        and access to diverse capital sources.
downturns. These downturns can be attributed
to underlying market challenges of speculation,                   Housing developers are diverse in size and
high dependency on FDI18, and shifts in housing                   target different market segments. Sixty real
sector regulations. The most recent downturn                      estate enterprises are listed on Vietnam’s two
has led to sector-wide consolidation, leaving the                 stock exchange platforms. As of March 2014,
most financially strong and capable developers,                   these real estate actors account for VND 125
while weeding out weaker ones. The housing                        trillion19 or ~10 percent of the stock market’s

     Figure 4.2 Share of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Real Estate

      FDI in real estate sector vs. FDI registered capital from 2004 to 2013
                USDbn               n FDI registered capital            n FDI in real estate
          80
                                                         71.7
          70
          60
          50
          40
          30                                                   23.6 23.1
                                               21.3                            19.9                            21.6
          20                                                                             15.6        14.0
                                    12.0
                           6.8                     5.0                  7.6        6.8
          10      4.5
                                                                                                        1.9
                     0.3      0.4       1.1                                                    0.9                 1.0
            0
                  2004     2005      2006       2007      2008       2009       2010      2011       2012       2013
     Source: VPBS



18
     FDI peaked in 2008 prior to most recent housing bubble as per Figure 4.2.
19
     VPBS Real Estate Industry, March 2014.

                                                                  The Housing Supply and Delivery System                     23
      capitalization. As of year-end 2013, Vingroup is                                                 The housing bubble rebalanced market price
      the largest listed player, with market capitalization                                            points to a more affordable level. Following
      and revenues at USD 3.5 billion and USD ~350                                                     widespread speculation, real estate prices
      million, respectively. Of the developers not listed,                                             reduced after the market downturn. The most
      some are large in scale while others are smaller,                                                severe home price declines were experienced
      ranging from small household contract builders                                                   in the high-end and middle-market segments
      to medium-sized contractors. Aside from private                                                  until 2013. At the same time, the bubble has
      enterprises, many SOEs with land also participate                                                shifted production away from the speculative
      in the sector.                                                                                   high-end market to the previously under-
                                                                                                       supplied affordable housing sector where
      The financial health of developers varies greatly.                                               there was continued real demand from first-
      While some developers have no debt, others,                                                      time home-buyers, primarily in the Q3 and
      such as the prominent Vingroup, are highly                                                       Q4 income range. Tracking of real estate
      leveraged. Highly-leveraged developers can                                                       production in Hanoi and HCMC by CBRE
      experience a crisis in liquidity due to unexpected                                               indicated that 41 percent of HCMC’s total
      events, such as delays in construction or in                                                     accumulated production since 1999 was in
      pre-sales efforts. These events can be caused by                                                 the affordable segment. In comparison, the
      macro-economic factors and bode challenges for                                                   affordable housing segment makes up 21
      the sector, as a whole, when occurring at scale.                                                 percent of Hanoi’s production.


          Figure 4.3 Secondary Prices for HCMC and Hanoi
                                  HCMC, Seconday Prices                                              Hanoi,, Seconday Prices
                                   $2.000                                                                              $2.000
       Seconday price ( US$/m2)




                                                                                            Seconday price ( US$/m2)




                                   $1.500                                                                              $1.500


                                   $1.000                                                                              $1.000


                                    $500                                                                                $500


                                      $0                                                                                  $0
                                               2011        2012         2013         2014                                          2011        2012      2013          2014

                                            High end      Mid end            Affordable                                         High end       Mid end    Affordable


         Source: CBRE Vietnam reports, 2014.




          Figure 4.4 Total Accumulative Supply from 1999 to Quarter 3, 2014 (Both Completed & Under-
          Construction; Sold and Unsold*)
                                                                          HCMC                                                   hanoi
                                                                               1%                                                    2%
                                                                    luxury
                                                                                                                                     18%
                                                                  High end
                                                                               29%

                                                              Mid end
                                                                               29%                                                  59%


                                                       affordable
                                                                               41%                                                  21%

                                                                      105.611 units                                             125.917units
         Source: CBRE Vietnam Reports, 2014.
         *CBRE definitions: (i) affordable is <VND 16M/ m2; (ii) non-affordable includes (a) mid-end at VND 16-30M/ m2, (b)
         high-end at VND 30-50M/ m2, and (c) luxury at >VND 50M/ m2.


24	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Oversupply of high-end housing is decreasing.
                                                                 Table 4.4 Housing Months-in-Inventory
In January 2013, the MoC began tracking the
                                                                 Unit	           Hanoi	      HCMC	 Others       Vietnam
volume of oversupply, primarily in the high-
                                                                                                                 Total
end segment. Assuming the same absorption
                                                                 Units Sold      1,954       1,134   3,733          6,821
rate achieved in 2014, the current Months-in-
                                                                 (Feb-Dec ‘14)
Inventory ratio20 of housing in Vietnam is at
                                                                 Inventory       4,306       7,141   14,458     25,905
38 months, with the majority of the projects
                                                                 @ YE 2104
being in HCMC. Developers are addressing
                                                                 Inventory        22          63      39             38
affordability by shrinking unit size and
                                                                 In Months
increasing production of 1-2 bedroom units.
Comparing units sold before 2012 to units sold                   Source: MoC, 2014.
after 2012, the average size of 1-bedroom units
has decreased from 50 m2 to 48 m2 and average                260 to 620 million are within the affordability
size of 2-bedroom units have decreased from                  range of Q3 and Q4 income segments, without
91 m2 to 75 m2. The number of 1-2 bedroom                    any government subsidy. As such, developers
units has increased from 66 percent of total                 have recognized this market opportunity and
production prior to 2012 to 72 percent of total              have begun constructing units to respond to
production after 2012.                                       consumer demand, particularly in HCMC,
                                                             where a wide range of products have become
4.2.2 The Cost Structure of Commercial                       available, some priced as low as VND 400
Housing Development                                          million. Affordable housing produced by the
                                                             commercial sector tends to be located 30 to
Developers are building market housing for                   45 minutes from the central business district,
the Q3 and Q4 income segments with a 10-15                   are within reasonable distance of community-
percent profit margin outside of social housing              based facilities such as shops, fitness centers,
programs. As per the affordability analysis in               and day care centers and rely on access by car
Chapter 3, units in the price range of VND                   or motorcycle.

     Table 4.5 Affordability Analysis for Hanoi and HCMC (refer to Chapter 3)
          Income            Mo. HH income           Capacity To Pay1          Loan Amount2             Home Price3
         Segments             (VND MM)                 (VND MM)                 (VND MM)                (VND MM)
          Hanoi Q3                16.1                     4.0                         290                    362
          Hanoi Q4                22.0                     6.6                         528                    625
          HCMC Q3                 11.8                     2.9                         212                    265
          HCMC Q4                 15.6                     4.7                         375                    470

     Assumptions: (1) Capacity to pay = 30% and 25% of HH income for Q4 and Q3, respectively; (2) Market rate of
     10%; 20 / 15 year term for Q4 and Q3 respectively; (3) 20% down payment.  Loan amount is calculated based on
     Constant Amortization Repayment method.


Developers are able to provide affordable                    low income consumers. DevCo A is a listed
homes for the Q3 and Q4 segments using                       company with a diversified and international
different development and business models.                   capital base and puts emphasis on marketing.
Table 4.6 outlines the cost structure of two                 DevCo B is self-funded and spends very little
example cases, hereby referred to as DevCo                   on marketing. The contrast between these
A and DevCo B. While DevCo B produces                        developers and their business models, when
smaller units, both developers are able to                   coupled with consideration for their shared
provide consumers with an acceptable price                   target segment and similar development cost,
point of VND 12 million/m2, an affordable                    bodes well for the possible growth and diversity
entry point for newly-formed households and                  of the affordable housing segment.

20
  Months-in-Inventory is calculated based on inventory on hand divided by the average
monthly consumption of sales.

                                                             The Housing Supply and Delivery System                         25
       Table 4.6   Example of Cost Structure for Two Developers
                                                 In VND ‘000 per m2	            % of Sales Price w/o VAT
        Comparative Developer Cost Structure    DevCo A Home DevCo BHome DevCo A Home DevCo BHome
        Construction Cost                       5,500           6,413           50%            58%
        Land Cost (include land use right)      2,200           2,000           20%            18%
        Marketing / Sales Cost                  990             190             9%             2%
        Project Management Cost                 660             238             6%             2%
        Finance Cost                            220             476             2%             4%
        Other Costs                             -               190             -              2%
        Total Cost of Goods Sold                9,570           9,506           87%            86%
        Profit before Tax                       1,430           1,494           13%            14%
        Profit Tax (22%)                        315             329             3%             3%
        Profit after Tax                        1,115           1,165
        Developer Profit Margin                 10%             11%             10%            11%
        Sales Price w/out 10% VAT               11,000          11,000
        Sales Price w/ VAT                      12,100          12,100
        Home Size                               40              34
        Home Price (VND ‘000)                   484,000         411,400

       Source: Interviews with developers.


      Many developers provide unique customer              moving into the housing space with existing
      financing schemes to address consumer                land reserves. Of the 34 projects approved
      challenges in accessing housing finance. DevCo       by the MoC as of November 31, 2014, 50
      A offers a promotional scheme where it pays          percent of units were converted to affordable
      interest payments on behalf of buyers during         from commercial housing. It remains to be
      the construction period. Meanwhile, DevCo            seen how these players will behave upon the
      B implements a 50-month interest-free                30T Package’s termination, but the increased
      payment scheme where customers earn a 50-            interest and investment in the affordable
      year lease upon payment completion. DevCo            segment bodes well.
      B’s progressive scheme frees buyers from the
      complication of having to obtain a bank loan         Yet, policy incentives for social housing
      and notably allows informal-income consumers         development still can be strengthened to interest
      a pathway to home ownership. DevCo B’s               a larger number of private developers. Incentives
      projects generally sell out within 3 months of       are laid out in Decree 188 – Article 12:
      pre-sale without a marketing program due to
      its unique consumer financing model and low          a.	 Exemption from land use right fees.
      price point. DevCo B is confident to take the        b.	 A preferential VAT rate of 5 percent,
      credit risk because in the event of a buyer’s            reduced from the normal rate of 10 percent.
      default, the developer is able to repossess          c.	 Corporate Income Tax rate of 10 percent,
      and resell quickly given the high demand for             reduced from a normal rate of 20 percent.
      properties at such a low price-point.                d.	 Trunk infrastructure hookups outside the
                                                               perimeter of the project are reimbursed by
      4.2.3 Policy Challenges and Opportunities in             the local government budget.
      the Commercial Housing Sector
                                                           The incentives reflect international practices
      The 30T Package has been successful in bringing      around supply-side government support, but
      existing developers down market and facilitating     challenges lie in execution. Reimbursement
      the emergence of new entrants. Of the list of the    of infrastructure development can be slow
      MoC’s 100 approved development projects              and burdensome, particularly when local
      eligible for 30T Package funding, a significant      governments lack fiscal and technical capacity.
      portion are new entrants, contractors moving         Procedures associated with verification of
      up market or large corporations in other sectors     consumer eligibility for social housing benefits
26	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
are complex, creating a hurdle for developers     up post-housing bubble, leading to fierce
to offload units. In addition, incentives are     competition between incumbent and new
accompanied by caps. Profit margins for           developers. Such competition might bode well
social housing projects cannot exceed 10          for consumer choice and market development
percent, so that some private developers and      if properly directed to meet actual demand, and
SOEs perceive participation in social housing     if not, the risk of another future bubble exists.
development as a social obligation and not
necessarily an economically attractive pursuit.   Access to land in major cities remains a major
These bottlenecks may deter participation of a    challenge for commercial production of
larger number of developers.                      affordable housing. Urban land, particularly in
                                                  large cities, is scarce, expensive and difficult to
The housing market crash has filtered out less    assemble. The high density and high number
competent developers and led to mergers and       of small plots in city centers have made land
acquisitions that consolidate and strengthen      access a challenge. A handful of prominent
the sector. Many developers have engaged in       developers have land reserves that have been
mergers and acquisitions to strengthen capital    assembled ahead of the surge in land prices.
base and operations. Yet more went bankrupt       However, even those land reserves are running
and exited the sector entirely. Remaining         out, requiring developers to reassess their
developers have proven capacity to weather        long-term growth strategy to adapt to scarce
economic downturns, scale in operations           land resources. Policy efforts to introduce
where necessary, and establish long-term          inclusionary zoning and allocate land for social
branding and product strategies that prioritize   housing development have not been effective
sector growth over deal-based profits.            and require strengthening of compliance
                                                  management and procedures (see Chapter
There is new confidence in the commercial         6). However, recent plans for infrastructure
housing market. The SBV policy in addressing      development through metro lines, urban
banks’ bad debt through the creation of Vietnam   upgrading, and redevelopment create a positive
Asset Management Company (VAMCO) and              backdrop for new development activities. As
banks consolidation has boosted confidence        cities increase infrastructure development
in the market and re-activated credit flow.       and urban planning projects, previously
Many commercial banks have once again             undesirable locations close to city centers now
started lending to developers. Yet many more      can be released, opening up new residential
are strategically shifting to consumer lending,   development opportunities.
thereby creating a competitive environment
with more mortgage options for buyers.            Changes and uncertainty in development
Loosening of foreign ownership regulations        regulations can introduce complications for
also helps to boost investor and developer        developers. Developers must balance an
confidence and is expected to increase the flow   extensive set of regulatory measures and
of FDI into the housing market, particularly      documents required at both the central and
for condominiums.                                 local government levels. Urban planning
                                                  guidelines can have impact on the costs of
Yet, the commercial housing market is still       site infrastructure, internal roads and green
vulnerable to external shocks and speculative     spaces. Aside from administrative procedures,
bubbles. The supply boom of the early 2010s,      developers must also account for periodic
its resulting backlog, and this renewed surge     changes in regulations and resulting cost
in housing production are leading toward          implications. Though necessary from a
another over-extension of resources. The          governance standpoint, the abundance of
housing sector has yet to absorb ~25,000 units    regulations will be able to better support
of pre-bubble housing. Stimulated by the 30T      sustainable development and increased
Package, 65,000 additional affordable units are   affordability for end users if streamlined with
expected to come into the market over the next    more consistency, transparency and ease of
two years. The market shows signs of heating      understanding and use.
                                                  The Housing Supply and Delivery System                27
      In the construction sector, variability in            makes up approximately 15 percent of Vietnam’s
      the quality of construction still needs to be         housing stock, or 3.3 million units nation-wide.
      improved. There is a new government focus on          The rate of rental housing is higher in urban areas
      developing the construction sector to reduce          (up to 26 percent of households in HCMC),
      the prevalence of faulty and sub-standard             among migrants (64 percent of migrants in
      construction work and to enhance the skills           HCMC and Hanoi live in rental housing) and
      of laborers as a means to support economic            among lower-income households21. As Vietnam
      development. Decision 134 of January 2015             becomes more urban and as the youth population
      on Restructuring the Construction Sector              becomes more mobile in search of education and
      focuses on these issues, as well as the use of a      work, demand for rental housing is also expected
      Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) to support          to increase, particularly in Vietnam’s cities and
      housing development. To support growth and            industrial centers. Assuming a 25 percent share
      improved quality, the construction sector will        of rental out of total new annual overall demand
      need to apply more stringent enforcement              (refer to Chapter 3), rental would account
      of minimum standards and professional                 for 95,00022 units per year. To reduce the
      workforce training. Meanwhile, households             qualitative deficit by 2030, an estimated 80,000
      with need for self-built housing largely turn         of improved or rebuilt rental units would need
      to small contractors to carry out construction.       to be addressed, and if the GoV were to attempt
      This sector remains largely fragmented and            to reduce the deficit more quickly, by 2020, then
      informal, yet employs a significant portion of        roughly 250,000 units per annum would need to
      the workforce.                                        be addressed.

      Finally, to ensure high resale potential and value    Rental housing demand is concentrated among
      in the long term, creation and management of          students, newly-formed families, migrant
      Home-Owners’ Associations (HOA) also must             workers, and low income families. Rental
      evolve to meet international standards. Living        housing is an important option for newly-
      in large-scale development projects is still a        formed and low income households, students,
      very new phenomenon for Vietnamese home-              and migrant workers. This is particularly true
      owners, and managing the common areas is              in large cities, like Hanoi and HCMC, where
      equally new to the local developers. Currently,       more than 70 percent of migrants are between
      most developers opt to conduct ongoing                the ages of 15 and 30, compared to about 40
      management and operations of condominiums             percent in the same age group among city
      and price the HOA services at a percentage of         residents. The proportion of housing ownership
      the sales price (e.g. around 2 percent), payable      for migrants in these cities was only 8.7 percent
      at the time of home transfer. There still lacks       in 2010. Over 90 percent of migrants live in
      any guidance or role models in the market on          rented housing, cramped shared quarters with
      best practice in management of high-rise and          relatives, temporary shelters on construction
      condominium blocks and how an HOA can be              sites, or workshops or shops. Rental housing is
      effectively operated.                                 important for socio-economic growth because it
                                                            enables worker mobility and options for those
      4.3 Rental Housing Sector                             who are unable to access mortgages or do not
                                                            want to buy housing.
      Demand for rental housing is high in urban areas
      and increasing. According to the 2009 Census          Industrial zone workers contribute to a large
      of Population and Housing, rental housing             share of rental housing demand. In Quarter


      21
         Based on the 2009 Census and the 2009 Urban Poverty Study conducted in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.
      22
         The number of urban households is estimated to increase by approximately 2.2 million from 9.1 million
      in 2015 to 11.3 million in 2020 driven by urban population growth rate of 3.03% per annum and a decline
      in the urban household size of 1.36% per annum, based on recent trends in both indicators. If 25% are
      estimated as rental housing, this results in an annual need of around 95,000 (of 374,000) units of rental
      housing demanded.

28	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
3 of 2014, out of the 15.8 million people who           Existing affordable rental housing in Vietnam
are employed in urban areas, 3.05 million               is mainly informal and substandard. There is
belong to the manufacturing sector, with 2.25           limited information on the 15 percent of the
million people working in 295 industrial parks          total housing stock that is rental. Empirical
and 15 economic zones across the country.               studies indicate that the commercial rental
Among industrial workers, roughly 40                    market is still very small, mainly catering to
percent are between the ages of 15 and 29 and           high-end consumers. There are also limited
approximately 78 percent of people, rent their          public stocks of rental housing for government
dwellings. It is estimated that formal supply is        workers, military officials and students, or
only sufficient to respond to 10 percent of this        of rental worker housing provided by larger
rental housing demand, indicating that most             companies in industrial areas. Much of the
people end up renting informally, and there is          rental housing in Vietnam is made up of
substantial unmet need in industrial zones for          single rooms provided by private landlords
adequate rental and starter home options.               in dense and often-informal neighborhoods


                                   Box 4.1 Industrial Zones in Vietnam


  Vietnam has had a long-standing goal to transform from an under-developed agricultural country
  into an industrialized nation. Following the success of industrial parks in Taiwan, Korea and China,
  Vietnam also adopted this policy to attract foreign investment into export-oriented manufacturing
  sectors in the late 1990s. This policy was used primarily to accelerate economic growth and shift labor
  into higher-productivity sectors and has been largely successful. By 2011, industrial manufacturing
  was the most popular sector for FDI in terms of both registered capital and projects, accounting for
  7,987 or 58.5 percent of projects and USD 93.05 trillion or 47 percent of total FDI.

  By 2014, Vietnam had developed around 295 industrial parks and 15 economic zones around the
  country. These industrial zones have been primarily concentrated in peri-urban areas close to Ho Chi
  Minh City and Hanoi and have prompted large volumes of temporary migrants. There are now an
  estimated 2.25 million people living and working in industrial zones, of which 75 percent are migrants
  and 40 percent are between the ages of 15 and 29. Initially these zones were planned exclusively for
  industry and did not provide space for social services or housing, even though they have attracted a
  high level of migrants. New regulations on industrial zones now require housing to be incorporated
  into site plans and there have been 63 social housing projects completed to support industrial
  workers, primarily dormitories, and several companies have also invested housing for employees.
  However, creating a healthy environment and ensuring that there is adequate accommodation for
  workers still remains a major challenge for Vietnam, which will be critical to support the success of its
  industrialization policy.

                    Figure 4.5 Distribution of Industrial Companies across Provinces

                                    Provinces		          N	         %
                                    Hanoi		              161	       16.1
                                    Vinh Phuc		          13	        1.3
                                    Bac Ninh		           16	        1.6
                                    Hai Phong		          71	        7.1
                                    Da Nang		            25	        2.5
                                    Binh Duong	          264	       26.4
                                    Dong Nai		           150	       15
                                    Ba Ria Vung Tau	     20	        2
                                    HCMC		               281	       28.1
                                    Total		              1001	      100


 Source: UNIDO Vietnam Industrial Investment Report, based on market research


                                                        The Housing Supply and Delivery System                29
      and rented by youths and migrant workers.             to healthcare, and income. Only 64.6 percent
      This rental housing is exchanged informally,          of non-registered children between 6 and 17
      where contracts are usually verbal rather than        attend public schools, compared to 82.4 percent
      written23. Units are often small24, in poor           of residents. Migrants are half as likely as
      conditions, and lack basic amenities, such as         residents to visit a doctor, with visitation rates at
      clean water, electricity, and sanitation25. In        23.4 percent compared to 11.4 percent. Finally,
      addition, units are often overcrowded, and            workers without registration are paid 9 percent
      tenants are insecure and unable to prove their        less on average, even though they work 10 more
      residency to obtain Ho Khau registration to           hours than registered residents per week and
      access other welfare benefits when necessary.         are far more likely to be working than residents,
      Furthermore, landlord-tenant laws are basic           with 85 percent versus 59 percent employment
      and underdeveloped in nature and cannot be            rates respectively.
      applied to the informal rental segment.
                                                            Despite rising demand and need, the supply of
      The low level of formality faced by many              formal affordable rental housing appears to be
      tenants has a significant impact on livelihood        limited. There is little data on rental housing
      opportunities and may magnify vulnerability           supply, though evident strongly suggests a
      to poverty. The Ho Khau system was introduced         majority of rental housing is linked to citizen-
      in urban areas in 1955 and is tied to place of        initiated informal housing. Of the estimated
      residence. In the past, particularly before Doi       3.3 million housing units constructed between
      Moi, it was strictly enforced and linked to the       1999 and 200927, around 60 percent or some 1.6
      ration system. Post 1990, it is still required for    million units were small, single-story informal
      administrative procedures, including buying           housing units mainly located on urban fringes.
      land, building houses, registering motor vehicles,    The majority of this informal construction was
      and receiving public welfare benefits. Hence,         residential and almost all are owner-occupied.
      the lack of written housing rental contracts          Meanwhile, an unknown but sizeable minority
      means that migrants cannot obtain permanent           of this construction was used for single room
      registration status and have to remain either         rental mostly to migrant workers. The supply
      a temporary or unregistered resident (KT3 or          of formal rental housing in Vietnam is limited
      KT4 status) without full access to public services    by several issues: (i) the economics of the rental
      within their district of residence or registration.   market are not attractive for developers due
      Unregistered migrants make up approximately           to the low payment capacity of low income
      20 percent of the population of larger cities26,      households (<VND 0.5M/ month for Q1); (ii)
      and have been shown to face higher costs of           high standards and complex legal requirements
      housing, water, and electricity. Registration         for the formal provision of rental housing;
      status has a major impact on education, access        and, (iii) poor market perception of the sector.

      23
         The Qualitative Assessment of Rental Housing estimated that 80-90% of rental housing contracts were
      verbal or without formal agreement.
      24
         The Qualitative Assessment also found that most rooms for rent are between 9-16m2, with the area per
      capita in the range between 3-4m2, often with shared toilet, arranging a kitchen themselves and normally
      sleep on individual mats.
      25
         The 2009 Urban Poverty Survey found that rented and temporary housing have higher rates of shared
      latrines and poorer access to water and electricity than owner-occupied housing. For example, households
      who live in rented housing or shared housing mainly source water from containers (39.6%) and drilled
      wells (30.6%), which are more expensive than piped sources and are not tested for water quality. 38.3% of
      rented housing and 50.5% of temporary housing use shared latrines versus 15.8% of households overall.
      Migrant households are far more likely to have indirect electrical connections (31.5%), as are those in
      rented housing (43.3%) or with rooms in large buildings (30.6%), or in temporary houses (20.2%) versus
      18.8% of households overall.
      26
         As reported by the World Bank presentation on the Ho Khau registration system in 2014. This figure is
      confirmed by the 2009 Urban Poverty Study that found the number of unregistered migrants to be 20% in
      Ho Chi Minh City, though noted that this is likely to be an under-estimation.
      27
         World Bank calculations, based on average house unit size of 70m2.

30	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
These aspects are explained in more detail in the             per month are only affordable to the highest-
following paragraphs:                                         income quintile, the bulk of whom will want
                                                              to own with the exception of young working
a.	 Firstly, affordable rent levels are not                   professionals and expatriates. Upper income
    sufficient to make quality rental housing                 rental often comes in the form of condos
    units economically viable for investors. High-            or detached three- to five-story houses.
    end formal rental options can cost over VND               The market has few to no entirely rental
    20 to 50 million per month28. Meanwhile,                  residential projects. Units of around VND
    rent for standard rooms in the market                     2 million per month are only affordable to
    currently start around VND 0.6 to 0.8                     the top 3 quintiles, excluding the lowest 40
    million per month for the most basic room                 percent of households. A rental unit charging
    of 6-9 m2 in a secondary city and rises up to             1 million per month, such as a 6 - 9 m2
    VND 5 million per month in a stand-alone                  room in HCMC, will still not be affordable
    house with own toilet facilities (see Annex 1).           to quintile 1 households. Hence, many
    Considering the varying payment capacity of               Vietnamese either live in shared dormitories
    households, rental units of VND 5 million                 or units in a substandard condition.

     Table 4.7 Affordability of Monthly Rent Levels
      Income      Monthly Affordable    Affordable Share of Income       Share of Income    Share of Income
      Quintile     Income  Payment      Rent Levels w/ Monthly Rent      w/ Monthly Rent      w/ Monthly
                  (m, VND) Capacity      (m,VND)        of 5m                 of 2m           Rent of 1m
         Q5          23.8         40%    9.5              21%                   8%                 4%
         Q4          12.8         30%    3.8              39%                  16%                 8%
         Q3           9.3         25%    2.3              54%                  21%                11%
         Q2           6.6         20%    1.3              75%                  30%                15%
         Q1           3.6         15%    0.5              140%                 56%                28%

     Source: Authors’ calculations.


b.	 Secondly, a number of legal hurdles prevent               at least 1.5 m² per person. There is also a series
    private sector participation and incentivize              of other hygiene and fire safety standards to
    landlords to remain informal. Landlords                   uphold. In HCMC, it was reported by the
    are legally required to register as businesses            Department of Construction that only 28.5
    and uphold strict construction standards for              percent of inns out of the total owned by the
    inns, based on the Ministry of Construction’s             households and individuals meet the quality
    regulations, such as Decision No. 75/2006 in              requirements and have been granted with a
    HCMC. These requirements include that the                 certificate of business registration.
    area ready for use, excluding walls, should be
    at least 9 m² without toilet in the room and        c.	 Finally, there is negative market perception
    12 m² with toilet in the room. Further, the             of the sector. Investors and the public sector
    width must not be less than 2.4 meters, and             alike perceive affordable rental housing as a
    the height from floor to ceiling should be at           risky and unprofitable sector. This perception
    least 2.8 meters, with separate partitions by           is driven by past experiences in public housing,
    brick between rooms. The average area should            where rent levels were set extremely low and
    be 3 m² per person, excluding toilet and shared         large government developments were poorly
    space. The room should be airy, with fans               maintained. This negative perception is
    and beds for tenants, and have windows. For             furthered by the informality that characterizes
    buildings with 10 rooms or more, tenants must           the current rental sector, which features
    have access to open green space that is equal to        severely degraded stock, unregistered tenants


28
     Sourced from interviews with Ministry of Construction.

                                                        The Housing Supply and Delivery System                     31
           and publicized cases of tenant mistreatment.      workers, and students. The law allows direct
           This has prevented the development of long-       state budget to be used for housing for rental
           term financial instruments suitable for rental    and lease, and allows for sale via a lease-to-own
           investment by commercial banks, as well as        model effective after 5 years of occupancy. For
           the interest in provision of affordable rental    a more detailed discussion of public housing
           housing by commercial developers.                 programs, refer to Chapter 7.

      The Vietnamese government has a long history           Despite limited success of programs to support
      of activity in the rental sector. From the 1960s       rental housing to date, the government has a
      to 1980s the government maintained a housing           renewed focused on improving this sector. The
      fund to build public housing units that were           National Housing Development Strategy to
      then distributed to government employees               2020 and Vision to 2030, approved in 2011, set
      under nominal rents. These units tended to be          out explicit targets to increase the proportion
      built in apartment complexes of three to five          of rental housing in the market. The targets
      levels, with apartment size varying from 16 to 32      include a plan to renovate and rebuild degraded
      m2. Yet, these provisions only reached a third of      apartment buildings and to promote rental
      government employees and the remainder had             housing in urban areas. The goal is to increase
      to resolve their housing needs without support         the rental share to 20-25 percent of the housing
      of the State29. In the late 1980s, during the          stock by 2020 and to satisfy the housing needs
      market-oriented Doi Moi reforms, government            for 80 percent of students and 70 percent of an
      halted this public housing production and              estimated 2.2 million industrial workers in the
      initiated policies to encourage people to build        same period.
      their own houses. In 1994, the government
      issued Decree No. 61 that cancelled the state-         The 2015 Housing Law includes important
      subsidized system on housing and pushed                revisions for the rental housing sector. Rental
      housing to be based on a market delivery system.       and lease-to-own options for urban residents
      Much of the Soviet-era stock was privatized,           have been explicitly stated as a focus of social
      though not always entirely successfully. In fact,      housing programs, with legislation expanding
      much has since suffered from poor maintenance          support to citizen-initiated housing and rental
      and has been left in limbo30.                          accommodations. Incentives for affordable
                                                             rental include land-use fee waivers, state
      In the past two decades, there have been a series      contributions for infrastructure financing,
      of recent efforts at public interventions in rental    and favorable tax treatment. Furthermore,
      housing. Since 1998 city municipalities have           rental units receiving state support should
      been allowed to allocate land to state enterprises     have rents set at a level that reflects capital
      for building housing units for sale and rent.          pay-back over a period of 20 years, as well as
      These include central, provincial, and sometimes       operations and maintenance costs, which is to
      district level construction companies. In 2005,        be overseen by PPCs.
      the National Housing Law defined forms of
      housing development, including social housing.         To achieve its targets in the rental housing sector,
      Current social housing policies mainly focus           the government of Vietnam will need to develop
      on using state budgets to develop housing for          a clearer operational and legal framework and
      eight key GoV target groups, which include civil       subsidy delivery system. Interventions should
      servants, revolutionaries, low income families,        focus on improving substandard rental housing


      29
         Presentation prepared by the Department of Housing Management and Real Estate Market,
      Government of Vietnam.
      30
         There are over 3 million m2 of floor of old apartment complexes, which were built before 1991, with more
      than 100,000 household living in them. Hanoi has 23 old apartment complexes with 4 or 5 floors, total floor
      area is about 1 million m2 with over 30,000 households living in 10 low-rise apartment complexes. HCMC
      has 6 central apartment complexes and many small ones scattered in 12 districts of which over 0.4 million
      m2 of old apartment were badly damaged with 10,000 households currently living in them.

32	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
stock, the level of formality in the rental sector,        migrant workers. Self-built housing also takes
as well as demand-side interventions to enhance            place in more central areas, however mainly
affordability. Further efforts are needed to               in the form of home improvements and
create a more flexible enabling framework (legal,          expansions. A significant share of self-built
financial, technical) to stimulate new rental              housing is informal as units lack the official
supply, which supports the development of a set            BOLUC certificate, having been constructed
of competent public, state-owned, non-profit,              or incrementally built without a complete set
and private social rental providers.                       of permissions from authorities.

4.4 Self-Built Housing Sector                              Self-built, particularly incremental self-built,
                                                           has been the most affordable and accessible
Self-built housing makes up approximately                  housing for the middle and low income segment.
75 percent of the total housing stock and                  While varied from city to city, and within
production in Vietnam. Self-built housing is               cities, the average construction cost of the most
defined as a home that is built by the home-               common housing typologies - tube houses and
owners themselves, either fully or partially,              grade IV houses (defined as a single story house)
or by a sub-contracted developer, builder                  is approximately VND 4 million/m2 and VND
or micro-builder. Self-built construction                  3 million/m2 respectively, for the three cities
projects can thus be newly produced homes or               surveyed in the World Bank’s Qualitative Study
incremental improvements or expansions for                 - Hai Phong, HCMC and Can Tho (see Table
self-consumption, for rent or for sale, and the            4.8). At this level of affordability, middle income
size and quality of the home can vary widely.              home-owners and perhaps even the higher
While the majority of self-built housing are tube          end of the Q2 income segment can upgrade
houses and alley houses, they can also be large            and expand their homes incrementally in line
villas for the high income or squatter houses              with their accrued savings and/or borrowing.
for the low income. The market for self-built              Another element of affordability is provided
housing is most dynamic and fast growing on                through the business opportunities linked
the urban fringes and peri-urban areas of larger           with commercial use of the first floor, which is
cities, responding to urban population growth              prevalent in self-built multi-story tube houses.
and the needs of the low income segment and


 Table 4.8 Labor and Construction Costs of Tube Houses and Grade 4 Houses
                              Grade 4 House	                           Tube/Multi-Story Adjacent House
                 Labor Costs/m2        Construction Cost/m2        Labor Costs/m2       Construction Cost/m2
                (thousand, VND)           (million, VND)          (thousand, VND)          (million, VND)
  Hai Phong        600-750                     2-4                     700-900                    4-8
  HCMC             600-900                     2.5-3.5                 950-1500                   3.5-5
  Can Tho          500-1000                    2.5-4.1                 700-1500                   3.5-6
 Source: Qualitative Study, World Bank, 2014. Compiled from in-depth interviews of construction contractors in
 September and October 2014.


In-situ incremental expansion has contributed              expansions, horizontal overhangs into alleyways
significantly to home size expansion over                  and streets can also be commonly spotted
the last two decades. As shown in Table 4.9,               in the urban housing landscape in Vietnam.
average home size has nearly doubled over the              Where structures are not designed for such
last 15 years while the average home size per              expansions, they may become problematic;
capita has more than doubled. The self-built               however, where structures anticipate growth
segment has been tremendously resourceful                  they provide opportunities for safely increasing
and innovative in incremental expansion                    the size of homes to meet the changing needs
by achieving additional space by any means                 of households.
possible. Besides regular horizontal and vertical
                                                           The Housing Supply and Delivery System                33
                                                                in order to maximize benefits from additional
       Table 4.9 Average Home Size in Urban
                                                                height, size or changes in the external
       Vietnam
                                                                appearance – even when they had already
        Urban Vietnam           1999       2009       2014      obtained a construction permit. The risk
        Average home size         44        70.3      83.7      taken by home-owners is real and there have
        Per capita average m2     9.7       19.2       23       been cases where stricter local governments
       Source: GSO 1999 and 2009 Census and 2014 Inter-
                                                                have enforced building violations with either
       Censal Survey                                            a penalty fee or alterations being required.
                                                                More often, it appears that the home-owners
      Self-built housing as a process is generally quite        are willing to take the risk, with an expectation
      manageable for consumers. The construction                that a fee can be paid to waive the violation.
      materials are locally sourced and widely
      accessible at different price points, while the           Culturally, self-built housing is largely preferred
      builders and small contractors are generally              by Vietnamese citizens, while meeting the density
      skilled, resourceful and entrepreneurial in               and other needs of cities. Population density in
      nature. Furthermore, households can easily                Vietnam ranks third in South East Asia, just
      control their construction budget as they build,          after Singapore and the Philippines. Hanoi and
      expand or upgrade stage by stage, depending               HCMC are two of the most populated cities in
      on their savings capacity and changing needs              the country, being 7 to 13 times higher than the
      over time.                                                average density of the country. Self-built multi-
                                                                story tube houses, with their small plot sizes and
      Informality of tenure is prevalent in the                 narrow frontages are appropriate solutions to
      self-built sector. The key reasons for tenure             match the need for urban density and growing
      informality are: (i) building on informal land            gross FAR requirements. This configuration, of
      (lacking the LURC certificate, in cases where             dense neighborhoods of tube houses and other
      households cannot afford the one-time fee,                units in a network of alleyways also support
      for example), (ii) building without obtaining             social inclusion and cohesion.
      construction permits, and (iii) not meeting
      local zoning ordinances and/or building                   Self-built housing solutions tend to be better
      codes. Many consumers avoid the bureaucratic              perceived than developer-built social housing.
      hurdles that the official process imposes on the          Box 2 details household preferences, which
      building permit applicant or do not follow the            determine their housing choice. Housing price
      building plans during the construction process            and accessibility are ranked significantly higher


                                        Box 4.2 Characteristics of Housing Preferences

       i. Affordability determines how much a person or household can consume. Self-built housing is most
          flexible to address the affordability question as a household can start with the most basic core unit
          and incrementally improve the quality and expand the size in line with their savings and earnings
          capacity as well as housing needs over time.
       ii. Accessibility is a second key priority as this is critical to income generation opportunities, thus
          immediately affecting a household’s social welfare and capacity to pay for housing. This location-
          based preference includes both the household’s connectivity to nearby jobs as well as the
          opportunity to conduct a business within the housing unit successfully. Elements that are
          important to connectivity would be the distance to business or employment districts, access to
          public transit, and street frontages for business opportunities.
       iii. Security is related to the degree of safety for the household away from issues such as burglary or
          other crimes.
       iv. Livability indicates access to social amenities, such as education (e.g. schools, kindergartens),
          health facilities (e.g. clinics, hospitals) and sociocultural facilities (e.g. parks, entertainment).

        Source: Qualitative Study, World Bank, 2014


34	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
than security and livability, as they are important    have been rising to unaffordable levels in well-
determinants of income and expenditure                 connected areas. The lowest price of land in low
and thus of the households’ social welfare.            income neighborhoods in HCMC, Can Tho,
Meanwhile, perceptions toward social housing           and Hai Phong is around VND 2.5 to 5 million/
can be negative. Specific concerns include lack of     m2. As an example, land for a modest single-story
affordability, limited accessibility or connectivity   core house, as shown in Table 4.10, can make up
to the work-place due to location, difficulties to     to 60 percent of the total unit cost. Households
comply with income and eligibility criteria, and       who would like to self-build, are required to
limited income generation opportunities, such          save for a long time to secure land before they
as home-based businesses with street access, in        can start construction. Besides high land prices,
the case of high rise social projects.                 other obstacles that prevent affordable land
                                                       access include high fees for land conversion
Self-built housing can be in a poor condition,         and transfer (e.g., LURC), large minimum lot
built of substandard materials or with low             size requirements in subdivisions (e.g. 50 m2 or
construction quality. This may be due to               more), and a regulation that requires land to be
several reasons. Firstly, low income households        serviced with infrastructure before subdivisions
that lack access to credit or have inadequate          can be sold.
savings are likely to invest less in construction.
Secondly, households that are uncertain of the          Table 4.10 Example for the Costs of a New
tenure of their homes are not willing to invest         Self-Built Homes
for the long term. Finally, to meet their small
                                                         Plot of 50 m2               VND 2.5/ m2 VND 125 mm
budget, households tend to utilize lower quality
                                                         Construction cost/          VND 2.5/m2 VND 113 mm
materials and/or work with lower quality sub-
                                                         single-story unit of 45 m
                                                                                 2
contractors.
                                                         Total of Unit                         VND 238mm
                                                         Plot of 25 m2               VND 2.5/ m2 VND 63 mm
Access to affordable housing finance is a major
                                                         Construction cost/          VND 2.5/m2 VND 38 mm
challenge to households who self-build, due to
                                                         expandable core of 15 m 2
the low number that have formal tenure. The
                                                         Total of Unit                         VND 100 mm
majority of self-built informal homes are bought
and sold in cash or in kind. Very little is known       Source: Qualitative Survey, World Bank, 2014.
about these activities and the key actors in the
sales and transfer of housing in the informal
market. The purchase and sale of self-built            Over recent years, prices of self-built housing
informal tenure homes are generally done by            have risen to a very high level. For example,
word-of-mouth among relatives and friends, or          average prices of low-end tube houses of at least
otherwise, informal housing agents take a small        30 m2 in Hanoi and HCMC, which are located
fee for bringing buyers and sellers together.          in peri-urban districts, have been found to be
Buyers need to rely on savings or lending from         approximately VND 400 million per unit (as
families or friends. Credit from moneylenders          captured by the Qualitative Study in 2014)
is typically far too expensive, given excessive        making such homes affordable only to the Q3
interest rates and the capital-intensive nature        income segment and above, or the high-end of
of housing. In addition, evidence from other           the Q2 income segment, with support from the
countries also suggests that low income                30T program.
households, even if eligible for mortgages, may
be afraid to take on the borrowing risk, as the        Positive interventions have been taken by the
foreclosure of their home would deprive them of        government to address the particular needs of
an essential asset.                                    the self-built sector as follows:
                                                       -	Regulations on minimum plot sizes in
Access to affordable formal land is another              subdivisions have reduced to 36 m2 in HCMC
key hurdle for the production of new self-built          and 25 m2 in Hai Phong, in recognition of the
housing, particularly in high growth cities. Land        high cost of land and density of urban areas.
prices vary widely depending on location and           -	Requirements for construction permits for
                                                       The Housing Supply and Delivery System                 35
           Table 4.11 Examples of Low-End Tube House Prices in Hanoi and HCMC
           City/ District		                      Location                   Built Area (m2)   Cost/m2       Unit Price
                                                                                              (VND, M)      (VND, M)
           Hanoi / Bac Tu Liem     North inner fringe hot area                    33            14.9           490
           Hanoi/ Ha Dong          West -south inner fringe hot area              40             9.5           380
           HCM/ Thu Duc            East fringe with industry                      38             9.7           368
           HCM/ Quan 12            North far fringe rural                         43             9.3           393

           Source: Qualitative Study, World Bank, 2014.


        simple projects have been made more flexible.                     under Decree 188 has not yet included
        As per Decree No. 64/2012/ND-CP, small                            the self-built segment. There is a need for
        houses are not required to have construction                      a strategy to supply suitable affordable and
        permits to simplify the building process.                         formal land for self built housing and with
        Specifically, units with a total floor area of less               it, the promotion of sustainable human
        than 250 m2, less than three floors and not                       settlements through efficient mixed-use and
        located in protected areas, can be designed                       mixed-income developments.
        and managed by investors, who are then
        responsible for the safety of the buildings and                b.	 Delivery of basic infrastructure is a key
        adjacent buildings.                                                challenge. As can be expected, the lower Q1
      -	Addressing the lack of funding of low                              and Q2 income-segments have a higher level
        income segments by making provisions for                           of needs with 40% and 25% of households
        financing of LURCs through debt, payable                           lacking access to basic water and sanitation
        over a 5-year period.                                              services, respectively (refer to Table 4.4.5
                                                                           below). Rapid urbanization and the
      The focus of government policies and programs                        proliferation of unplanned settlements has
      has recently been on the development of the                          led to a significant number of communities
      formal housing market and much less on                               that need to be retrofitted with basic services,
      the self-built housing sector. In particular,                        which presents technical and cost challenges31.
      policies have favored large-scale, developer-                        Experiences from Latin America suggest that
      driven projects that are executed with People’s                      ex-post infrastructure provision in unplanned
      Committee approval and support. As a result,                         settlements is about 2.5 to 8 times as costly
      the self-built informal housing sector has                           as an anticipatory strategy, such as sites and
      grown without significant interference from                          services, to accommodate the low income
      the government and there is limited public                           population in an affordable way.
      information to track trends in the self-built
      housing sector or experience to manage                           c.	 There is a need for continued urban
      this sector. Key sector challenges that need                         upgrading and home improvement
      government support include:                                          support. There is an opportunity to build
                                                                           on the success of existing initiatives, such
      a.	 Lack of affordable land for the self-built                       as the VUUP and to expand such programs
          sector. It is estimated that approximately                       to other cities and low income areas in
          11,500 hectares of urban land is needed                          need. This will require identification and
          for housing annually. Formal land supply                         classification of areas, development of budget
          is currently not able to keep up with                            and cost-recovery mechanisms and the design
          demand overall. In addition, the 20                              of interventions, to be integrated across
          percent inclusionary zoning requirement                          different administrative sections. Meanwhile


      31
         Basic services may include physical infrastructure (water, sanitation, street paving, street lights,
      electricity, storm water drainage and waste collection services) as well as social infrastructure (e.g. health,
      education, and recreational facilities).

36	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
     Table 4.12 Access to Basic Services for the Urban Population, by Quintile
       HH Income Quintile      Mo. HH Income in ‘000 VND      No Safe Water (%)    No Safe Sanitation (%)
               Q5                          29,805                   16.8                    4.9
               Q4                          14,278                   21.9                    6.9
               Q3                          10,315                   31.2                    9.8
               Q2                          7,325                    34.3                    17.3
               Q1                          3,982                    44.6                    31.7
                                           13,134                   29.8                   14.1
     Source: Urban Vietnam – VHLSS 2012.


      community driven development programs,                 standards. This will include: (i) adjusting
      such as those supported by the Association             legislation, regulation and policies to more
      Cities of Vietnam (e.g. the 142 KKT program            affordable and acceptable terms that respond
      in Vinh City) have achieved positive results,          to the people’s real housing demand32; and
      although small in scale. Much learning can be          (ii) supporting households still unable to
      extracted for scaling and replication to other         afford the revised standard, for example with
      cities and communities.                                subsidies for provision of basic infrastructure
                                                             and/or de facto tenure security.
d.	 Lack of technical support for quality
    construction of self-built housing. The self-          The 2015 Housing Law highlights self-built
    built housing sector has largely benefitted            housing as an important component of its
    from poor enforcement of construction                  national housing policy and intervention
    quality and safety standards by local DoCs.            programs. Implementing these programs will
    Construction changes are unreported or not             require the GoV to incentivize and maximize
    recognized, and violations may be waived               the entrepreneurial capability of the self-
    for a fee in some cases. However, better               built segment, while providing support to
    strategies for improving construction quality          ensure access to adequate land, basic services,
    and compliance are required. In order not              micro-finance, more flexible permitting and
    to push households into informality, for               registration systems and technical assistance to
    example due to enforcement of unaffordable             achieve higher construction quality.




32
   For example, small minimum plot sizes, acknowledgment of incremental housing and
infrastructure development and affordable fee structures are considered essential here. These
measures may be complemented with vocational training for construction workers to improve
capacity and an online registration/notification system for simple construction projects to reduce
opportunities for informal fee collection.

                                                           The Housing Supply and Delivery System              37
       5
      Chapter


                Housing Finance


                5.1 Housing Finance Sector Assessment                 of long term funding, inadequate prudential
                                                                      regulations, an ineffective foreclosure system and
                5.1.1 Overall Sector Context                          limited housing data for valuations can prevent
                                                                      growth of a healthy and sustainable mortgage
                Vietnam’s housing finance sector is emerging,         market. There is also a significant gap in retail
                though is still small in terms of overall lending.    housing finance delivery channels, where the
                Mortgage lending only began in 1993 with the          needs of the informal income and the urban Q1
                establishment of the Land Law that allows a real      and Q2 segments are not properly addressed.
                estate owner the right to mortgage, guarantee or
                collateralize utilizing land use rights. Mortgage     5.1.2 Housing Finance Demand
                lending accounted for approximately 3 percent of
                GDP in 2011, compared to 5 percent in India, 10       A low degree of financial inclusion limits
                percent in Thailand and 31 percent in Malaysia.       housing finance access for a majority of the
                                                                      population. Only approximately 20 percent33
                Development of real
                estate lending has
                                             Table 5.1 Real Estate Loan Outstanding in the Banking
                been unstable in recent System (trillion, VND)
                years. As shown by
                Table 5.1, real estate As of YE 		                                         2008 2009 2010         2011

                credit volume grew at Retail Home Loans                                     32.1   58.3   104.8   79.7
                an extremely high pace       Developers Loans                              127.5 223.4 208.9 153.5
                until 2010, reaching 20 Total Real Estate Loans                            198.4 343.4 388.0 280.0
                percent of total bank        Total Loans and Credit to the Economy          993    1,468 1,932 2,256
                loans outstanding, then Total Real Estate Loans /Credit to the Economy 20% 23.4% 20.1% 12.4%
                fell sharply following Retail Home Loans/ Credit to the Economy            3.2%    4.0%   5.4%    3.5%
                the market downturn          Developer  Loans /Credit to the Economy       12.8%  15.2%  10.8%    6.8%
                and restrictive credit Source: State Bank of Vietnam / Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
                growth        guidelines
                issued by SBV in 2011.
                Credit to developers was by far the dominant of Vietnam’s population has bank accounts
                activity in the residential lending sector, while and only around half of those actively use the
                mortgage loans represented a small portion of accounts for consumer transactions. The level
                bank portfolios.                                         of financial inclusion is small relative to peer
                                                                         countries in the East Asia Pacific region (e.g.
                There are a range of inter-related factors slowing Thailand has a banking penetration rate of 70
                the growth of the housing finance market. Lack percent). Financial inclusion is particularly


                33
                     SBV Settlement Department - 2012

38	             Vietnam Affordable Housing
small in rural areas, at 17 percent, compared           market segments. In general, mortgage products
with 30 percent of the urban population who             in Vietnam provided by commercial banks are
have financial access.                                  highly standardized, as detailed in Table 5.1.2.
                                                        There are few customized products designed for
Limited consumer financial literacy is a                specific target consumers at different stages of
challenge to accessing financial services.              life cycles, income levels and savings capacity. In
According to a survey conducted by Home                 particular, the informal sector, estimated at 68
Credit Vietnam in 2013, around 50 percent of            percent of the non-agricultural labor force, has
consumers in Vietnam, specifically households           been underserved or neglected by the banking
and SMEs, do not have sufficient financial              system34. There is a general reluctance of the
knowledge to make an appropriate decision               banking sector to lend to this segment, due to
when assuming a consumer loan. Given the large          lack of experience in assessing real incomes,
size and long tenure
of a mortgage loan,        Table 5.2 Standard Mortgage Product offered by Commercial Banks
consumers need to
understand         their     Amortization       Constant Amortization method (CAM) is the prevailing practice
                                                Equated MonthlyInstallments (EMI) are offered by some banks
repayment capacity,
                                  LTV           70% is most common; some banks offer 80%
the         appropriate          Term           15 years is most common; some to 20 years
level of debt, the           Product Types      a. Home improvement / extension
loan tenure, and the                            b. Home purchase (developer-built future home or existing
potentials risks related                        home)
to a floating interest                          c. 30T package
                               Rate Type        Most banks offer a 3, 6, 12-month teaser rate
rate.     Furthermore,          Current         After teaser period: bank adjustable base rate + 3.5-4%; reset
a complex mortgage           Prevailing rate:   quarterly, based on each bank’s internal cost of funds
application process is          10-11%          Some exceptions:
a significant deterrent                         Vietcombank offers 3- and 5-years fixed rate products
for many prospective                            Mekong Housing does not use teaser rate; floating rate reset
                                                every 6 or 12 months
borrowers.      Finally,
due to a lack of           Source: Interviews with financial institutions.
understanding about
consumer rights, potential borrowers can fear expected higher costs of underwriting and
being taken advantage of by banks and thus be managing loans to informal income clients and
reluctant to borrow or resort to money-lenders. the perception of higher risk of default.

Increasing home prices in urban areas over the past     5.1.3 Housing Finance Delivery Actors
decade have made home ownership unattainable
for the middle income Q3 and Q4 segments.               Vietnam’s banking industry has grown
Housing affordability issues persist in spite of the    tremendously since Doi Moi in size, products,
impact of the housing bubble on recalibrating           players and netwok coverage. In the past 25
market prices. Units for first-time home-owners in      years, the banking sector has grown from a single
the Q3 income segment at the price point of VND         actor, the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), to a
300 to 400 million are still not widely available       sizeable network of banks and non-bank financial
across different housing typologies and locations.      institutions with combined value of ~VND
For the bottom of the pyramid or the lowest two         5,650 trillion in assets, equal to 100 percent of
income quintiles, access to affordable homes in         GDP35. These include State-Owned Commercial
urban areas is extremely difficult.                     Banks (SOCBs), Joint-Stock Commercial Banks
                                                        (JSCBs), national policy banks, foreign banks,
Mortgage products lack diversification and              credit cooperatives and a range of microfinance-
customization to meet the real needs of different       providing MFIs, associations and unions.

34
     International Labor Organization, 2014.
35
     USD 240B by Sept 2013, VPBS Vietnam Banking Industry, Jan 2014

                                                                                        Housing Finance          39
           Figure 5.1 The Structure of Vietnam's Banking Sector



                                                            SBV

                  Policy                 Commercial                   Non-Banks                    MFIs
                  Banks                    Banks

                                                  Tier 1              Cooperative                   3 Licensed
                       VBSP
                                                5 SOCBs                 Bank                           MFIs

                                                 Tier 2                   1200 PCFs                Semi-formal
                       VDB
                                                34 JSCBs                                              MFIs

                                                  Tier 3
                                                 109 FBs
           Source: Author analysis based on interviews with key stakeholders.
           Legend: VBSP = Vietnam Bank of Social Policy; SOCB = State-Owned Commercial Bank; JSCB = Joint Stock Com-
           mercial Bank; FB = Foreign Banks; PCF = People’s Credit Funds; MFI = Microfinance Institutions.


      Commercial banks primarily serve the top income             collateralized lending36. Non-conventional
      quintile and are starting to lend to Q3 and                 financial providers, such as community savings
      Q4 segments with formal income. Q3 and Q4                   groups and moneylenders, are expected to fill
      consumers have become a strategic segment for all           in the gap for consumers not wishing to engage
      commercial banks over the last few years through            with formal financial institutions.
      expansion of the mortgage sector induced by the
      30T package and changing risk perceptions. The              People’s Credit Funds are a major player in
      largest three SOCBs – BIDV, Vietinbank and                  providing financial services to rural communes
      Vietcombank – account for a 40 percent share                and some urban and peri-urban areas. The
      of the credit market, which is largely made up of           PCFs are cooperatives that incorporate
      formal salaried workers in urban areas. Foreign             principles of self-help and mutual support into
      banks have also become active, though tend to be            their lending frameworks. PCFs have VND
      relatively conservative in their lending practices.         2.5 trillion in combined loans outstanding.
                                                                  There are 1200 PCFs, which are active across
      There are specialized actors that address the               10 percent of all rural communes. PCFs draw
      needs of the Q1 and Q2 income segments,                     funding from members’ deposits (85 percent)
      particularly in rural areas. Prominent actors               and from the Cooperative Bank (15 percent) to
      in rural areas include Agribank (Vietnam’s                  serve their 1.7 million members, most of whom
      largest commercial bank with 20 percent                     are low and middle income consumers. Housing
      market share), People’s Credit Funds (PCFs),                finance accounts for approximately 12 percent
      MFIs and Women’s Union networks, and the                    of PCFs’ lending activities, with the average loan
      Vietnam Bank of Social Policy (VBSP). Formal                amount at VND 500 million for home purchase,
      documentation of income and employment                      VND 50 million for home improvement, and
      are not the norm within rural areas, so                     loan terms of 3 to 5 years. The Cooperative
      financial providers across all income segments              Bank is the apex bank established to serve the
      use the common method of underwriting                       PCF network. However, it also has 27 branches
      using cash flow recalculation combined with                 that carry out lending activities where PCFs do


      36
           Collateralized lending is not used by the MFIs and the WU network at the bottom of the pyramid

40	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
not have presence. PCFs are regulated both as                  100 million, of which only three are formally
cooperatives and as financial institutions.                    licensed. Only the top two MFIs, CEP Fund
                                                               and TYM, are of significant size. CEP and
The MFI sector is small and focuses on poverty                 TYM have approximately VND 2.1 trillion
reduction, with 90 percent of total lending                    in combined loans outstanding, with housing
targeting Q1 borrowers, who are mostly women                   microfinance products amounting for VND
in the rural areas. There are 50 MFIs with                     300 billion. Refer to Table 5.4 for details on
an average loan portfolio of around VND                        the CEP and TYM housing products.

 Table 5.3 Housing Finance Actors by Income Type and Urban/Rural

      Income             Income Type                             Housing Finance Providers
      Quintile
                                                   Formal           Formal                Semi/In-formal
                                                   Urban             Rural
         Q5                 Formal                 All Banks
                           Informal                                Agribank              Relatives / Friends

         Q4                 Formal                 All Banks                          Rotating Savings Groups

                           Informal            Some JSCBs
                            Formal                 All Banks                        Community Savings Groups
         Q3
                                                   PCFs (5%)       Agribank
                                                                  PCFs (95%)
                           Informal            Some JSCBs                           Money Lenders/ Pawn Shops
                                                PCFs (5%)
                                                                                           Supplier Inputs
         Q2                 Formal                 PCFs (5%)      PCFs (95%)
                           Informal                               WU Network          Unlicensed MFIs (for Q1)

                         Poor &                                   MFIs (90%)
         Q1           Moderately Poor          MFIs (10%)         WU Network
                           Poor List                                 VBSP

 Source: Interviews with financial institutions.




 Table 5.4 Comparison of Housing Micro-Loan Products
                                                   CEP		                                   TYM
    Max Loan Amount           VND 30 million                         Cycle 1: VND 3-4 million
                                                                     Cycle 2: VND 3-6 million
         Rate                 0.6%/month on a flat basis             0.25% / Weekly flat payment
         Term                 Max 5 years                            70-100 weeks
   Compulsory Savings         Savings of 0.25%/week or 1%/month      Cycle 1:  VND 10,000/week at rate of 3.6%/year
                              of Original Loan Amount                Cycle 2: requires a savings of 10% of disbursed
                              Rate: 0.1% per month                   loan amount (e.g., 90% LTV) at same rate of
                                                                     3.6%/year
  Effective Interest Rate ~15% to 20%                                ~28% to 29%
                          Assuming monthly repayment                 Assuming loan of VND 4MM, weekly repayment
                          frequency and 18 to 60 months term         frequency and 70 to 100 weeks term
 Source: Interviews with financial institutions.



Vietnam’s Women’s Union (WU) also                              collection and management. The WU, together
plays a critical role in the operations of the                 with the Ward People’s Committees, form a
microfinance sector. Established in 1930 and                   type of informal credit bureau. The borrowing
consisting of 15 million members, WU works                     history of community members are recorded by
with VBSP and MFIs in consumer education,                      the two institutions and used to great effect in
community savings, and loan servicing,                         controlling lending risks and preventing over-
                                                                                              Housing Finance          41
      indebtedness. Some JSCBs, such as Dong A              Opportunities exist to extend coverage to better
      Bank, have started to use the WU network to           serve the urban low income. Commercial banks
      reach the low income segment in the rural area        can play an important role in scaling existing
      for income generation loans.                          products to a broader set of customers or moving
                                                            down-market to better serve the bankable Q2
      As the non-profit policy lender, Vietnam Bank         and Q3 income households. Meanwhile, Tier 2
      of Social Policy (VBSP) reaches the poor list         banks may be able to enter into the low income
      to provide highly subsidized housing finance          market by working further with associations
      products. VBSP is fully sponsored by the              and MFIs to channel housing micro-loans.
      government and enjoys tax-free status, funding        Better product segmentation and tailoring will
      from the state budget, and no requirements for        also be critical to meet the unique needs of each
      insured deposits. For lending purposes, VBSP          market segment, such as flexible appraisal and
      mobilizes large amounts of capital, which             collection tools to account for borrowers with
      include funding from the government and               informal income. At the product level, lenders
      IFIs and a compulsory 2 percent of deposits           will need to start considering adapting loan size,
      from other commercial banks. VBSP has 64              term and payment options and learning from
      branches, 8000 officers and staff covering            international examples38.
      98 percent of all communes in the country.
      It uses mass organization channels for all            5.1.4 Systematic Sector Challenges
      customer-facing activities, ranging from
      sourcing customers and lending appraisals to          Despite impressive growth of the housing
      disbursement and collections. VBSP has two            finance sector in the past two decades there
      housing subsidy products. The first is housing        are. The main challenges include a legacy of
      loans for the rural poor without existing homes       poor asset quality, low capital adequacy, tepid
      (via Decision 167). The second is lending             credit growth, insufficient risk management
      and technical support for those in the flood-         tools, and a lack of long-term funding to address
      prone Central and Mekong Delta regions (via           asset-liability mismatches. SBV is pushing for
      Decision 716). Both have a highly subsidized          consolidation of the sector to reduce the total
      flat interest rate of 3 percent37 that is well        number of banks by 50 percent over the next 3
      below prevailing MFI rates.                           to 5 years and ultimately to 18 banks by 202039.
                                                            The speed of bank consolidation, coupled with
      The needs of Q1 and Q2 or informal income             systematic recapitalization of the banking sector,
      consumers living in urban areas are not fully         will determine how fast the banking industry
      addressed by the banking sector. Some of the          will recover and move forward.
      JSCBs, as Tier 2 commercial banks, have built
      products for informal income customers to             The lack of transparency in debt classification
      differentiate their brand. The Tier 2 JSCBs tend      hides the severity of nonperforming loans
      to lend to informal income customers that are         (NPL) and highlights the shortcomings of
      high income and low risk. Lending volume is still     reporting standards. Stricter loan classification
      small, accounting for approximately 10 to 20          and provisioning rules will be in force in 2015
      percent of their mortgage portfolio. Meanwhile,       with the issuance of Circular 2 by SBV, aimed at
      PCFs have 5 percent of their footprint in urban       tightening risk management and enforcement of
      areas to serve the Q2 segment and the two largest     more consistent and uniform standards for the
      MFIs, CEP and TYM, provide coverage to some           treatment of debt, collateral, and NPLs. SBV and
      of the Q1 segment in urban areas.                     State-Owned Commercial Banks (SOCBs) have
                                                            acknowledged that SBV’s Circular 2 may bring to


      37
          VBSP discussion
      38
         India’s specialized Housing Finance Companies provide a good source of best practice through their
      understanding in addressing and underwriting informal income workers.
      39
         World Bank, 2014

42	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
light an additional VND270 trillion40 (~US$13                                   Sources of funding for financial institutions are
billion) of NPLs in the system, which have                                      limited. The banking sector in Vietnam relies
been primarily a result of defaults on developer                                primarily on consumer deposits for funding,
financing once sales slowed and demand for high-                                complemented by corporate bonds, and
priced speculative stock evaporated. The Vietnam                                business current accounts. Consumers generally
Asset Management Company (VAMC) was                                             prefer short-term deposit of 3-months, in spite
established to off-load impaired assets from                                    of the fact that the deposit rate is currently being
banks’ balance sheets. Rules for handling NPLs                                  capped by the SBV at 5.5 percent. Based on data
and sales to VAMC have been issued – lastly                                     collected by StoxPlus in 2011, as per Figure 5.3,
through an SBV Directive in January 2015, with                                  banks suffer an asset-liability mismatch where
the view of achieving an NPL ratio of 3 percent                                 medium and long-term savings account for 16
by the end of 2015. Even after the restructuring                                percent of total banks funding, while medium
of bad debt, NPLs in April 2014 stands at ~4.2%                                 and long-term loans account for 41 percent of
which is significantly higher than other South                                  liabilities. However, the SBV Circular 36 of
East Asian countries as show in Figure 5.2 below.                               November 2014 put a 90 percent and 80 percent
                                                                                limit on the Loan-to-Deposit ratio for SOCBs
     Figure 5.2 NPL Ratio in Vietnam, Compared                                  and Joint-Stock Commercial Banks (JSCBs),
     to other Asian Countries                                                   respectively. Unfortunately, this limit does
     NPL Ratio 1/
     ( In percent)
                                                                                not only encompass deposits, but also external
     5                                                                          funding sources. This prohibits de facto banks to
                                                                                use the capital market if they reach the ceiling,
     4
                                                                                since this would not improve the ratio, even
     3                                                                          though issuing bonds is conventionally used to
                                                                                address excessive LDRs.
     2


     1                                                                          Practical and sustainable solutions to asset-
                                                                                liability mismatches will depend on banks’
     0
            Vietnam     Philippines   ThaiLand     Malaysia    Indonesia        ability to raise long-term funding through the
     1/ Vietnam as of April 2014 Philippines as of September 2013 , Thailand,
     Malaysia and Indonesia as of end 2013
                                                                                capital market. While the bond market has
     Source: IMF Vietnam Country Report No. 14/311,                             grown significantly over the last five years, it is
     October 2014.                                                              still small - about 16 percent of GDP (half of
                                                                                the stock market)42. The constraint is due to
There has been an improvement in liquidity                                      the lack of liquidity and the small size of the
constraints in the banking system. This has been                                institutional investor base: the insurance sector,
achieved mainly by deleveraging of financial                                    the mutual fund industry, and the state pension
actors, since SBV instructed banks to limit                                     system, Social Insurance43, are all small in size.
Loan-to-Deposit Ratio (LDR) and reduce credit                                   To stimulate the growth of the pension system,
growth. The global LDR of the banking system                                    a reform has been prepared that would involve
declined from 107 percent to about 88 percent                                   an increase in the number of contributors,
between early 2010 and early 201441. However,                                   but its effect will not be significant in the near
the situation varies between institutions. The                                  future. Banks are in fact the largest group of
‘Key Statistical Ratios’ for banks, established by                              bond investors today. The largest bond issuer,
SBV, show a ratio of 95 percent for state-owned                                 with around 90 percent share, is the government
banks, compared with 76 percent for private                                     together with government-guaranteed entities.
sector banks.                                                                   SOCBs, such as Vietcombank, BIDV and


40
   Macquarie Research, 2013.
41
   IMF Article IV Consultation, October 2014.
42
   Reported as of 2011.
43
   The Social Insurance, a pay-you-go system, covers only 20 percent of the workforce and allows early
withdrawals of lump-sums meant to be paid to new retirees.

                                                                                                               Housing Finance         43
      Vietinbank, have begun to issue corporate             bond market (e.g. addressing primary market,
      bonds, though the tenure is still limited to a        market infrastructure, investor base, corporate
      maximum of three years and the volume is small.       bond framework). Yet, concrete results for
      Authorities and stakeholders are working on           capital market development will take time44.
      steps and reforms to improve the capacity of the

           Figure 5.3 Bank Loan and Deposit Break-down by Term, 2011
                                                                   Deposit Due       Special Deposit
                                                                      2%                  1%

                      Mid term                                         Demand        Med & LT
                        14%                                            Deposit       Savings
                                 Long term                                            16%
                                                                        16%
                                   27%


                         Short term                                              Short term
                           59%                                                      65%



           Bank Loan Break down by Term-2011                  Deposit Breakdown by term-2011

           Source: Macquarie Research, 2013.



      More macro-prudential measures and                       into consideration a household’s basic living
      standards are needed to ensure the safe                  expenditures and considers the capacity to
      development of the housing finance sector.               repay a housing finance loan only on their
      Existing lending practices in Vietnam are risky          income surplus46. Furthermore, some banks
      compared to international standards, which               are more advanced than others, Vietcombank
      have been strengthened in many countries                 has developed a proprietary credit scoring
      following the sub-prime crisis. The following are        system for underwriting, for example.
      some key areas that require some attention.
                                                            b.	 Loan purpose standards. Currently, banks
      a.	 Capacity-to-pay standards. As shown                   do not differentiate mortgage products
          in Table 5.5, Debt-to-Income (DTI)                    between home purchase or use for other
          guidelines, to calculate payment capacity,            purposes such as investment. Historical
          vary significantly from bank to bank. Some            performance data across many international
          banks employ more conservative guidelines             markets has shown that the default rate
          in line with international standards, while           of home loans for investment tends to be
          others seem willing to take on more risk,             higher than owner-occupied loans. In many
          allowing DTI limits up to 60-70 percent.              markets, lenders price investment-related
          International benchmarks for capacity-to-pay          risk with a higher interest rate and limit the
          assessments, specifically Debt to Income45            number of investment loans allowed by one
          ratios, are in the range of 30-45 percent with        borrower. Requiring banks to segregate loans
          higher rates only applied to low-risk customer        by purpose and to track the performance
          profiles in higher income segments. For lower         separately over time can enable banks to
          income borrowers, the residual income ratio           analyze the different risks and put in place
          methodology is usually preferred, as it takes         appropriate underwriting guidelines and



      44
         With the technical assistance of the World Bank
      45
         Debt to Income = Total Debt Obligations (mortgage installment + other existing debt obligations) /
      household income assessed
      46
         Residual income Ratio = Mortgage Installment / Residual Income (household income after tax less
      household expenditures and other debt obligations).

44	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
     Table 5.5 Examples of Capacity-to-Pay Guidelines by Select Lending Institutions
      Financial Institutions	            Capacity to Pay Guidelines			                       Risk Level
      Vietcombank         Max DTI of 60% on fully documented income
                          (including the 30T package)
      Dong A Bank         Max DTI of 70% - higher income segment                               Less
                          Max DTI of 50% - likely for household income of VND 20MM         Conservative
      Coop Bank           Max DTI of 70% for Civil Servants (unsecured lending)
      HCMC Branch         Max DTI of 60-65% for Self Employed
      VP Bank             DTI of 30-45% depending on segments
      Mekong Housing Bank DTI of 30%                                                    More Conservative
      Lienviet Postbank   No specific ratio, using residual income approach
      Peoples Credit Fund 50% of Residual Income Ratio (HH income less all HH
      District 2 HCM      expenditures)
     Source: Interviews with financial institutions.




      pricing. Loan purpose differentiation would             examples include introducing an interest
      also allow SBV the option to introduce                  rate buffer, term extension and smoothing
      tighter prudential guidelines during periods            out variation by using a 12-month average.
      of economic stress, as deemed necessary.
                                                           d.	 Informal income assessment standards.
c.	 Risk management guidelines for interest                    There are a number of instruments that are
    rates. The floating interest rate system in                needed to encourage commercial banks to
    Vietnam can induce a shock to households’                  serve credit-worthy households active in
    capacity to pay for their loan. Highly volatile            the informal sector, while mitigating the
    interest rate movement was experienced                     risks. These include underwriting standards
    as recently as 2009 and again in 2011,                     and complementary tools to help banks to
    when rates moved up from ~7 percent to                     estimate a household’s income level. This
    a high of 18 percent. Volatile periods have                could be supported by regular surveys in
    had a significant and negative impact to                   different regions, promotion of savings-
    both borrowers and lenders. While the                      for-housing products that enable lenders
    constant amortization method provides                      to check the savings capacity of prospective
    some protection against interest rate risk, it             borrowers, as well as exploring the feasibility
    does not fully address the magnitude of the                of a guarantee product specific to this type
    potential payment shock of a 11 percent                    of borrowers. This strategy would also
    rate rise over a two year period. There are                include stimulating certain banks47 that are
    product features as well as bank’s internal                already familiar with the dynamics of the
    rate setting and resetting processes that can              informal economy to be active in the housing
    be strengthened to help smooth out macro-                  microfinance sector. Pilot projects could be
    economic fluctuations and mitigate interest                initiated to test the viability of the tools and
    rate risks for the banking sector. Some                    practices developed for this purpose.


                                 Box 5.1 List of Relevant Regulations Issued by SBV


     Notable regulations related to credit institutions and housing finance include the following:

        l   	Decision No. 1627/2001/QD-NHNN of December 31, 2001, on issuing regulations on
             lending by credit institutions to clients.



47
      For example, Dong A Bank or HD Bank.

                                                                                          Housing Finance         45
                                Box 5.1 List of Relevant Regulations Issued by SBV
                                                                                                (continued)
          l	Decision No. 493/2005/QD-NHNN of April 22, 2005 promulgating the regulation on
            classification of debts, appropriation, setting up and use of reserves for handling credit risks
            in banking activities of credit institutions.
          l	Circular 13/2010/TT-NHNN , issued on May 20, 2010, stipulating the prudential regulations

            for credit institutions. This was the most comprehensive set of rules toward full compliance
            with Basel I. This framework covered requirements for capital adequacy, credit exposure
            limit, liquidity risk management and investment in subsidiaries/non-subsidiary companies.
          l	Order No. 09/2010/L-CTN of June 29, 2010, on the promulgation of the Law on Credit

            Institutions, which was passed on June 16, 2010. This Law defines rules and procedures for
            the establishment, organization, operation, special control, reorganization and dissolution
            of credit institutions.
          l	Circular No. 19/2010/TT-NHNN , issued on September 27, 2010, to amend the prudential

            ratios in activities of credit institutions. One limiting rule here is the ratio limit of credit
            exposure over funding sources. This limit is 80% for banks and 85% for non-banking credit
            institutions.
          l	Joint Circular No. 20/2011/TTLT-BTP-BTNMT , issued on November 18, 2011, guiding the

            registration of the mortgage of land use rights and land-attached assets.
          l	Circular No. 22/2011/TT-NHNN , dated August 30, 2011, supplementing some articles of

            the Circular No. 13/2010/TT-NHNN, stipulating prudential ratios in operations of credit
            institutions.
          l	Circular No. 02/2013/TT-NHNN , issued on January 21, 2013, on classification of assets,

            levels and method of setting up of risk provisions and use of provisions against credit risks
            in the banking activity of credit institutions, foreign banks’ branches.
          l	Inter-Ministerial Circular No. 01/2014/TTLT-NHNN-BXD-BTP-BTNMT , issued 25 April

            2014, guiding the procedure for mortgage of houses.
          l	Circular No. 36/2014/TT-NHNN , issued November 20, 2014 stipulating minimum safety

            limits and ratios for transactions performed by credit institutions and branches of foreign
            banks. This includes minimum capital safety ratio, credit limits, solvency ratios, maximum
            ratio of short-term capital sources used as the medium and long-term loans, limit on capital
            contribution and stock purchase and loan-to-deposit ratios.
          l	Directive No. 02/CT-NHNN , issued 27 January 2015, on furthering the handling of NPLs of

            credit institutions. This directive issued instructions on the handling, legal framework and
            sale of NPLs to the Vietnam Asset Management Company (VAMC) to reduce the ratio of
            NPLs to less than 3% by the end of 2015 as stated at the Resolution No. 01/ND-CP, dated 3
            January 2015.

        Vietnam has divided capital into Tier 1 and Tier 2, while risk assets are divided into six
        categories with risk weight factors being 0%, 20%, 50%, 100%, 150% and 250%, the highest
        of which has been given to real estate. The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of 9% is considered
        a robust development, given international standards. Total loans and extensions of credit
        outstanding is limited to 25% of equity capital of banks. Credit institutions must constantly
        maintain liquid reserve ratios of 10% for commercial banks. There are also rules governing
        the use of short-term capital sources as medium and long-term loans (maximum of 60% for
        commercial banks), as well as progress in the classification and treatment of NPLs.



      Lack of an effective foreclosure process forces      foreclosure arise due to complex and lengthy
      lenders and developers to bear a significant         judicial processes and costly foreclosure
      part of consumers’ credit risk. Banks can legally    proceedings. Foreclosure is uncommon and
      foreclose on a default loan but often prefer to      currently carries negative social connotations
      resolve defaults through direct negotiations         for banks involved. For developer-built
      with home-owners. Barriers to conventional           products, banks often rely on the developer’s
46	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
support in repossessing the property. In many         of GDP48, bad debt of ~9 percent49 in the
cases, developers provide a guarantee to the          banking sector, and a home price decline of
banks so that developers would be responsible         between 30-40 percent50 from peak to trough,
for property repossession and resale in the           the GoV launched the 30T package in June
event of borrower default within the first few        2013 to address the over-supply of high-end
years of home purchase. It would be critical and      inventories, waning consumer and business
advantageous to the banking sector for SBV to         confidence, and stagnation in real estate
promote an orderly and effective foreclosure          production and consumption.
system. International experience has shown
that foreclosure is an important foundational         The 30T package aimed to shift developers
tool in helping banks manage lending risk and         and banks from production of speculation-
maintain loan portfolio quality.                      prone high-end commercial housing and
                                                      issuance of mortgages primarily for the high-
Market data and information to support                income. By incentivizing and realigning
lending decisions is still not readily available.     market interest toward real demand from
There is a critical need for financial institutions   middle and low income consumers, GoV
to have informative data on residential real          sought to diversify and reignite real estate
estate market trends around housing stocks,           production and lending to stimulate the whole
current and planned production, sales and             economy. SBV and MoC co-developed the
pricing movements for key markets but also            governance and regulatory framework of the
on a nationwide basis. Data availability enables      30T package. While SBV manages consumer
lenders to make informed decisions on real            eligibility criteria and loan disbursement
estate portfolio lending exposure. For example,       and performance on the demand side, MoC
lenders would be able to balance lending limits       is responsible for the same activities on the
during real estate downturns and to identify          developer supply side.
potential risk in geographical areas as related
to over-supply or unaffordable pricing. In
                                                        Table 5.6   Key Characteristics of the 30T Package
addition, a real estate database accessible to
the real estate sector’s stakeholders would             Lending       VND 9T for developer loans; VND
contribute toward a faster, cheaper, and more           Goals         21T for mortgage loans
reliable collateral valuation process, to support       Interest Rate Concessional rate of 50% of average
better lending decisions.                                             lending rate (max ceiling at 6%)
                                                        Loan Term     Max 15 years
                                                        Program       3 years (June 2013 - June 2016)
5.2 Assessment of the 30 Trillion
                                                        Duration
Stimulus Package
                                                        Source: SBV
The 30 Trillion (30T) package is GoV’s
broad-based economic stimulus program,
focused on stabilizing the housing sector,            The 30T package struggled with low uptake
and the economy in general. It has largely            and market skepticism in its first year of its
achieved its goals, but primarily benefits            launch. The 30T package represents the first
formally-employed middle class households             attempt by the GoV to address economic
at high economic cost to the government,              downturns linked to volatility in the real
which is not fiscally sustainable. Amidst             estate sector. Hence, the initial program
a severe economic downturn driven by                  structure was not well aligned with consumer
the surge in credit peaking at 183 percent            needs and was met with public skepticism


48
   As of 2011 - IMF and WB FASB - 2014
49
   As of 2012 as confirmed by the SBV as per article- www.reuters.com/article/2012/10/24/markets-ratings-
vietnam-idUSWNA826820121024
50
   CBRE (peak in 2008 and trough in 2013)

                                                                                       Housing Finance       47
      and low participation. In August 2014, the            between the SBV and participating banks are
      GoV built out user-friendly implementation            as follows:
      guidelines based on feedback from the public
      and lending institutions. Eligibility criteria,       a.	 SBV refinances both mortgage loans
      administrative procedures, and transfer                   and developer loans disbursed by banks
      mechanisms were amended, all of which has                 at a concessional refinancing rate. The
      led to noticeable increase in program uptake.             concessional rate is calculated at 50 percent
      Program highlights are detailed below:                    of prevailing banks’ lending rate and
                                                                capped at 4.5 percent (based on a ceiling
      a. Mortgage eligibility criteria (demand side):           rate of 6 percent less 1.5 percent margin
                                                                to the banks). The 1.5 percent margin is
      -	 Maximum price of eligible properties is                intended to cover the bank’s operating and
         VND 1.05 billion for home purchase,                    credit costs.
         construction, expansion or improvement             b.	 On a monthly basis, banks collect
         for owner-occupied buyers and for rental /             installment payments (principal and
         lease-to-purchase investors.                           interest) from borrowers and banks re-pay
      -	 Eligible borrowers include: public and                 principal and interest at the refinance rate
         government officials and employees;                    of the prior month to the SBV.
         employees of socio-political organizations,        c.	 Banks enjoy a 3-year grace period on
         public service delivery and military agencies;         principal re-payment, with the first
         and low income individuals who either have             principal due at the beginning of the 4th
         no house or a home with average area of <8             year.
         m2 per person, and either with permanent           d.	 SBV charges banks Overdue Interest Rate
         residence or with temporary residence,                 of 150 percent of the prevailing refinancing
         but with social insurance for at least one             rate for unpaid repayments.
         year in the area. There are no eligibility
         specifications for borrowers’ income.              The actual cost of the 30T package at
      - Financial products have a maximum loan              completion is difficult to determine, with
         term of 15 years and require a minimum             heavy dependence on macro-economic
         down payment of 20 percent.                        factors, such as inflation and sovereign risk.
                                                            These factors drive the yield on public debt
      b. Developer eligibility criteria (supply side):      throughout the 15-year repayment period
                                                            for the mortgages supported in the program.
      - Eligible investments must be categorized as         The higher the nominal interest rates of 15-
        social housing.                                     year local currency treasury bonds, the higher
      - Eligible investments must have approval             the cost of the program and its subsidies. At
        in writing by competent authorities with            the current yield of 7.75 percent on a 15-year
        cleared land and construction permits;              local-currency treasury bonds, the implicit
        commercial projects being converted to              subsidy cost for mortgage loans and developer
        social housing must have approval by                loans are 23.8 percent and 7.1 percent of total
        authorities.                                        capital, respectively. Consequently, the total
      - Financial products require developer equity         cost of the subsidy in the current environment
        of at least 30 percent.                             would be VND 5.6 trillion51 or a weighted
                                                            subsidy rate of 18.8 percent.
      The 30T program disburses through
      SBV and provides participating lending                The cost of the subsidy would significantly
      institutions with capital refinancing with            increase should perceived sovereign risk
      operating margins for banks incorporated.             or expected inflation increase without
      The refinancing and repayment mechanics               adjustment of the program’s refinancing


      51
           VND 5.6T = (VND 21T X 23.8%) + (VND 9T X 7.1%)

48	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
 Table 5.7 Implicit Subsidy Rate in the 30T Program and Sensitivity Analysis
                              Mortgage Finance 	 		                       Developer Finance
  Real int /                      Inflation			                              Inflation
  T Bonds            3%          5%      8%        15%            3%        5%       8%        15%
  1%               3.3%       15.1%   29.1%       50.8%         1.6%      7.8%    16.2%       32.0%
  2%               9.5%       20.2%   33.0%       53.0%         4.8%     10.8%    18.7%       33.9%
  3%              15.1%       24.9%   36.6%       55.1%         7.8%     13.5%    21.2%       35.8%
  4%              20.2%       29.1%   39.9%       57.0%        10.8%     16.2%    23.5%       37.6%
 Source: Authors’ calculations.



terms, as shown in the sensitivity analysis in        mortgage tenure of 15 years, future economic
Tables 5.7 and 5.8. If the yield on treasury          and/ or real estate downturns can undermine
bonds would increase to 16 percent or above,          banks’ capacity to repay, particularly those
the implicit subsidy cost would reach 50              with a high concentration of developer risk.
percent or higher for mortgage loans. This            There are also inherent risks to SBV serving
scenario is possible as the yield of treasury         as both a creditor of a bank and the lender of
bonds previously did reach 15 percent, on             last resort.
September 20, 2008.
                                                      The cost of the program may be lowered with
A hidden cost of the program is the                   a high loan pre-payment ratio. Such pre-
counterparty risk assumed by the SBV vis-             payment would result in shorter loan terms
a-vis the 15 transactional banks. Such risk           that reduce total subsidy cost. Pre-payment
is not to be ignored in light of the weak             may be triggered by factors such as consumers’
structure of the banking sector, which has            adversity toward debt and a low pre-payment
suffered from non-performing loans, weak              penalty. However, the current level of the
capital adequacy ratios and weak liquidity            interest rate, at well below market rates,
by some of the smaller banks. Given the long          makes this outcome unlikely today.

 Table 5.8 National Program Status as of February 28, 2015
  Type                      Loans         % of            No. of Loans      Loans         Avg Loan
                          Committed      Target           Committed       Disbursed       Amount
  Mortgage                 VND 6.4T       30%               14,064         VND 4.4T       VND 453M
  DeveloperLoan            VND 4.4T       49%                 34           VND 1.7T       VND 130 B

 Source: MoC.



With nearly one third of its total funding            the course of its implementation, with latest
committed at the end of 2014, the 30T                 data from the end of 2014. In the event that the
package is expected to complete its funding           30T package will not reach its disbursement
target by the end of 2016. On the supply              goals by the targeted completion date of June
side, MoC has pre-approved a total of 100             2016, the MoC and MoF have the option of
projects by YE 2014 to fulfill its target by the      extending the program.
program’s termination date. Meanwhile, on
the demand side, the SBV has appointed an             The 30T package has been successful at
additional 10 commercial banks to participate         reorienting developers and lenders toward
in the 30T package to ensure that the target          the affordable housing market, yet at a
will be achieved. By the end of February              high economic cost to government, which
2015, the 30T package had committed VND               is not fiscally sustainable. Although, the
10.8 trillion and disbursed VND 6.1 trillion.         30T package has had a broad impact on the
Table 5.8 specifies the disbursement and              economy, of most significance is the shift of
commitment of the 30T package throughout              the real estate sector’s focus from high-end
                                                                                      Housing Finance    49
      speculation-prone products to the Q3 and                    households is enhanced by around VND
      Q4 income segments with real housing needs.                 100 to 200 million, while the fixed interest
      By the completion of all of its loans the 30T               rate ceiling of 6 percent avoids risk of
      stimulus package would support a projected                  interest rate volatility53.
      total of 45,000 households in mortgages
      for their home purchase, improvement or                   d.	Increased housing production at an
      construction and finance the development of                  affordable purchase point. Of the 34
      65,000 affordable units52. Other important                   projects committed by November 2014,
      impacts include:                                             several have units at ~40 m2 and purchase
                                                                   price of around VND 350 million, that
      a.	 Improved    consumer                 and   business      are affordable to Q2 households, all the
          confidence.                                              way through to units priced at VND 1.05
                                                                   billion aimed at the Q4 income segment.
      b.	 Strengthened mortgage lending. Mortgage
          lending volume has grown for participating            e.	 A reduction in unfinished and vacant
          banks (in one case, by 700-800 percent) and               projects by allowing conversion of
          developers have relied on these mortgages                 commercial properties into affordable
          in selling stock (in one case, 100 percent of             units. Out of 34 projects approved under
          volume in Q4 of 2014 was sold with 30T                    the 30T package, 13 projects with a total
          package mortgages).                                       of 15,000 units (or ~50% of total units
                                                                    approved) were converted, allowing
      c.	 Extended affordability and reduced                        projects to either increase off-take or draw
          default risk. The purchasing power of                     new capital to enable completion.


           Table 5.9 Status of the 30T Package Disbursement

               Developer Projects		                  Hanoi	      HCM City	          Others		         Total

           # Projects                                  13            14                7               34
           # Units                                   11,900        12,048           5,228            29,176
           Smallest Unit Size                          36            42               30
           Lowest Price/m2 (million, VND)              10            9                7
           Lowest Home Price (million, VND)           360           378              210

           Source: MoC, as of November 2014.



      Despite these results, the 30 trillion package            bond rate and inflation) and can be planned
      is not an economically efficient approach                 at a more predictable and transparent cost to
      to expand access to mortgage finance and is               government. The NPV for a down-payment
      recommended to be restructured. Economic                  subsidy, at current market conditions to
      analysis shows that the same level of                     achieve the same level of affordability, is 26.7%
      affordability to households can be achieved at            of the loan value. This compares with the NPV
      much lower cost and risk to government using              of an interest rate subsidy of 23.8%, but which
      alternative subsidy instruments. A buy-down               can easily increase with slight changes in real
      subsidy or down-payment subsidy are less                  interest rates to well above 30% of the total
      vulnerable to changes in the macro-economic               loan value. Meanwhile, a buy-down subsidy
      environment (i.e. volatility in the treasury              is the most efficient instrument to improve


      52
         Assuming that the average loan amount (mortgages) and number of units (developer loans) achieved by
      30T Program by November 31, 2014 would be similarly replicated throughout the remainder of the scheme.
      53
         Interest rates increased by 8 percent over a two-year period between 2009 and 2011, Vietnam EIU, 2012.

50	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
affordability for the target groups (Q3, Q4),
with a NPV of 9.2% of the loan value in
current conditions. The impact is amplified
if such a subsidy is linked to mortgages that
use Equal Payment Installments, which gives
an affordability enhancement of 25-30%.
Hence, it is recommended that the 30 trillion
program is restructured and shifted into a
buy-down subsidy, which will provide more
fiscally sustainable solution for government.




                                                Housing Finance   51
      6
      Chapter

                Land Management and
                Urban Planning

                6.1 Overall Context For Urban Land                      between places of residence and places of
                                                                        work or access to other urban amenities,
                Land management is widely recognized as one             increases in congestion, pollution and the risk
                of the biggest challenges in the housing sector         of exacerbating social exclusion of the low
                and beyond. Demand for land in expanding                income. Integrated planning and transparent
                urban and peri-urban areas is high and planned          decision-making should maintain an emphasis
                supply has not been able to keep pace. Limited          on mixed-use, mixed-income, and medium-high
                supply contributes to rising prices and reduced         density developments, as well as connectivity to
                affordability, with particularly adverse impacts        affordable public transport options, in order to
                on the poor and poverty reduction efforts.              support sustainable and inclusive urban growth.

                Public sector tools for land management                 Other major challenges to the availability of
                and taxation have not been able to keep up              accessible, serviced and affordable land for
                with rapid growth in consumer demand, real              affordable housing include:
                estate development, urban expansion, and
                the resulting land transactions. Key blockages          -	Desirable sites in or near urban centers are
                include:(i) tight urban growth boundaries; (ii)           mostly off the market.
                underdeveloped and vacant land due to land              -	Development of peri-urban sites is arduous,
                holding, speculation, and the public sector’s             with challenges in site clearance negotiation
                lack of enforcement in cases of continued non-            and compensation.
                development of publicly assigned land; (iii)            -	The regulatory framework is underdeveloped
                under-investment in public transportation,                to support land sharing for cross-subsidy of
                particularly mass public transit54; (iv) under-           housing production.
                taxation of land, which rewards speculative land-       -	Local governments might lack resources
                holding and reduces the government revenues               or political will to deliver trunk and site
                required to support inclusive urbanization.               infrastructure in a timely manner for social
                                                                          housing projects.
                Land use and urban planning efforts have                -	For households, quality of infrastructure
                focused largely on peripheral as well as                  surrounding the site can be low and hinder site
                homogenous developments in terms of use,                  infrastructure connections.
                density and income. Large-scale, unconnected
                and single function developments at the                 6.2 Management and Administration
                urban peripheries result in urban sprawl and            of Urban Land
                inefficiencies in cities. These inefficiencies
                include long distances and travel times                 6.2.1 Legislative Framework


                54
                   In cities such as HCMC, the development and completion of bridges, highways, and major
                transportation infrastructure lead to desirability of land around transportation nodes and ease of supply.

52	             Vietnam Affordable Housing
A solid legislative framework exists to guide          and implementation persist55. The duplication
and oversee the land sector, with efforts by           of responsibilities has combined with a lack of
policy makers to gradually adapt to market             coordination to create inefficiencies in land
dynamics and needs. The Land Governance                management that are widely recognized but
Assessment Framework (LGAF) study on                   have proved difficult to change.
Vietnam rated the country highly in the
strength of land policies and regulations. The         State-driven land acquisitions and compensation
2013 Land Law, updated from 2003, made                 levels remain contentious. Complaints on land
adjustments to reflect market growth and               prices for acquisition were reported as making
needs, enhanced developer accountability in            up to 70 percent of all pubic complaints to
land and real estate development, clarified            government, based on 2005 data. This could
administrative procedures around land use, and         adversely affect tenure security and investment in
restated the importance of citizen participation       land and property. The Land Law and its guiding
and protection in land transactions and                decrees have, step by step, provided fairly clear
development. The Land Law, in conjunction              eligibility criteria concerning compensation,
with the Civil Code No. 33 of 2005 which               support and resettlement for land-users who
provides legal foundation for civil transactions,      hold no Land Use Rights Certificate (LURC)56.
regulates the development of cadastral maps;           This equally applies to the current Land Law
land use planning and mechanisms; land use             2013 that provides specific regulations on what
rights; land allocation, lease and reclamation;        land use deeds can be used as an alternative to
land management entities and administrative            the LURC (e.g. Decree 43/2014). However, in
procedures; land users rights and responsibilities;    practice, there are cases where compensation is
and land disputes and complaints.                      not provided to land holders not in possession of
                                                       a LURC. Also, when compensation is provided, it
A major challenge for the land sector’s legislative    is calculated based on the Land Price Framework
framework is the complexity and inconsistency of       (LPF), which grossly undervalues the price of
procedures, implementation, and enforcement.           land, and compensation is delivered at once,
Provisions outlined in laws and accompanying           without time consideration for land occupants
legislation can be confusing, cumbersome and           to restore their livelihood, change jobs, and be
inconsistent. Secondary legislation is frequently      compensated for lost income, as stipulated in the
either not in place or not implemented. There          2003 Land Law.
are several ministries with responsibilities for
land management or development. For example,           6.2.2 Land Administration
MoC is primarily responsible for physical
planning, housing and real estate markets,             Land administration is complex, underdeveloped
urban development and land use planning,               and lacking in transparency. Information on
while MoNRE leads on land policies and land            land, including detailed local-level land maps, is
management and Ministry of Home Affairs                not easily available, reducing tenure security, even
(MoHA) is responsible for setting boundaries           for formal land use right holders with LURCs and
for urban areas and MoF is responsible for             BOLUCs. MoC is looking to the Torrens system
fiscal policies, including land and property-          and Sweden for advice on land registration.
related taxes. Cases of inconsistent legislation       MoNRE and MoC are collaborating in efforts


 55
    A World Bank report (2011:162) ‘Compulsory Land Acquisition and Conversion in Vietnam: The
Conceptual Approach, Land Valuation and Grievance Redress Mechanisms Ha Noi’ reports: “Vietnam’s
National Assembly decided to amend and supplement the Law on Complaints and Denunciations in 2004
and 2005. Despite these amendments and supplementations being undertaken twice within two years
and a third time in adopting a new Land Law, there is still a lack of coherence between the two pieces of
legislation. Indeed, there is significant difficulty in implementing the laws in reality.”
56
    World Bank (ibid:162) states that “At the beginning of 2010, many local areas revealed that the number
of administrative appeals on land prices for compensation, support, and resettlement comprises about
90% of the total of complaints arising from the public.

                                                          Land Management and Urban Planning                  53
      to use electronic land and property registration     and development. Consumers and market
      and eased administrative fees and procedures to      actors in urban settings will also benefit from
      encourage increased registration. The current lack   less administrative steps, as procedures and
      of transparency in land administration, especially   approvals can be consolidated for land and
      in the land registry, presents opportunities for     development related processes.
      abuse and misappropriation of public resources.
      The LGAF report of 2014 noted high levels            6.2.3 Land Use and Urban Planning
      of corruption and a lack of transparency (for
      example, the land registry is not up to date         Planning standards for residential development
      and land ownership records are not publicly          are generally appropriate. Official standards
      available, reducing tenure security). The LGAF       compare closely with the average plot size found
      report stated that a lack of transparency in land    in typical incremental developments occupied
      records was one of the most problematic areas in     by the majority of urban residents. Recent
      Vietnam. Availability of public information on       regulatory changes have reduced minimum plot
      fee schedules was also low and fees adjusted on a    sizes to 36 m2 in HCMC and even 25 m2 in Hai
      non-regular basis, impeding good governance.         Phong. However, many low income households
                                                           opt for living on even smaller plot sizes, due to a
      Consistent and firm enforcement of laws and          high preference for detached ownership housing
      requirements are needed, such as tightening lax      and the unaffordability of larger formal plots,
      penalty enforcements for stalled developments        leaving them outside of the formal system.
      on publicly assigned land. There exists cases
      where developers had been allocated large areas      Regulations permit a high level of plot
      of land (up to 100 hectares) for development,        utilization and plot use efficiency. Floor Area
      but have failed to develop it within the specified   Ratios (FAR) of up to 5 for residential land
      24 month period and had even failed to develop       and possibly up to 1.5 more for commercial use
      it in some cases within ten years. Failure to        permit high residential densities appropriate to
      cancel the allocations and recover undeveloped       locations where land prices are particularly high.
      allocated lands without compensation has             In the case of social housing, an additional factor
      contributed to increased land prices and             of 1.5 is possible for typical FAR for the area
      encouraged speculative behavior on the part of       and the use. Regulations specify that in ‘special
      developers who can effectively acquire private       cases’ FAR can be adjusted by authorities, to a
      land banks and only develop land when market         maximum of 7. However, it should be noted
      conditions maximize private gain. This issue is      that the FAR gains do not really give a cost
      being addressed in adjustments to the Housing,       discount to peri-urban development, where land
      Real Estate and Enterprise laws. Article 64 of       is comparatively cheaper.
      the 2013 Land Law induces additional LURC
      and land lease charges for developments stalling     Despite strengths in planning standards, actual
      more than the maximum allowable 24 months;           land use plans and urban master plans have yet to
      at the end of a 24 months extension, if delay        be responsive to market needs and require more
      persists, the GoV will claim the land and built      synchronization with socio-economic planning.
      structures upon it without compensation.             Provincial-level cities and provinces have the
      Enforcement will be key to these new measures,       responsibility to prepare urban master plans that
      and implementation of procedures in general          account for projections of population growth,
      will require more attention.                         economic development, and transportation
                                                           needs, among others, with consultation from
      Aware of challenges in urban land                    private sector and community-based agencies
      administration and management, the GoV               and groups. In practice, urban development
      has taken a strategic step in moving urban land      occurs on an ad hoc basis as direct response to
      oversight responsibilities under the MoC. The        short-term market dynamics and construction
      transfer of urban land oversight from MoNRE          and development activities. Cases of cities
      to MoC will improve efficiency in the long run,      growing too quickly and without long term
      as MoC plans and oversees urban construction         planning are prevalent and can be incentivized
54	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
by a cities’ desire to attract higher funding from       yet to be identified, although actions are being
central government allocations and foreign               taken to increase the Land Price Framework to
investment if the city is elevated in urban status.      be closer to market value.
Expansion of cities’ administrative and urban
boundaries is often ahead of demand and can              There are no mechanisms for value capture from
bring adverse long-term socio-economic effects.          land conversions or developments. There are
                                                         substantial changes in land prices resulting from
The 20 percent land contribution requirement             state action in the conversion of land uses from
has yet to achieve intended results.                     agricultural to residential use, or from residential
Implementation of the 20 percent inclusionary            to commercial. As an example, in Binh Chanh
zoning requirement under Decree 188 continues            district, land prices increased 50 times when
to experience challenges due to limited local            land is converted from agricultural to residential
government capacity in enforcement, developer            use and ~16 times when residential land is
pushback, and underdeveloped management                  converted to commercial use59. Prices for each
of collected land reserves57. The regulation             land type were recorded in the 2014 Qualitative
currently does not consider the characteristics          Study as follows:
of land sites. Whilst allocation of 20 percent           - Agricultural land: VND 10 million/500m2 =
of the land for social housing works for some              VND 20,000/m2
sites, a higher or lower percentage of allocation        - Informal subdivision (no LURC, no infra.):
might work for other sites. There are economic             VND 30 million/30m2 = VND 1 million/m2
benefits in exploring an alternative approach            - Semi-formal subdivision (No LURC but
that has capacity to respond to the unique                 infrastructure): VND 8 million/m2
circumstances of different sites, while ensuring         - Formal land (LURC + infrastructure): VND
ease of implementation.                                    500 million/30m2 = VND 16.6 million/m2

6.3 Economics and Taxation of Urban                      Existing tax instruments do not allow
Land                                                     government to retrieve some of this value for
                                                         public benefit. The issue of land value capture
6.3.1 Land Taxation                                      has been discussed within government, but
                                                         no decision has been taken. Land use fees
Land tax rates are very low. Taxes are levied            are determined by PPCs on a per-site basis
on both an annual and a one-off basis. One-off           without a structured, and therefore projectable,
taxes include VAT, corporate tax and a land use          calculation method. Land use fees are payable
fee. Housing taxes are levied annually according         once per project and can be prohibitively costly
to a formula defined by People’s Committees58.           to the development financing structure of
All taxes are levied based on the Land Price             households and developers alike.
Framework, with valuations significantly lower
than market price, leading to limited tax revenues       6.3.2 Economics of Urban Land Challenges
generation. In the area of citizen-owned land,
low household incomes can make it difficult for          Demand for residential urban land is likely to
people to pay appropriate tax rates. Informally          increase significantly during the coming decades
occupied land is also taxed at the higher rate           with continued urbanization. An estimated
of 0.15 percent a year. Local governments are            27,994 hectares of land has been added to
aware that tax revenues are inadequate and               the nation’s total urban residential land area
that in some rural areas the cost of collection          between 2005 and 2010, an impressive increase
accounts takes away a high proportion of the             of 27.2 percent in five years. In addition,
taxes collected. Plans to increase tax levels are        urban land used for construction is forecast

57
   Refer to Chapters 3.1, 10.1, and 10.5 for further discussion on Decree 188.
58
   For example, the tax rate in Hanoi is 0.03 percent for a plot of 200m2 or less, 0.07 percent for plots
between 201-600m2 and 0.15 percent for plots of more than 600m2.
59
   World Bank. Qualitative Study on Self-Provided Housing. 2014.

                                                            Land Management and Urban Planning                  55
      to reach 335,000 hectares by the end of 2015          real estate sector at large and the small-scale self-
      and 450,000 hectares by 202560. This implies          built housing sector that serves the needs of low
      a substantial increase in the annual rate of          income groups in particular. Pricing excludes
      urban land development, amounting to 11,500           even more households from the formal market,
      hectares a year. Other estimates prepared by the      creating a spiral of exclusion and unapproved
      project team61 indicate that a significantly lower    and informal development. Prevalence of sub-
      area of land is required suggesting that further      formal or informal tenure and ownership status
      research is needed to ascertain future urban          continues to create an ungoverned transactions
      land needs. Land need projections will need           market that deepens constraints on land
      to also be closely linked to urban development        management and land supply.
      planning in order to be effective. At present,
      formal channels are failing to keep pace with         A proactive, anticipatory strategy for expanding
      this rate of demand and the gap is being met          the supply of serviced, well-located land will
      largely by small-scale developers and builders.       be beneficial in the long-term63. The limited
      A significant proportion of land will need to be      supply of land planned for urban residential
      dedicated for small-scale land development and        development and consequent high prices has
      housing in the future.                                forced many households into overcrowded,
                                                            underserviced, insecure, informally tenured
      The inability of formal supply to keep pace with      and/or poorly located housing. It is estimated
      demand is forcing up prices to levels that are        that approximately 4.8 million households
      increasingly unaffordable. As an example, land        suffer such a qualitative housing deficit, which
      prices reach up to VND 600 to 800 million/            is exacerbated not only by the high cost of land
      m2 in central Hanoi62. This adversely affects the     but also blockages around delivery and finance.




      60
          Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (2010) Report on Land Statistics, Hanoi: MONRE, quoted
      in UN-Habitat (2014:81) ‘Vietnam Housing Sector Profile’ Nairobi.
      61
         The project team estimated the total urban land need to be between 2,250 to 4,500 hectares annually
      for accommodating an additional 374,000 urban households every year. This estimate is based on an
      average household size of 3.6 and a gross population density of between 600 and 1,200 people per hectare
      The land includes the land for residential, local infrastructure and amenities as well as some commercial.
      It however does not include land for large-scale manufacturing, large-scale commercial or large-scale
      amenities (e.g. universities, hospitals, sewage plants, city parks).
      62
         Approximately USDPPP 60,000 to 80,000, using a stylized purchasing power parity conversion factor of
      10,000, extrapolated on 2012 IMF data.
      63
         Chapter 10.5 provides tentative recommendations to tackle this challenge.

56	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                                                                                                     7
                                                                                                     Chapter


Government Housing Interventions

7.1 Existing Government Initiatives               subsidies, engagement with sector stakeholders
                                                  or monitoring and oversight. As a result,
To address the housing needs of Vietnamese,       coordination between different government
the government has introduced almost a dozen      bodies in program implementation has been
public housing programs over the past decade.     limited and tracking progress is difficult.
These programs span assistance to rural low       Consolidating and structuring common
income households, to urban upgrading or          delivery systems for programs, as well as
financing solutions for the middle income. A      accounting for direct, indirect and implicit
number of these government programs have          subsidies will help GoV to enhance program
achieved positive results and are moving into     design and improve efficiency of spending.
subsequent phases of implementation. The
program for rural poor households, under          GoV has a new strategic emphasis on supporting
Decision 167, has supported over 260,000          housing solutions for low income households in
households with low-cost microfinance loans       urban areas and addressing systemic issues.
for home improvement during its first phase       Historically, there was a gap in policy focus
of implementation, with the second phase          for urban low income households, despite the
planning to deliver an additional 510,000 units   need of Q1 and Q2 income segments. VUUP
over four years. The program to support flood-    and the 30T package were some of the first
prone households in the Mekong Delta, under       public programs that directly targeted the
Decision 716, also provides lending through       urban low income. Decree 188’s requirement
VBSP coupled with technical construction          for the contribution of 20 percent of applicable
support. This program has delivered 40,536        project sites for social housing is a further
units up to 2014. The next phase of this          government effort to resolve land blockages
program is planning to run through to 2020        and stimulate supply in urban areas. Housing
and to also expand into the Central Region.       policy is reorienting toward these areas of
Other programs have managed to reach a large      high demand for social housing, particularly
number of beneficiaries, including the student    in urban and industrial areas, with a focus on
housing program and 30T package.                  development of market segments and income-
                                                  based targeting, rather than social groups.
Although there have been success cases,
government housing programs have largely          Programs with funding and technical support
been fragmented and results are difficult         from external agencies complement and
to track. Programs are usually developed          enhance government efforts. International
independently to serve a specific priority        agencies and NGOs have supported
segment, for example, meritorious people,         government efforts in key areas to develop
students, industrial zone workers, officials,     sectors underserved by private sector and in
low income and poor households. Most              need of public investments. Notably, in the
programs have been stand-alone, with very         areas of urban infrastructure and basic service
little in common in terms of shared systems       provision, housing finance for low income
for identifying beneficiaries, delivery of        households, as well as home improvement

                                                          Government Housing Interventions                     57
      and community upgrading in urban areas,                     The following table outlines the major
      including Hanoi, HCMC, Mekong Delta, and                    government efforts in the housing sector and
      the Central region.                                         results.

       Table 7.1 Overview of Government Housing Programs

           Program				                                 Description			                               Target

                                A program for meritorious people. MoLISA determines
                                eligibility and selection. MoC oversees and recommends
        Housing support for     allocation of budget, with approval by MoF. PPCs receive       340,341 units complete.
        meritorious people      budget, purchase units from the market and allocate            72,153 additional units
                                to beneficiaries. Beneficiaries get full title and are free    planned.
                                to resell. There is no standard for quality and price of
                                houses purchased.

          Housing support       MoC oversees program. Five PPCs in the Mekong Delta            56,520 units complete
         for people living in   region implement, through providing infrastructure             40,536 additional units
          flooding areas in     for flood prevention and enabling access to VBSP’s             planned.
            Mekong delta        preferential credit to households for repairs, upgrade,
                                and new construction. Land readjustments occur where
                                required. Default rates are low.

          Housing support       Program is in planning and plans to replicate the success      40,500 additional units
         for people living in   of the Mekong Delta program by adapting a similar              planned.
          flooding areas in     implementation model for the Central region.
         the Central Region
            (Decision 716)

        Housing support for     The program targets poor households in rural areas             260,587 unitscomplete
        poor households in      without existing homes. VBSP provides low-cost credit          510,700 additional units
            rural areas         for home improvement and incremental construction,             planned.
          (Decision 167)        as well as basic technical assistance for construction.
                                Women’s Union, Farmer’s Union, and Youth Union are
                                among community organizations that provide customer
                                interface and operations, from origination and appraisal
                                to disbursement and collection.

         Social housing for     Funding comes primarily from issuance of government            Target of 95 projects to
             students           bonds, as well as from the Ministry of Education and           serve 330,000 students,
                                Training (MoET) and local governments. PPCs authorize          of which 75 projects for
                                projects. Learning institutions directly receivebudget         145,000 students complete.
                                for construction via PPCs and MoC approves designs for
                                dormitories.

         Social housing for     Investors of industrial zones are required to plan areas       Target of 6,039,898 m2
        workers in industrial   for social services and housing for workers. Investors can     for 960,264 workers, of
               zones            directly build or transfer land to developers to build. PPCs   which 64 projects (20,277
                                provides infrastructure and can support land clearance         units) are complete and 59
                                and compensation. PPCs approve rent levels. Developers         projects (66,753 units) are
                                receive fees and tax incentives and preferential credit        being implemented.
                                where available, like regular social housing provision.
                                In some cases, VDB offers loans funded through bond
                                issuance, approved by MoC, yet participation has been low.

          Social housing for    Developers of social housing in urban areas receive            Target of 7,106,272 m2 or
        low income people in    incentives in land, tax, and preferential credit, via Decree   166,390 units, of which
             urban areas        67/2009. The 30T Package in 2013, overseen by MoC and          129 projects have been
                                SBV, provides a source of preferential credit through          approved, 38 completed



58	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Table 7.1 Overview of Government Housing Programs 				                                              (Continued)
   Program				                                Description			                               Target

                        commercial banks to developers as well as qualifying         (19,686 units) and 91 in
                        consumers for home purchase. See Chapter 5.2 for more        implementation (55,830
                        details on the 30T package.                                  units), by December 2014.

  Sale of State own     State-owned public housing sold at below market rates to     362,500 units planned,
  houses to current     current tenants, as condominiums. Lack of management         of which 286,300 units or
tenants in accordance   structures for public spaces as resulted in poor building    86.3%are complete.
   with Decree 61/      maintenance and some units are stuck in legal limbo due
       CP/1994          to disputes over the rights to ownership.

   Official housing     National and provincial levels of government lease and       A total stock of 315,280 m2:
                        manage housing to senior public and military officials.      49 villas & 6,377 apts.

   Housing finance      Three program components: (i) mortgage lending to            Target of 37,000 housing
project for urban low   urban low income; (ii) housing microfinance for the          loans, with 15,307 housing
  income and poor       urban poor; (iii) establishment of a Mortgage Refinancing    loans originated by June
     households         Facility (MRF). ADB supported GoV to provide lending         2013.
                        capital to participating commercial financial institutions
                        and community based financial institutions. MRFefforts
                        reside with SBV, as do program oversight activities.

    Mekong Delta        With MoF oversight, AFD set up a 20 year credit line to      ~60,000 loans originated
  housing purchase      Mekong Housing Bank to on-lend toward new housing            to date.
 and upgrade finance    purchase and housing improvements in flood prone
       project          regions. After 6 years, lending reached 6-7 loan cycles
                        with 0% NPL, average loan size of VND 20M, and an
                        average 1 year repayment per loan.

   Vietnam Urban        As a component of the VUUP, a revolving fund was set         90,000 housing micro-loans
     Upgrading          up to MFIs and community networks for offer home             complete.
  Program (Housing      improvement microloans to low income households in
    Microfinance)       HCMC, Hai Phong, Can Tho, and Nam Dinh. Loans had
                        max amount of VND 15 millionand maximum tenure of 5
                        years. The total line of credit was USD 15 million.

 HCMC Tan Hoa Lo        As part of an infrastructure and waterway project, 72        72 units complete.
 Gom Resettlement       families were resettled from informal housing into
     Project            apartment blocks. A collaboration between HCMC,
                        Belgian Technical Cooperation, with WU and the Hunger
                        Eradication & Poverty Reduction Fund facilitating a
                        community savings program.

  ACCA Community        ACCA set up the Cities Development Fund for lending,         29 units complete.
and Housing Upgrade     matched by community savings, for housing upgrade
      Project           projects. Vinh City, as a pilot, used a community-led
                        process and supported with simple administrative steps.
                        Loans had 0% interest, 10 years terms. Implemented in
                        conjunction with community infrastructure upgrading.
                        Yielded 2 story houses on 45 m2 plots subdivided through
                        a community land readjustment process.




                                                                   Government Housing Interventions                 59
      7.2 Housing Policy Looking Forward               b.	 Reorient Policy. Use the 2015 Housing Law
                                                           as an opportunity to develop a new suite
      Looking forward, Vietnam’s past experiences          of housing programs and capable delivery
      in housing sector interventions, comprehensive       actors, focused on efficient use of public
      assessment of housing needs, the shortcomings        funds and solutions catered to the bottom
      of the existing housing delivery and housing         40 percent of the population.
      finance systems, as well as the framework
      of the 2015 Housing Law, provide a strong        c.	 Strengthen Coordination. Build out an
      foundation for the formulation of new policies       over-arching coordinating body to convene
      and programs into the medium-term. Key               across public agencies, control programs,
      messages from the affordable housing sector          channel funding, and support local
      assessment for the development of the next           governments toward becoming effective
      generation of government interventions in the        executing agents.
      housing sector are the following:
                                                       d.	 Invest in Building Blocks. Invest in the
      a.	 Increase Investment. Consolidate and             components of effective housing sector
          increase housing sector funding, in a            governance, including enforcement of
          sustainable way, to meet national housing        regulations, management information
          objectives, focusing on the urban poor,          systems for improved sector monitoring
          particularly in high growth cities and           and measures for accounting and reporting
          industrial zones.                                performance of public spending.




60	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
           Vietnam affordable housing




       II
  Recommendations for
     A Roadmap for
Affordable Housing Policy




           Government Housing Interventions   61
      8
      Chapter


                Objectives of the Roadmap

                8.1 Introduction to the Roadmap for                     planning, and management of affordable housing
                Affordable Housing Policy                               delivery and housing finance, will be instrumental
                                                                        for attracting greater private sector participation,
                The goals of Vietnam’s housing policy are               putting in place sustainable policies and achieving
                grounded in the first Housing Law of 1991, which        morelong-term stability in the housing sector.
                stipulated that it is justifiable and legal for every
                Vietnamese citizen to have access to an adequate        8.2 Roadmap Goals
                house. This statement was further affirmed in the
                National Housing Development Strategy of 2011,          The Roadmap outlines a strategy to inform and
                which stated: ‘It is a basic right of human beings      shape the government of Vietnam’s interventions
                to have a proper and safe shelter. This legitimate      in the housing sector in the next five years. These
                need of housing is an essential condition for           recommendations have been developed with
                improving the quality of human resources as part        consideration for the most feasible policy and
                of the industrialization and the modernization of       program options from a technical, political, and
                Vietnam.’                                               fiscal standpoint, as well as the findings in the
                                                                        comprehensive sector assessment and priorities
                Yet, rapid urbanization and very low incomes            outlined in the 2015 Housing Law.
                for the bottom 40 percent of households have
                overwhelmed the government’s ability to                 The Roadmap intends to serve the following
                ensure access to safe and affordable housing.           purpose:
                Approximately 4.8 million or 20 percent of
                Vietnam’s households live in poor conditions.           a. Present a set of concrete policy and program
                These challenges will continue into the foreseeable        options that can be readily selected and adapted
                future, with new demand (375,000 units per year)           by policy-makers to achieve housing sector
                concentrated in large cities and industrial zones,         objectives. Specifically, targets of reducing
                where economic opportunities exist.                        the qualitative housing deficit andincreasing
                                                                           annual supply of formal low-cost housing,
                Housing is critical to Vietnam’s long-term social          including self-built and rental housing, for
                and economic development. Affordable housing in            priority target groups.
                high growth cities and industrial zones, which are      b. Propose a strategy for consolidating and
                well-connected to theselivelihood or employment            strengthening institutions and delivery systems
                opportunities and other essential services, will           for government to build out a capable set of
                be necessary to enableongoing urbanization,                housing sector actors and robust coordination
                increased productivity and inclusive growth in             and implementation frameworks for improved
                Vietnam. By actively supporting access to adequate         performance of housing policy and programs.
                housing for the lowest income, the government           c. Identify areas of investment and reform to
                creates the positive conditions for improved public        reorient housing policy to the bottom 40 percent
                health, educational outcomes, and opportunities            and high growth areas, as a tool to support
                for poverty reduction and economic development.            broader national development objectives,
                Furthermore, resolving issues around regulation,           including poverty reduction, a shift to higher-
62	             Vietnam Affordable Housing
  productivity employment and inclusive and              Action 6: Consolidate and strengthen
  sustainable urban development.                         housing sector governance, through
                                                         building out a set of capable delivery actors,
8.3 Roadmap Recommendations                              including an overarching coordinating
                                                         body for the housing sector, and effective
The Roadmap for Affordable Housing in Vietnam            local executing agents, as well as investing
provides a comprehensive set of recommendations          in governance building blocks, including
organized around six key areas of action. These          management information systems, targeting
areas of action are:                                     frameworks and M&E standards.

  Action 1: Improve access to housing finance,        As a vehicle to implement these actions and
  by supporting development of specialized            realize the objectives of the 2015 Housing Law,
  financial products and improving the financial      the government is recommended to structure a
  sector’s capacity for lending through improved      National Affordable Housing Program. This
  prudent lending standards, risk management          Program would serve as an umbrella to prepare
  measures and long-term funding options.             and execute the highest priority interventions
                                                      in affordable housing across the six areas
  Action 2: Help secure urban land for housing        of action, as well as put in place a common
  through improved land management and                framework and the delivery systems to channel
  planning, mobilization of under-utilized land       investment and roll out a package of supporting
  assets, and making adjustments in the land          sector reforms over time.
  taxation framework.
                                                  Specifically, it is recommended that the
  Action 3:Invest in affordable rental housing,   National Affordable Housing Program
  targeting industrial workers and Q1 and Q2      initially focus on three Flagship Initiatives and
  households through introduction of new          two Structural Reforms. The three Flagship
  subsidies on the supply- and demand-sides and   Initiatives should include housing finance
  making regulatory adjustments.                  assistance, expanding supply of affordable
                                                  rental and starter homes for self-built housing,
  Action 4: Support self-built housing with while the two Structural Reforms would
  delivery of starter core units in well-serviced concentrate on adjusting the urban land
  subdivisions, as well as urban upgrading and taxation framework and institutional reform
  facilitating incremental improvement and to consolidate and strengthen an overarching
  expansion of existing substandard stock.        housing authority and capable local
                                                  governments, in order to effectively implement
  Action 5: Stimulate developer-built the Program. The proposed structure of the
  affordable housing by introducing tools National Affordable Housing Program is
  and partnerships to leverage private sector shown in Figure 8.1 and summarized in more
                       Figure
  financial and technical         2 and
                           resources         Figure
                                     and increase   8.1in the Executive Summary.
                                                  detail
  participation in affordable housing delivery.

  Figure 8.1 Structure for a National Affordable Housing Program


                       Housing             A ordable
    Flagship           Finance               Rental              Starter Home
   Initiative         Initiative            Initiative             Initiative



                                   Institutional Strengthening
  Structural
   Reforms
                                    Urban Land Tax Reform



                                                                       Objectives of the Roadmap          63
      9
      Chapter

                A Framework for Housing Policy
                Reform for Vietnam

                 Policy         Description of                                  Strategic Priority  Targeting by
                 Areas          Policy Initiatives                   (Short Term; Medium Term): Income Quintiles:
                                                                                                     1   2   3 4 5
                                10.1.A Develop specialized housing finance products for
                1. Housing      underserved segments (buy-down; savings and subsidy-linked)
                 Finance        10.1.B Strengthen the lending capacity of the housing finance
                                sector (long-term funding; prudent lending; risk management)
                                10.1.C Adopt market-making measures (coordination; monitoring
                                & evaluation; consumer literacy and protection)
                                10.2.A Reform the land taxation system (introduction of new land
                2. Access to    tax and removal of one-off LURC fee)
                    Land        10.2.B Adopt integrated land development strategies (integrated
                                planning; land pooling & land readjustment; land sharing)
                                10.2.C Adopt market-making measures (regulatory review;
                                coordination; One-Stop-Shops; RFPs; small scale development)
                                10.3.A Invest in supply-side support for affordable rental housing
                 3. Rental      (capital subsidies; rental housing provider accreditation)
                 Housing        10.3.B Introduce demand-side rental housing assistance (rental
                                vouchers; landlords qualification)
                                10.3.C Adopt market-making measures (regulatory strengthening;
                                long-term finance for rental housing; market information)
                                10.4.A Implement a starter home program (incremental
                4. Self-Built   improvement and expansion; household savings link to subsidies)
                  Housing       10.4.B Support improvement of self-built units and carry out
                                neighborhood upgrading and development
                                10.4.C Adopt market-making measures (land for self-built units;
                                community participation; shared tenure; flexible standards)
                                10.5.A Structure PPPs for affordable housing delivery, focusing on
                    5.          opportunities in industrial zones
                Developer-      10.5.B Explore development right incentive (strengthening of
                  Built         mechanisms for payment in lieu of land for social housing)
                 Housing        10.5.C Adopt market-making measures (guide HOA practices,
                                redevelopment of old housing)
                                10.6.A Strengthen institutional framework (over-arching housing
                                authority; build local government capacity)
                6. Housing      10.6.B Develop building blocks for housing sector (housing
                   Sector       information system; targeting framework, M&E standards)
                Governance
                                10.6.C Adopt market-making measures (regulatory audit; streamline
                                procedures; knowledge sharing)




64	             Vietnam Affordable Housing
                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                           Chapter

                                    Recommendations for
                                   Housing Policy Reform

10.1. Housing Finance                                Detailed Description. There are two priorities
                                                     in expanding access to housing finance: (a)
There are two main areas of focus for the housing    restructure the existing 30T subsidy scheme, and
finance sector. Firstly, improve access to housing   (b) customize financial products to better meet
finance by developing specialized housing finance    the needs of the underserved market segments
products to meet the needs of underserved market     and to match different housing supply channels.
segments. Secondly, ensure safe and stable growth
of the mortgage sector by strengthening lending      a. Restructure the 30T Scheme by Shifting to a
standards, risk management tools and expanding       Mortgage-linked Buy-down Subsidy
access to long-term funding.
                                                     Introduce a mortgage-linked buy-down
10.1. A Develop Specialized Housing Finance          subsidy which would achieve the same levels
Products to Reach Underserved Segments               of affordability as the existing 30T scheme,
                                                     but at 50 percent of the current economic cost
Brief. Restructure the 30T subsidy scheme to         to government. Target customers are salaried
improve the efficiency of public spending, while     workers in the Q3 and Q4 income segments that
diversifying public interventions by supporting      meet the 30T eligibility criteria.
development of specialized housing finance
products to meet the needs of other underserved      Mortgages are priced at market-rate by banks
segments. Focus support to urban areas, where        and government provides a “buy-down”
there is a high number of informal income and        subsidy to enhance a borrower’s capacity-to-
informal tenure households.                          pay in the initial years, instead of subsidizing
                                                     the interest rate. The buy-down subsidy would
Target Group. Consumer segments with limited         be slowly reduced in line with the borrower’s
housing finance access such as urban low income      income growth. In addition, affordability
households, informal income and informal             can be increased up to 25 percent by using
tenure households.                                   the Equated Monthly Installment (EMI)
                                                     amortization method instead of constant
Strategic Context. Access to long-term and           amortization. To take into consideration
low-interest housing finance is a major barrier      pricing differences by region, government
for increasing affordability. There are large        could set differential pricing eligibility criteria
underserved segments that are unable to access       on a geographical basis to balance out the costs
housing finance. For example, 68 percent of the      and benefits of the housing subsidies.
labor force have informal income and therefore
typically do not qualify for mortgages. Neither      The benefits of the buy-down subsidy scheme, in
do home-owners with informal tenure and the          particular when amortized on an EMI basis, are
poor, who have minimum savings and payment           as follows:
capacity. Innovations in housing finance products
and lending channels are required to respond to      - From the borrower perspective, the scheme
these market needs.                                    can be calculated so that the initial payment
                                                Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                            65
        installments would be approximately the                       Product B: An Uncollateralized Housing
        same as in the 30T scheme. Furthermore,                       Micro-Loan
        the debt-to-income (DTI) ratio can be set
        at a constant level. This will help to alleviate              The target for the housing micro-loan product are
        potential payment stress during the initial                   Q1 and Q2 income households. In this program,
        years of the loan when the probability of                     participating MFIs and possibly PCFs will qualify
        default has traditionally been higher.                        eligible households for a housing micro-loan (e.g.
      - Lenders would be free to set their interest                   loans up to VND 30 million, for approximately
        rates to reflect their own assessment of the                  3-5 years) that would be linked to a subsidy
        consumers’ risk profiles and to meet their                    enhancement provided by the government.
        internal profitability objectives. In this way, the           Payment capacity may be established through
        government support can be better integrated                   a minimum period of savings (e.g. 12 months),
        into their current product portfolio, as opposed              or a pre-existing savings and lending history.
        to a separate obligation.                                     Given that the loans are uncollateralized and that
      - The government would be able to reach                         both household income and property tenure are
        approximately twice as many consumers                         informal, loan amounts would be smaller and
        with the same amount of public expenditure,                   interest rates relatively higher than other housing
        in economic terms, using the buy-down                         finance products. Such micro-loans could be
        subsidy approach.                                             used for home improvements or incremental
                                                                      expansion for own-use or for rental purposes,
      b. Develop Savings and/or Subsidy-Linked                        where small landlords will be encouraged to
      Credit Products                                                 construct an additional room for rental. Larger
                                                                      construction projects may require successive loan
      Expand the availability of housing finance by                   cycles, possibly increasing in size as the household
      developing specialized products with savings                    has proven more credit-worthy.
      and/or subsidy features, as appropriate, to meet
      the needs of underserved segments. While a                      Construction technical assistance should
      suite of products are described below, by priority              also be incorporated into the loan to ensure
      of needs, it is recommended that government                     quality of construction. This assistance could
      performs in-depth consumer assessments, tests                   include construction techniques, advisory
      and pilots of the products with the relevant target             from professionals and/or access to lower-cost
      segments to determine suitability before launch. It             construction materials. Habitat for Humanity
      is also recommended to ensure that each financial               has developed an effective model described
      product aligns with a specific supply-side housing              in Box 10.1 in partnership with cement
      product, for example, home improvement and                      suppliers (Lafarge and Holcim), which is being
      extensions or availability of appropriately priced              implemented in several countries, including
      core units.                                                     Nigeria and the Philippines. Pilots have also
                                                                      been completed successfully where the purchase
        Figure 10.1 Categorization of Household Type                  of construction materials by self-help builders is
        and Matching Housing Finance Products                         pooled to achieve cheaper prices and technical
                                                                      advice is provided to them.
                                      C                           D
       Informal
       Tenure        Savings ( Subsidy)      Savings ( Subsidy)       Product C: Mortgages for the Informal
                       Collateralized       Housing Micro-Loan
                        Micro-Loan                                    Income Segment
                                                  Q1 + Q2
                           Q2-Q3            MFI’s / WU / Others
                   PCF’s / Lien Viet Post
                                                                      The target segment for this product would be
                                       A
                                                                      Q2 to Q4 households with informal income
                      Optimize                                    B
                     30T Pakage             Savings ( Subsidy)        who wish to purchase, self-construct, upgrade or
                    w/ Buy-Down                 Mortgage
                       Subsidy                                        expand a home with formal land title (i.e. LURC
                                                Q2-Q3
        Formal
                        Q3-Q4
                        Banks                Banks & Others           certificate). The expected loan amount would be
        Tenure
                  Formal Income                 Informal Income
                                                                      in the range of VND 200 to 800 million, with
                                                                      loansof tenure up to 15 years. This product would
66	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
also finance formal, expandable starter core           Product D: Collateralized Micro-Loans for
houses for ownership, for lease or for rent-to-own     the Informal Tenure Segment
(see recommendation 10.4.A).
                                                       The target market of this product would be
There are two main components which guide the          borrowers with formal income, likely in the Q2
expansion of mortgage lending into the informal        and Q3 segments, who would like to purchase
income sector: (i) the capacity to assess income,      or upgrade a home that has informal tenure.
in spite of the absence of documentation; and          This product requires an investment amount
(ii) knowledge of future borrowers’ behaviors.         that exceeds MFIs’ scope of intervention, but
Following are the key aspects involved in              which lacks the regular tenure of LURCs and
informal income lending:                               so deters the engagement of mortgage lenders.
- Assessment of income and expenditures: Loan          The expected loan amount range would be
  officers need to acquire a good understanding        VND 75 to 300 million, with a maximum loan
  of the borrower’s business model and be              tenure of 10 years.
  able to ‘re-generate’ statements of accounts,
  margins and cash flows for the business. In          Alternative sources of collateral can fill the gap
  addition, the loan officers need to be able to       of the security of a LURC and related obstacles
  calculate residual income having considered          to foreclosure of the financed property. These
  the household incomes and expenditures.              alternative sources of collateral can include
- Industry knowledge: Regular survey of                pledged savings, cars or personal valuables,
  industries related to where lenders are focused      deposit of documents proving possession rights,
  provide underwriters with a base of industry         pre-agreed registration of title and mortgage
  data such as expected margins, seasonality, cash     creation, in case of default. Development of
  flow, etc.                                           these alternative collaterals would require: (i)
- Know Your Customer (KYC) principle: Existing         identification of financial actors interested in
  banking relationships, such as current and           product development for this segment; (ii)
  savings accounts or a lending history are critical   capacity building of these institutions; and (iii)
  to provide trends on borrowers’ capacity to pay.     availability of subsidies to improve affordability
  Without such information, consumers need             for households based on the general principle
  to enter into a savings contract, as discussed       of prior savings mobilization. Finally,
  below, to establish an income proxy.                 underwriting with strict delinquency guidelines
- Flexibility in repayment schedules: Lenders          that contribute to a credit history recorded in
  need to take into account the irregularity           the Credit Information Center’s (CIC) reports
  of informal customers’ income streams by             would be an important credit policy standard
  introducing some flexibility in repayment            for this product to ensure good performance.
  schedules, or customize payment frequency to
  align with the borrower’s business cycle.            Savings features are recommended for the
- Avoid risk layering: Lower the maximum LTV,          three specialized products (B, C and D),
  as well as the maximum capacity-to-pay, offer        where deemed necessary. Contractual savings-
  loans to owner-occupied only or introduce a          for-housing schemes are contracts by which a
  fixed-rate for the first 3-5 years of loan tenure    customer commits to accumulate savings for
  in order to mitigate the risks of lending to         a minimum of 12 months, to gain access to a
  households with informal or potentially              housing loan at the end of the savings phase. The
  volatile income.                                     creation of such a mechanism is being explored
                                                       in Vietnam and the savings feature brings
In India, for example, Housing Finance                 clearbenefits to the housing finance system
Companies have brought the underwriting                for all relevant stakeholders. Specifically, (i)
of informal income borrowers to a high level           savings help first-time borrowers to accumulate
of expertise and best practices which can be           a down-payment; (ii) savings allows informal
drawn from in the development of this product          sector borrowers to build a credit record
in Vietnam.                                            through regular savings payments, which
                                                       also provides an indication of their payment
                                                 Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                  67
      capacity, and hence the level of their incomes;            eligibility criterion for housing subsidies in the
      (iii) for lenders, such a requirement helps                Chilean model.
      them to increase term deposits that are an
      economical source of funds, enabling lower                 Subsidization is not always necessary, though
      lending rates, and are less liquid and more                can be importantin certain target segments.
      stable than ordinary savings accounts.                     In particular, those households that face the
                                                                 most severe affordability challenges. Thus, a
      The main international savings-linked housing              comprehensive assessment of the needs of the
      loan models are in Germany, France, North                  different targets would be necessary to design the
      Africa, and Chile. The German and French                   right type and level of intervention for each of the
      models use closed systems, in which the amount             different products described above. A progressive
      of loans must balance the savings deposited,               subsidy structure is also recommended, where
      at the lender’s level and at the banking sector            the subsidy is differentiated according to income
      level, respectively. The North African lenders             levels, with more assistance to lower income
      offer interest rate discounts to customers who             earners and progressively lower subsidy amounts
      have accumulated savings, while savings is an              for higher incomes.

       Table 10.1 Risks Related to the Development of Specialized Housing Finance Products
                   Risks					                                            Mitigants
        High perceived risk profile   To control for high risk, develop proper credit guidelines, underwriting
        for the products and          standards and portfolio credit limits. Pilot products before launch and establish
        consumers                     close monitoring processes to enable early adjustment of the program. Also
                                      consider other risk mitigation measures, such as incremental loan cycles to
                                      finance larger construction projects.

        Weak lender capacity          Choose financial partners that have good coverage, underwriting capacity
                                      and commitment. Develop a comprehensive toolkit for program training that
                                      comprises: credit policy standards, underwriting tools and monitoring metrics.
                                      Provide training to lenders, monitor performance and re-train as necessary.

        Mistargeting and/or           Set up close feedback loops via reporting of lender portfolios that include
        mismanagement of              consumer characteristics to ensure accurate targeting. Establish third-
        subsidies                     party audits, as necessary. Disburse loans in line with completion of stages,
                                      as confirmed by lenders. Design a subsidy regime that is consistent across
                                      products and income segments, in order to reduce market distortions between
                                      products and minimize incentives to skim off subsidies.

        Lack of government            Several tactics can be used to maximize reach of the government’s modest
        budget                        budget: (a) minimize subsidies, for example, through temporary (e.g. buy-down)
                                      rather than permanent subsidies (e.g. interest rate subsidy) and caps in subsidized
                                      loan amounts, (b) improve targeting to focus subsidy toward the segments with
                                      the most urgent needs; (c) leverage commercial segment capital to multiply the
                                      impact; (d) pilot in specific areas, such as community redevelopment, to test
                                      effectiveness of products for specific targets, conditions etc.




                      Box 10.1 International Examples of Specialized Housing Finance Products

       i. Housing Loans to Informal Sector Households in India

       India provides a valuable example of lenders serving the housing needs of informal sector households.
       For example, there are two main Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) with a focus on non-salaried
       consumer segments: DHFL, for middle and low-end segments, and GRUH Finance. GRUH extends
       loans between USD 1,500 to 150,000, up to 20 years. They are secured both by mortgages and
       personal guarantees, with LTVs not in excess of 65 percent. Borrowers are existing customers with


68	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
        Box 10.1 International Examples of Specialized Housing Finance Products (Continue)

 a multi-year savings history. GRUH has a good knowledge of typical incomes generated by various
 trades in specific areas. It has developed an internal scoring model on which interest rate scales are
 based. The credit performance of the GRUH portfolio is very good, with the NPL rate falling to 0.32
 percent in FY 2013.

             Figure 10.3   Level of NPLs of Different Market Segments and Actors in India
           5.0     (%)
           4.0
           3.0
           2.0
           1.0
           0.0
                   FY05      FY06     FY07       FY08     FY09      FY10     FY11     H1FY12
                           LIC Housing                              HDFC
                           Dew an Housing                           Gruh Finance
            Source: Companies , Emkay Research

 In the wake of the market deepening initiated in 2008, new lenders have entered the informal
 incomesegment given the strongcommercial potential. There are now nine Housing Finance
 Companies active in this segment.

 ii. Colombia Fondo Nacional de Ahorro: Housing Loans to Informal Sector Households

 FNA is a public provident fund mainly covering severance compensation for salaried employees,
 funded by mandatory savings. FNA also extends housing loans to its affiliates. In 2007, FNA opened
 its operation to non-salaried households through a voluntary savings plan that entitles them to
 apply for a housing loan. Applications can be made after a minimum of 12 months and once the
 savings amount represents the equivalent of one month of income. Stated incomes are compared to
 household surveys conducted every year by the Colombian Bureau of Statistics, and verified during
 field visits. To assess applicants’ creditworthiness, FNA looks at credit history if available, and applies
 an internal scoring model. Housing loans are secured by mortgages. The NPL rate inthis program is
 lower (5 percent in 2012) than other FNA loans.

 iii. Habitat for Humanity: Housing Support Service Centers

 This a one-stop shop model with the MFI leading the integration of various aspects of the building
 process. The MFI provides the following services:

 – Helps the borrowers deal with administrative requirements (title, connection to infrastructure,
   building permit if necessary).
 – Sets up lists of pre-qualified builders.
 – Provides technical assistance in case of purely self-help construction.
 – Provides the financing and disbursement according to the progress and quality of construction.


10.1.B. Strengthen the Housing Finance                  safety, soundness and stability of the
Sector’s Capacity for Lending                           mortgage sector.

Brief. Introduce prudent lending practices              Target Group. SBV, financial institutions, other
and standards, risk management tools, long-             housing finance sector stakeholders (e.g. appraisal
term funding alternatives and financial                 industry, Credit Information Center, legal
sector monitoring systems to ensure the                 foreclosure system).
                                                   Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   69
      Strategic Context. A real estate-driven               Overall, the affordability assessment may often
      downturn in 2009 to 2012 put stress on                be disconnected from borrowers’ actual ability
      Vietnam’s mortgage system (with NPL reaching          to repay, which heightens their credit risk.
      double-digits, as per Fitch Ratings) and caused
      significant retrenchment in the market, from          A set of mortgage lending guidelines or
      credit contraction to creation of the VAMC            instructions should be developed by SBV to
      entity to help address bad debt portfolios            generalize sound practices and lenders from
      of banks in a systematic manner. Other                relaxing their underwriting policies. Norms
      provisioning and debt classification rules were       would aim at establishing a realistic methodology
      put in place to address weaknesses in the market.     of assessing borrowers’ ability to repay, including:
      As the market slowly starts to heat up again, it      (i) assessments of DTI, and their adequacy to
      is an important moment for SBV to perform             various income levels. The current practice of
      thorough assessments of lending practices             a 60 percent limit is very high, and a regulatory
      and standards and makenecessary changes to            ceiling should be considered. This measure
      strengthen the lending system, while softening        becomes even more important when migrating
      the potential impact of future downturns.             to an EMI, rather than a CA repayment
                                                            schedule. In the case of lower income customers,
      Program Description. It is recommended for            determining affordability based on earnings after
      the SBV to carry out a comprehensive assessment       paying for basic living expenses, rather than by
      of the lenders’ practices and standards, and then     applying a simple DTI on the total income is
      to develop a program of reforms to put in place       better practice64; (ii) the use of teaser rates for
      general prudent lending practices and standards,      assessments of payment capacity should not be
      risk management tools and monitoring systems          allowed; (iii) ‘risk layering’ should be avoided, i.e.
      to help ensure safety, soundness and stability of     where high loan risk factors are compounded. For
      the lending system. These activities are described    instance, adding the irregularity of borrowers’
      in more detail below.                                 incomes on top of unmitigated fluctuations
                                                            in interest rates65. Finally, counter-cyclical
      a. Prudent Lending Practices and Standards            prudential measures should be considered as
                                                            is necessary. These measures could include
      Strengthening general prudent lending norms.          adjusting parameters such as LTV limits, risk
      Banks generally put an emphasis on LTVs,              weights to create a differentiated set of loans, or
      lending generally between 70 and 80 percent           provisioning requirements.
      Loan To Value (LTV), despite the uncertainties
      in the appraisal industry that may impact the         Mitigate credit risk generated by variable
      valuation of property values. The 70 percent          interest rates. Fixed rate products can only
      LTV in the proposed decree governing social           develop in parallel with the progress of capital
      housing development and management is in line         market funding, thus adjustable rate mortgages
      with the risk related to this segment. Analyses       will likely prevail in the near term. Given the
      of affordability do not match international           historic volatility of interest rates, it would be
      best practices, with DTIs often above 50              important to promote market practices that
      percent. In part this may be attributed to the        limit the credit risk created byvolatile interest
      prevailing constant amortization schedule,            rates. Several ways exist to mitigate this risk,
      anticipating significantly lower DTI in the           including the application of simple stress tests to
      near future due to lower payments and higher          check the resilience of borrowers to interest rate
      nominal income. However, the variability of           shocks. In addition, the inclusion of a cushion
      interest rates and their historic volatility, are     in DTIs (or in interest rates when determining
      not sufficiently factored in the assessment.          payment capacity) will also help borrowers to


      64
        Some lenders already apply this principle
      65
        For example, to account for increased income and expenditure volatility, MFIs use only 2/3 of
      determined income to establish the capacity to pay for informal income households.

70	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
withstand such shocks (e.g. keep repayment                Strengthen the appraiser industry. Although
installments constant – in the case of EMI-based          banks use the services of independent valuers,
repayment). Other actions include extending               the appraiser industry is affected by several
loan terms equivalent to the increase in rates66,         weaknesses, which creates stability issues for
and smoothing out interest rate fluctuations              bank lending. Applicable regulation is limited to
by using a moving average of benchmark rates              the delivery of licenses – a function that is split
calculated over a period of at least 6-months.            between the MoF, MoC and MoNRE. There
                                                          are no norms governing methodologies, code of
Establish risk management practices at the                ethics, nor oversight mechanisms. A major gap
portfolio level. In addition to prudent lending           is the difficulties to access information, which
standards at the loan-by-loan level, mortgage             is essential for real estate valuations - appraisers
lenders should also have principles to manage risks       largely maintain proprietary databases that are
concentrated at the portfolio level. International        neither shared nor validated independently.
experience has shown that correlated risks can            The Housing Management Information System
result in large-scale default when an industry,           could be used to better organize the industry,
a market segment, or a geographic region                  including the development of procedures to
experience economic downturns. A portfolio-               document valuations, rules to access information,
level lending policy should include exposure              and a professional code of conduct.
limits to higher risk products or segments such
as non-owner-occupied loans, loans with higher            Explore the feasibility of mortgage guarantees.
LTV and DTI, informal income loans, and                   Mortgage guarantees for low and middle
provide for periodic stress tests of the mortgage         income informal sector households can help
portfolio. In addition, analysis of portfolio             to share and reduce risks if designed correctly.
performance, according to origin, would enable            It is common for mainstream banks to abstain
an understanding of how portfolios perform                in general from lending long-term without
through the different economic stress cycles as           clear income documentation. A government-
well as their key risk factors that drive default.        sponsored guarantee fund can provide a ‘stop
                                                          loss’ mechanism that encourages lenders to serve
b. Risk Management Tools                                  new customer segments within a certain level
                                                          of acceptable risk. The guarantee should not
Improve the efficiency of mortgage rights.                however provide full risk coverage but preferably
Execution of mortgages can be cumbersome                  on a proportional basis, and possibly only above
and time-consuming due to contestations and               a certain threshold applied to the individual
delaying tactics by delinquent debtors. This factor       loan or across the entire portfolio, to ensure
could be significantly reduced if constraints on          lenders’ interest in managing and mitigating the
contestations were set, for instance: limits on           credit risk remains for the duration of the loan.
the grounds for judicial recourse; limits on the
timeframe for initiating them; the requirement            c. Developing Solutions for Long-Term
of deposits set aside that would be lost in case          Funding
of trivial recourse. In addition, judicial training
could be undertaken to raise awareness of the             For the long-term health and stable development
importance of mortgage securities to be credible          of the mortgage market, financial institutions
and play a dissuasive role on credit discipline,          in Vietnam need access to long-term funding at
which will support the deepening of housing               the cost of funds that can match the long-term
finance services in the lower income population           maturity of mortgage loans. Progressively moving
and of the stability of the banking system. The           toward fixed-rate products, even only for the
suggested reform would not imply a significant            medium-term initially (i.e. 3 to 5 years), would
change of the legal basis of mortgage lending.            be very positive for the sector, since the volatility
                                                          of interest rates translates into an indirect


66
     This approach is common in India, yet this cannot be applied without limits.

                                                     Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                    71
      credit risk for lenders. A long-term solution for    loans that meet pre-defined quality standards.
      Vietnam is to explore the establishment of a         Eventually, the liquidity facility could develop
      mortgage refinancing company (MRC), which            into a long-term funding provider. The NHB in
      is a common approach in a number of countries        India and the Federal Home Loan Banks in the
      (e.g. Cagamas in Malaysia, NHB in India and          USA, are good examples of entities that fulfill the
      SHF in Mexico). Such a structure is well-suited      dual function of long-term funds provider and
      to nascent markets, such as Vietnam, by pooling      short-term liquidity back-stopping.
      lenders’ funding needs (which are too small
      individually to efficiently tap the bond market),    d. Monitoring Tools
      providing a new long-term investment tool to
      institutional investors, and helping to establish    Develop ‘early-indicator’ monitoring tools.
      robust lending practices by setting quality norms    Monitoring can provide SBV with important
      for the mortgage loans it refinances. Financial      early indicators of the health of the housing
      authorities and market players are currently         sector, which has follow-on effects for the rest of
      exploring the feasibility of a MRC.                  the economic and financial stability. Important
                                                           data points include: home price movement, as
      If it appears that the development of long-term      well as the balance between housing supply (i.e.
      funding instruments is premature and not in line     construction permits, under-construction and
      with the current capacities and willingness of       ready-for-sale inventories) and housing demand
      institutional investors, an intermediary option      (i.e. the absorption rate of housing stock). Many
      would be to establish short-term liquidity support   central banks use these housing indicators
      for mortgage portfolios at cost of funds. This       to inform decisions on monetary policy and
      would help lenders manage temporary liquidity        inflation adjustments. While MoC is developing
      shortages during the lifetime of long-term           the Housing Management Information System,
      housing loans funded by deposits. Such a facility    coordination with the SBV will ensure that this
      should be independent from the central bank and      data is effectively used to monitor the financial
      only secured by the collateralization of housing     system as well.

                  Box 10.2 Moroccan Example of a Guarantee Fund for Informal Sector Segments

       In Morocco, the government set up a specific guarantee fund, FOGARIM that provides partial credit
       guarantees on mortgage loans extended to households earning low and irregular incomes. The main
       eligibility conditions are the existence of a first rank mortgage, a monthly repayment charge below
       a certain ceiling (currently USD 180, and USD 100 in the case of relocated slum dwellers), which is a
       proxy for a limit on home prices and incomes that are difficult to verify. Lenders can submit claims
       after 9-months in arrears, and once the foreclosure process has been initiated. The guarantee covers
       up to 70 percent of the loss, and the premiums range from 0.25 to 0.50 percent per annum, depending
       on the LTV. FOGARIM supported 115,000 loans since 2004, or about 20 percent of all mortgagesin
       Morocco, while keeping NPLs at a reasonable rate in spite ofthe risk of the targeted segment.


      10.1.C. Other Market-Making Measures to                 report, an integrated strategy requires the
      Improve Access to Housing Finance                       coordination of multiple public agencies
                                                              and stakeholders, which requires an
      In a context where financial services for housing       over-arching authority to support policy
      are largely underdeveloped, it is necessary to          design, institutional coordination and the
      implement a comprehensive strategy that                 management of subsidy programs. This type
      encompasses multiple types of policy measures,          of institutional approach has been, or is in the
      subsidy programs, training as well as consumer          process of being, developed in countries such
      literacy and awareness. Two of these measures are       as Mexico, Indonesia or Egypt.
      described briefly below:
                                                           b.	 Build out and implement a framework for
      a.	 Support a national-level coordinating                consumer literacy and protection. Serving
          body. As mentioned elsewhere in this                 low income groups requires first enhancing
72	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
     financial inclusion. Confidence in the banking      Land Price Framework are far below market
     sector must be created, as well as awareness        rates67. Simultaneously, high profits from land
     of the implications of being indebted, and          holding incentivizes speculation, reducing supply
     understanding as to how to manage when              of land and causing increases in land prices to
     consumers are in trouble financially. This          unaffordable levels, adversely affecting not only
     requires information campaigns and also             the poor but also middle income households,
     measures to ensure the transparency of lending,     business and cities at large. Finally, local
     the ability for consumers to compare the            governments and the public also lose out from
     conditions offered by different institutions, and   only capturing a small share windfalls during
     the opportunity to make educated decisions.         urbanization (e.g. during land use conversions
     These components can be incorporated within         from agricultural land to residential or from
     the design of a consumer protection framework,      residential to commercial)) which significantly
     as well as the development of advisory services     increases the market value of land. A portion of
     especially targeting underserved categories.        this value increase should be captured and used in
     This would include legal and regulatory             the best public interest.
     measures, as well as just-in-time awareness and
     training activities, and possibly the eventual      Detailed Description. As land taxes are collected
     development of a specific advisory network.         and retained by local governments, they have an
                                                         incentive to increase taxes to the level that enables
10.2. Land Management and Urban                          them to meet their responsibilities. This can also
Planning                                                 strengthen accountability, governance and land
                                                         administration. It is therefore recommended that:
Access to urban land is arguably the largest
challenge restricting the supply of affordable           -	 The LPF be gradually aligned with market prices,
housingin Vietnam. To facilitate access to                  for example through more frequent valuation
affordable and suitable land for affordable housing,        and/or alternative valuation strategies, and/or
it is recommended for the government to adopt               land auctions in case of new developments (see
a proactive and integrated land development                 on LPLR above).
strategy, adjust the land taxation framework and         - The one-off LURC fee be reduced to an
introduce a series of regulatory and administrative         administrative charge, based on the cost of
reforms toward improved land management.                    effecting the land use conversion, on the
                                                            expectation that this would encourage higher
10.2.A. Adjust the Land Taxation Framework                  registration levels. Similarly, any dues applicable
                                                            to property transfers should be reduced to
Brief. Phase out of the one-off land use fee, and           a nominal administrative charge, in order
move toward more market-adjusted annual                     to encourage title registration and promote
land use and real estate taxes, which enable                formality by expanding access to affordable
developers and households to budget for land and            LURCs and BOLUCs.
development administrative costs in a predictable        - The annual land value tax in urban areas
manner, enhance local government revenues and               be increased to cover the costs of land
aid in increasing the supply of land.                       administration and other State responsibilities.
                                                            This can be expected to increase public
Targets. Broader land market.                               revenues and encourage those holding land for
                                                            speculation to develop it, thereby increasing the
Strategic Context. Revenues from land                       supply of land for residential and related land
taxation are minimal (only 2-3 percent of total             uses, reducing land price inflation, improving
government revenue), as the rate of taxation is             housing affordability and stimulating economic
very low and the land values calculated in the              growth. Progressive taxation imposed on the

67
  Dang Hung Vo, Nguyen Van Thang, T&C Consulting.Improving Land Sector Governance in Vietnam
(Draft Report: Implementation of Land Governance Assessment Framework (LGAF). World Bank.
Washington DC.December 2013.

                                                    Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                     73
         areas exceeding quota (e.g. minimum lots)                     and their consequent variations in taxable value,
         should be applied to guarantee social equality,               would also present major challenges to land and
         prevent land speculation, and reasonably deal                 property valuation authorities, raising significant
         with projects delaying land development.                      risks of disputes and abuse.
      -	 Alternatively, if raising land tax rates is not viable,
         a new tax, such as a housing levy or property tax,            It is important to raise land (or property) taxation
         may be introduced to achieve the same; however,               gradually, as the tax may reduce the market price
         this should be based, to the degree possible, on              of land, given the additional outlay imposed by
         the value of land.                                            the tax and lower expected profits from the land.
      -	 In contrast, taxes on building should not be                  Thus, if the tax is introduced too fast, it may
         introduced and revenues generated solely from                 deflate the prices of land and adversely affect the
         land, assessed by locality, plot size, levels of              value of assets that serve as collateral in financial
         services provision and access to amenities.                   contracts (e.g. mortgages), putting the financial
                                                                       sector at risk. Rapid introduction may also
      At present, there are no taxes on land development               generate increased resistance. However, if the
      or buildings in Vietnam. Whilst this may be                      land tax or fee rate is increased gradually, then it
      considered a lost opportunity to generate tax                    aids in controlling unwanted land price increases.
      revenues, especially in cases where substantial                  Secondly, such taxes impose relatively higher
      developments have taken place in some residential                costs on land use right holders of underdeveloped
      areas, the introduction of such taxes would be likely            land: while this effect is welcome to control
      to deter some land holders from investing in land                speculation, it may negatively affect the poor.
      development, or encourage them not to register                   Therefore, it is important to introduce land taxes
      such developments, in order to avoid the tax. The                progressively so that low income groups, or those
      highly variable nature of building developments,                 in modest housing, are protected.

           Table 10.3 Risks Related to Adjusting the Land Taxation Framework
                        Risks					                                             Mitigants
            Underdeveloped valuation          Build upon existing private and public sector efforts in property appraisal,
            and appraisal sector hinders      with goal of diversifying appraisal sector actors and deepening appraisal
            taxation reforms                  frameworks.

            Property/building tax deters      Adopt a tax that emphasizes inherent site value. If possible, focus solely on
            development activities            taxation of land.

            Market responds negatively        Employ regular and gradual increase in tax rates, backed by strong local level
            to raising of overall tax rates   appraisal and clear announcements to market and citizens.

            Taxation negatively impacts       Poor families may hold underdeveloped land, albeit in small quantities. To
            the poor                          mitigate this risk introduce a progressive taxation regime, for example taxing
                                              land below a certain quota at a lower rate or allow alternative payments
                                              mechanisms (e.g. community service).




                            Box 10.3 Lessons from International Experience in Land Value Taxation


           The potential for revenue mobilization through Land Value Taxation (LVT) is significant: for example, in
           Australia, LVT accounts for 100 percent of local tax revenues (Dye and England, 2010). LVT shifts a share of
           land value from the land use rights holder to the public sector, thereby aiding in the control of land prices
           and tempering of speculation. For example, a reasonable tax rate of between 2 and 4 percent captures
           between 25 and 40 percent of the land value68. For its wide-ranging positive impact, the mission team
           recommends that serious consideration be given to deepening value capture options in Vietnam.


      68
           This assumes a real discount rate of 6 percent.

74	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
10.2.B. Adopt an             Integrated      Urban      It is recommended to review and revise urban
Development Strategy                                    master plans to enhance planning of medium-
                                                        density and mixed-use urban development,
Brief. Adopt a proactive approach to urban              which stimulates a higher level of social
development that integrates land use planning           interaction, economic development and reduces
with investment in major infrastructure (e.g.           urban sprawl. In particular, there should be a
public transport) and public facilities, and            focus on better integrating land use and transport
ensure that there is adequate formal and                planning, aligning a city’s master plans with socio-
affordable land for low income housing, which           economic development goals set out by MPI,
is well-connected to basic infrastructure, social       and ensuring there are adequate provisions of
facilities, employment opportunities, and               land for formal low income housing. To achieve
other essential amenities. This can be achieved         this, there will need to be coordination of all
with amix of tools including: integrated                major governmental stakeholders (MoC, MoF,
master developments, Land Pooling and Land              MoNRE, MoT, MPI and local governments)
Readjustment (LPLR), land sharing and other             and tools put in place for enforcement, either
land value capture mechanisms (e.g. betterment          through the revised land taxation framework,
charges and exactions for development rights)           changes in development rights, or through direct
that are capable of capturing some ofthe                government intervention, acting as amaster
windfalls of urbanization for the public benefit.       developer. Such an integrated approach also
                                                        makes it easier to capture windfalls arising from
Targets. All income segments.                           government action during urbanization (e.g.
                                                        infrastructure investments and higher value land
Strategic      Context.      Many        large-scale    use permits), making inclusive urbanization more
developments and land conversions in Vietnam’s          affordable to government69.
cities are homogenous in nature (i.e. single use of
either residential, commercial or industrial) and       b. Pilot and roll out Land Pooling and Land
carried out at the urban peripheries due to the         Readjustment Projects (LPLR)70
low cost of land. This creates inefficiencies in city
development as it increases distance and travel         LPLR is a long established policy instrument
time between places of employment, places of            and is particularly effective in organizing
habitat and other essential facilities (e.g. health     efficient and coordinated development of land
clinics, schools). Other negative externalities         held by a large number of individual households
include increased congestion, pollution, social         or groups with small or mixed-size parcels. In
segregation or exclusion, and encroachment              a typical project, the authorized LPLR agency
of agricultural land. Focusing on strategies to         selects and designates the urban-fringe area to
promote more inclusionary and sustainable               be developed and identifies the land parcels (and
urban growth patterns, which include a mix of           owners) to be included. A draft LPLR scheme
uses and good transport connections, will be            is then prepared to plan, define and explain
important to ensure that cities continue to be          the project, and to demonstrate its financial
effective at spurring economic growth, poverty          viability. The scheme for each project therefore
reduction and other opportunities.                      includes a map of the land parcels in the project
                                                        site, a list of the landowners, the land parcels
Detailed Description.                                   and their valuations; plans of the proposed
                                                        road, drain, water, sewerage and electricity line
a. Revise urban master plans to reflect                 networks and the plot subdivision layouts; a
integrated land use planning                            list of the plot valuations; a plot reallocation

69
   The City Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) in Mumbai, India, financed the complete costs of
train and highway networks by selling land rights in strategic locations near transport nodes.
70
   For an early review of LPLR, see Archer, R (1999) ‘The potential of land pooling/readjustment to provide
land for low-cost housing in developing countries’ in Payne, G (Editor) ‘Making Common Ground: Public-
private partnerships in land for housing’ Intermediate Technology Publications, London.

                                                   Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   75
      plan; an implementation program; cost                    serviced land based on the outcome of land
      estimates and a financial plan. It also includes         needs assessments for selected primary and tier
      a written statement of the project objectives            one cities.
      and principles, and the project implementation         - Capture some land for public purposes through
      measures. The LPLR agency can consist of a               exactions (e.g. 15 percent for roads, 15 percent
      local government’s DoC, with guidance from               for open space and amenities, and 20 percent
      PPCs and technical support from MoC’s urban              for social housing as per Decree 188).
      and land planning technical staff.                     -	Expand auctions of some additional land for
                                                               revenue generation for public investment and to
      The LPLR scheme is prepared in consultation              value the land and monitor market prices; and
      with the landowners in the project area and in         -	Once a proportion of planned and serviced
      co-operation with the public utility agencies            plots have been sold to recover the costs of
      that will be involved in its implementation. It is       infrastructure provision and land development,
      prepared as a draft scheme and then presented            the remaining plots are allocated back to the
      for majority approval by the landowners and              original land use right holders in exchange for
      placed on public display. After any necessary            their land. Although the area of land returned
      amendments, it is submitted for approval to              will be less than that held originally, the value
      the relevant authorities. It is recommended that         will be significantly higher due to the granting
      pilot projects be undertaken in peri-urban areas         of urban landuse rights and the provision of
      of selected primary or tier one cities under urban       physical and social infrastructure73.
      development pressure and where land-owners
      are keen to maximize the economic potential of         c. Introduce land sharing in                    both
      their land.                                            redevelopment and new build sites

      Interest in this policy instrument is already          Land sharing involves the redevelopment of
      strong in Vietnam following land sector                part of a site for sale to cover, or cross-subsidize,
      workshops in 2014 and 201571. If designed              the costs of producing affordable housing.
      properly, LPLR projects can also include               Land sharing can be particularly fitting for
      additional provisions such as exactions of land        redevelopment of old public apartment blocks,
      (e.g. 30 percent of land for social housing, and       where additional units can be sold at prices
      10 percent for revenue generation) and land            sufficient to recover the costs of re-housing the
      auctions to generate revenues and to add value         existing residents. Land sharing hasbeen used
      to the land72.                                         in Bangkok, Thailand, Mumbai, India and
                                                             Jakarta, Indonesia to carry out self-financed
      Moreover, LPLR projects provide the                    developments and improve the efficiency of
      opportunity to incorporate some or all of the          land use. The MoC has built provisions into
      following:                                             new decrees for Housing Law 2015 that allow
                                                             for mixed-used and market-rate housing as
      - Expand the supply of well-planned and                components of redevelopment projects. Such


      71
         The LPLR workshop in Vietnam in 2014 brought experts from a India, Thailand, Korea, Australia and
      Japan to discuss a conceptual and methodological basis for introducing pilot LPLR projects in peri0urban
      areas in Vietnam.
      72
         For example, the Town Planning and Urban Development Act in Gujarat, India statutorily define Town
      Planning Schemes, whichallow exactions to reach up to 50 percent forroads (15%), parks (5%), amenities
      (5%), affordable housing (10%), and additional land for auctions for revenue mobilization (15%). The latter
      also provide the basis for market-based land valuation.
      73
         In the case of providing a portion of land to infrastructure developers, similarly to the Land For
      Infrastructure mechanism, it is important to ensure that the infrastructure developer is selected on a
      competitive basis. For example, the developer willing to build the infrastructure in exchange for the lowest-
      value land portion would receive the contract. In addition, land would only be allocated based on output,
      for example according to a predefined drawdown, ensuring the completion of all works.

76	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
provisions have the potential to incorporate                  to submit proposals that specify a commitment
land sharing.                                                 to providing a range of mandatory components
                                                              and as many of a range of additional components
d. Utilize transparent bidding frameworks,                    as they consider financially feasible. Sealed
such as Requests for Proposals (RFPs)74                       proposals are then opened in the company
                                                              of a representative group of stakeholders and
RFPs are a well-established policy instrument for             the one which commits to providing the most
increasing land use and planned development,                  components is declared the winner and is free
as well as capturing the maximum benefit from                 to implement proposals without delay. RFPs
market-driven developments for allocation in                  encourage fair competition between developers
the public interest. They involve the preparation             in ways which also meet specified social policy
of briefs for undeveloped sites ready to be                   objectives and can consistently maximize the
developed for a range of uses, including low                  public benefit despite the fact that each site
income housing, at no cost to the authorities.                is unique. RFPs can begin in the form of pilot
Approved private sector developers are invited                projects in selected urban areas.

     Table 10.4 Risks Related to Integrated Land Development
                 Risks					                                           Mitigants
     Local governments continue        Reduce adverse incentives for local governments to expand jurisdictions
     to support urban expansion,       geographically, such as through adjustments in budgetary allocation to focus
     despite lack of demand            more on population density and less on population and geographical size.

     Local governments lack            The Vietnam Institute for Urban and Rural Planning under the MoC could play
     capacity to carry out effective   a useful role in facilitating capacity building, for example through peer-to-
     mixed-use planning                peer sharing of effective models.

     Land value capture as result of   Develop mandates to allocate fixed minimum portions of land value capture
     LPLR goes to non-housing use      toward financing housing production.

     Unclear regulatory framework      Structure legal requirements on land sharing to ensure government authority
     distorts land sharing             tomanage developer’s activities around land development for alternative
     mechanisms                        non-housing use.



     Box 10.4 International Examples of Integrated Land-Use Planning and Land Value Capture


     i. The City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) in India, was established in 1971
     as a parastatal organization to develop Navi Mumbai to accommodate over 2 million people75. By
     selling land rights adjacent to and in developments at major transport nodes, CIDCO was able to
     cover the costs of major road, rail and public utilities provision. The application of LPLR proposals,
     known as Town Planning Schemes, also enabled the city to grow to its intended population on a
     largely self-financed basis.

     ii. China Experience. Perhaps the broadest and most comprehensive application of value capture
     is in China, where municipalities buy adjacent agricultural land from farmers at agricultural use
     prices, service it with infrastructure, and sell it to developers as urban land with permits for urban
     development. The difference in price between the land’s urban value and its agricultural value
     accrues to the municipality, provides a large share of local revenues, and pays for the installed
     infrastructure76.


74
   The main characteristics, benefits and limitations of RFPs are summarized in the Appendix.
75
   http://www.cidco.maharashtra.gov.in/NM_Introduction.aspx
76
   Ingram, G. K., and Ong, Y-H (2011) ‘Value Capture and Land Policies’ Proceedings of the 2011 Land Policy
Conference, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Studies, Cambridge, MA.

                                                         Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                     77
            Box 10.4 International Examples of Integrated Land-Use Planning and Land Value Capture
                                                                                                (Continued)
       iii. Latin America. There is considerable international experience in land value sharing, which enables
       land administration agencies to capture a reasonable proportion of the added value generated by
       state action for allocation in the public interest, including:
       - Land Pooling and Land Readjustment to finance pro-active inclusive urbanization
       - Betterment charges to recover public investments in technical and social infrastructure
       - Exactions in exchange for the authorization of higher-value development rights.


      10.2.C Other Market Making Measures to                in some provincial land administration
      Support Land Supply                                   offices and provide services linked to each
                                                            sectoral department. It is recommended
      a. Review the regulatory framework                    that consideration be given to increasing the
      of planning standards, regulations and                number of such facilities, relocating them
      administrative procedures. MoNRE and MoC              within residential areas and restructuring
      can collaborate to determine where changes            them to provide a wide range of services. In
      can most quickly generate improvements. It is         Andra Pradesh, one-stop shops located in
      recommended that such reviews take place every        residential areas of Hyderabad have been
      five years or so to ensure that the regulatory        successful in providing functions ranging
      framework for land management and urban               from birth, marriage and death certificate
      planning responds to changes in the market            applications to passports, land transfers
      and in people’s needs. It should be noted that        and building permits. This has improved
      significant progress has been made by MoC             governance and ease-of-service.
      and MoNRE in simplifying the procedures for
      registering LURCs and BOLUCs as reflected             d. Reclaiming undeveloped land allocated
      in the decrees drafted to implement the 2015          to developers, but not developed within the
      Housing Law and the Land Registration Law.            specified 24 month time period. Improved
                                                            enforcement of the requirement on developers
      b. Establish some form of over-arching co-            to develop land within the stipulated 24 month
      ordination body on land administration. At            development period can significantly increase
      present, MoC, MoNRE, MoHA, MoF and                    land supply and therefore reduce land price
      MoJ have direct influence over aspects of land        inflation. New measures built into adjustments
      administration and the overlap this generates is      to the Housing Law and the Real Estate Law
      replicated at provincial and local levels. Overlaps   requires developers to pay an additional
      are particularly strong between MoC and               land use registration fee past the first 24
      MoNRE. A coordinating body need not take              allowable months to start development. Such
      the form of a statutory body and could consist        measures should be effective, yet should also be
      of a Ministerial Coordination Council or Task         accompanied by revoking of land use privileges
      Force, with high-level representation from            should further delays persist.
      all relevant authorities at central, provincial
      and municipal levels, with the mandate to             e. Increase the area of land allocated under
      reduce duplication and improve governance             Decree 188 to small-scale developers.
      on land. Alternatively, the government may            Allocating some of the 20 percent of land
      consider bundling the functions of multiple           allocated for social use rule under Decree 188
      line ministries into a single body, provided that     for small-scale developer or citizen-initiated
      reduces the overall number of actors involved         housing would help to overcome current fiscal
      and responsibilities and leadership roles are         constraints faced by local governments, as the
      assigned clearly (see Recommendation 10.6.A).         selling off of land parcels for self-development
                                                            could easily pay for the cost of infrastructure
      c. Expand the existing system of ‘One-                and amenity provision.
      Stop-Shops’. These are currently located
78	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
10.3. Affordable Rental Housing                        projects financially feasible. Public investment is
                                                       important to fill the funding gap between what
Enhance supply of affordable rental housing            is affordable to low income groups and the total
with private sector participation, particularly in     cost of the production and management of a
industrial zones, for migrant workers, students        quality rental unit over its lifetime.
and low income families. Key objectives are to
improve the quality and formality of existing          Detailed Description. Develop a set of subsidies
rental housing stock, stimulate new supply of          and incentives for private sector provision of
affordable rental housing to meet demand and           affordable rental housing for high-priority
to enhance the affordability of rental options for     and under-served groups. Subsidies would be
the lowest-income and most vulnerable groups.          provided to qualified actors via capital grants,
                                                       provision of infrastructure and concessions on
10.3.A. Invest in Supply-Side Support for              land. Access to these subsidies will require an
Affordable Rental Housing                              actor to be accredited, make a commitment
                                                       to maintain rent at affordable levels and to
Brief. Invest in an affordable rental housing          rent units to specific target groups, such as
program, driven by local governments, where            students, resettled slum-dwellers, low income or
supply-side support is provided to private             vulnerable groups (e.g. people with disabilities,
rental housing providers through capital grants,       elderly), depending on need.
infrastructure delivery, and concessions on land.
This will help to reduce the cost of affordable        Specific program characteristics may include the
rental production for target priority groups           following:
(e.g. the lowest income, migrant workers and
students) and to build a set of competent and          - Central government designs overall program
accredited rental housing actors.                        rules, including funding sources, target
                                                         groups, eligibility criteria, RFP templates,
Target Group. Industrial zones, migrant workers,         implementation steps, and reporting
low income households in Q1-Q2 segments.                 requirements etc.
                                                       - Implementation of the program is locally-
Strategic Context. With a high and growing               driven. The DoC of PPCs play a lead role in
numbers of workers in industrial zones, as well          identifying local needs, suitable locations,
as a large number of low income urban dwellers           mobilizing land and engaging local rental
unable to afford to purchase a unit, the demand          housing providers and small landlords.
for affordable rental housing is substantial.          - Capital subsidies are delivered and monitored
Only 10 percent of the existing 2.25 million             through PPCs, and local budget may be
industrial workers are served by decent housing,         allocated for concessional provision of land as
while 78 percent are estimated to live in rental         well as infrastructure delivery.
housing. Meanwhile, the student population, at         - Rental housing providers should have a set of
approximately 1.6 million people, is increasing.         minimum competencies to become accredited
There will be limited formal supply for the              to receive subsidies. These could be non-profit
lowest income and most vulnerable groups                 or for-profit actors, state-owned, small private
without relaxing regulatory hurdles, as well as          enterprises or employers in industrial zones.
introducing additional incentives and support          - Grants to rental housing providers can be
for rental housing providers to make these               calculated based on the income of end-users,

77
   These grants could make up to 60-100% of capital costs of a project. In South Africa, grants combine up
to around 70% of total construction costs for projects where 30% of subsidized units are targeted at very
low income (earning between R1500 – R3500 per month or VND 2.7 – 6.3 million) with maximum rental of
R750 per month (VND 1.3 million), and the remaining 70% are targeted at households of the ‘secondary
target market’ (i.e. earning between R3500 – R7500 per month or VND 6.3 – 13.4 million) which can be
charged up to R2,250 per month (VND 4.0 million). Violation of these terms result in the SHI being required
to partially repay the subsidy amount.

                                                  Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   79
        location, number of units and require keeping                       rental housing providers in the program.
        the rental price below a stipulated affordability                  - Local governments would be responsible
        maximum for a period of time, for continued                         for assessing needs, vetting and approving
        rental or rent-to-own77.                                            projects, as well as delivery of infrastructure
      - The central government would play a lead role,                      and supporting access to suitable well-
        working with local governments, in designing                        located land (this may be facilitated through
        and funding the capital grants, as well as                          concessional leases on public land or
        associated TA and accreditation process for                         utilization of Decree 188).


           Figure 10.2 Affordable Rental Housing Initiative


                NHA                                             Banks
                                                                                  • Savings account
                                                                                  • (in future) housing nance



                                                                                                           Bene ciaries
                   • Program design                                 • LT rental nance
                   • Program oversight                                                                      (Renters)
                   • Capital subsidy provision ($)



                                                                                 • Rental payments
                                                               Investors
               Local
            Governments                                         PPCss
                                                               Landlords
                             • Targeting & selection                             • Equity
                             • Capital subsidy allocation      Employers         • Operations            Integrated Housing Site:
                             • Land + Infrastructure        Rental Housing       • Commitment to            w/ minimum rental
                                                              Providers             a ordability       requirement (e.g. 40% rental)




           Table 10.5 Risks for the Rental Housing Capital Subsidy Program
                       Risks					                                                 Mitigants
           Limited interest by       Subsidies will need to be carefully calibrated through thorough market assessment
           investors                 and financial modeling to ensure that affordability can be maintained, while providing
                                     sufficient income to attract investors.

           Poor operations and       Upfront project subsidies are simple and transparent, yet there is a risk that developers
           management                are incentivized to build projects without a proper management system being in place
                                     for the lifetime of a project. Develop standards and guidelines for accredited actors in the
                                     management and operations of rental housing projects (including tenant agreements,
                                     rent collection, non-payment measures etc.). DoC also should carry out periodic checks on
                                     the conditions of rental units and set in place penalties for non-compliance.

           Capacity of               Carry out trainings and a set of minimum conditions for a local government to participate
           governments               in the program. Pilot the program with only a few high-capacity local governments to start
                                     with, to create best practice models, and promote peer-to-peer sharing.

           Regulatory hurdles        Ensure that business registration and accreditation guidelines are simple and support
                                     new market entrants. Revise building standards to provide more flexibility for rental
                                     housing providers.




      78
            See more information: http://www.shra.org.za/.

80	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
              Box 10.5 International Experiencein Supply-Side Rental Housing Programs
 	
 There is extensive experience over the past century of public investment in rental housing programs.
 Although an argument can be made for keeping land and housing assets in public ownership to
 ensure that there is space in the city for the most vulnerable, such an approach is not easily scalable
 and is insufficient to respond to the magnitudeof the demand. Increasingly, governments are shifting
 toward the use of more efficient instruments, such as land-use controls and targetedsubsidies to
 engage and leverage private sector investment and expertise in low-cost rental housing production
 and operations.

 i. South Africa’s Social Housing Program. In 2004, South Africa began to develop a sophisticated
 social rental housing program. A new entity, the Social Housing Regulatory Authority (SHRA) was
 created to design regulations, accredit Social Housing Institutions (SHIs), administer grants and
 support development of the sector.SHRA offers two types of subsidies, the Restructuring Capital
 Grant for specific projects, and the Institutional Subsidy direct to qualified SHIs. The SHRA, along
 with the National Association of Social Housing Organizations (NASHO), and the South Africa Local
 Government Authority (SALGA) work together on capacity-building of SHIs and local governments,
 as well as undertaking market studies to support development of the rental housing sector78.

 ii. Subsidized Rental Housing in the United States. The U.S. has a long history of investment in
 affordable rental housing. From 1935-1970, large-scale rental projects were built and managed
 entirely by public sector. Poor location choices (adverse selection of land use alternatives), clustering
 of the urban poor (‘income concentration’), and untrained public-entity owner/ managers led to
 severe social and health issues in public housing. From 1970-2015, all new US affordable rental
 housing has been via PPPs with the private sector (for-profit and non-profit), principally through an
 investor-targeted capital subsidy tied to long-term affordable use. The dominant resource today is
 the Low income Housing Tax Credits (LIHTC), plus soft-debt funding via HOME or state-level housing
 production initiatives.

 - The LIHTC provides tax credits to private investors in return for equity investments in privately-
   owned rental housing developments with restricted rents (often set below 18 percent of the
   median household income). This program has been active since the late 1980s and produces
   between 60,000 and 100,000 units per year.
 - The HOME program is a housing block grant to city, county and state “participating jurisdictions”.
   Cities can choose how to use funds, though most use a substantial portion of the grant for rental
   housing production.



10.3.B. Demand-Side           Rental     Housing       still lack the capacity to pay for affordable rental
Assistance                                             housing. Households in the Q1 market segment
                                                       earn on average VND 3.98 million per month,
Brief. Introduce time-bound rental vouchers to         and given the high percentage of income that
improve the capacity of the poorest familiesto pay     goes on food and transport, will only have around
for housing in accredited units. Vouchers should       VND 600,000 for housing. There are also around
use a simple and transparent allocation system         1.6 million urban households that are classified
(e.g. based on income, type of household, type of      as poor. In order to assure that these people have
rental unit) and not be limited by a beneficiary’s     access to housing, and that there is adequate cash
residential status.                                    flow for a rental housing provider to maintain a
                                                       quality rental unit, the government can provide
Target. Lowest income Q1 households, and               a direct subsidy, through a rental voucher, to the
vulnerable groups (e.g. elderly, disabled).            poorest and most vulnerable households. This
                                                       interim support can allow a poor household
Strategic Context. Even with supply-side support,      to become better integrated into other social
many households, with the lowest income, will          development and income-generating programs
                                                  Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   81
      and work towards increasing income and financial               - Units rented through the program must meet a
      capability to manage their own housing situation                 minimum set of housing quality and contractual
      in time.                                                         standards. Units are pre-qualified by the local
                                                                       DoC before households can occupy them and
      Program Description. Demand-side rental                          are checked periodically during a household’s
      housing vouchers directly support low income                     tenure. Units may be provided by accredited
      tenants to obtain decent rental housing by                       rental housing providers and landlords, which
      increasing their ability to pay. These vouchers can              have participated in the capital subsidy program.
      be targeted at the lowest income households and                - These vouchers could be distributed to
      could be delivered directly to the landlords on a                landlords via commercial banks. The use of
      monthly basis to supplement a tenant’s payments.                 banks would have two major benefits: (i)
                                                                       provide an incentive toward formal financial
      Such a program might have the following                          inclusion of poor households and development
      characteristics:                                                 of a regular payment and credit record, and (ii)
                                                                       reduce barriers to social assistance related to a
      - Households are qualified based on income                       household’s residence status.
        determinants, requiring up-to-date information               - A simple and transparent system can be used
        on beneficiaries. Selected beneficiaries are then              whereby the subsidy is flat for each eligible
        able to select from the list of pre-qualified rental           household, requires co-payment, and there are
        units in a set amount of time (e.g. 60 – 90 days).             maximum controls on the type of rental units
      - Local governments would play a primary role in                 and rent level (e.g. max. size of 40m2 and spend of
        identifying and verifying beneficiaries as well as             around 25 percent of income).
        rental units. This could be done using the existing          - The rental vouchers can be combined with
        poor list as the basis and combined with other                 supply-side interventions to affordable rental,
        social assistance programs to minimize costs for               and launched under the umbrella of an affordable
        administering the program. Ideally, there would                rental housing program.
        not be restrictions on residence status.

       Table 10.6 Risks Related to Rental Housing Vouchers
             Risks					                                               Mitigants
        Rental price     A large number of voucher holders could push up rent prices. This could also occur where
        inflation        landlords artificially inflate rental prices to the maximum allowable level of the program. In order to
                         mitigate this risk, in-depth assessments of the local market should be carried out in order to design
                         a voucher that minimizes distortions. Vouchers could also be rolled out incrementally in order to
                         first test the market impact.

        Limited supply There may also be reluctance by landlords to rent to low income households that qualify for
        of rental units vouchers if the administrative steps are too complex, or the government becomes involved (i.e.
                        rent must be reported), and upon non-renewal of the voucher the landlord would have to find
                        another tenant. The voucher program should be designed with engagement and input from
                        potential landlords to ensure that it supports maximum participation.

        Beneficiary      If the voucher is means-tested or means-adjusted, perverse incentives arise where recipients are
        reliance on      penalized for earning more money, marrying (and adding an income), or other self-improving
        program          activities. A flat-subsidy is recommended to avoid these issues and also due to the difficulty to
                         reliably measure household income in Vietnam.There should also be efforts to coordinate voucher
                         eligibility with other livelihood and savings programs, so that beneficiaries have an exit strategy.

                         Administering 1-on-1 landlord-tenant arrangements is management-intensive; many steps are
        Poor program     involved. There is a risk that substandard units or households with incomes above the maximum
        administration   threshold are allowed to participate, or that local governments do not have sufficient resources
        by local         to properly manage the program. Local governments need to be trained, capable, transparent,
        governments      and reliable in identifying qualifying households and rental units for the program. Only those local
                         governments that comply with these minimum standards will be able to participate.



82	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                        Box 10.6 International Experiencesin Rental Housing Vouchers


     Rental assistance schemes are becoming increasingly common in countries around the world.
     These include the Housing Choice Voucher Program in the US, the housing benefit in the UK, the
     Commonwealth Rental Assistance (CRA) program in Australia, as well as rental assistance to low
     income households and students in Netherlands and France, and many others. These international
     examples show that there are a number of options in the design of a rental housing voucher program,
     based on overall objectives. For example, use of a flat subsidy structure can avoid complexities of
     measuring incomes79 and the negative incentives on income that result from an income-based
     subsidy80. Also, it should be decided whether housing subsidies can be stacked or not81, whether
     vouchers are a universal right or limited in number on a first-come, first-served or waiting list
     basis82. Also, rental assistance programs are often integrated with other social support and income
     generation activities to better leverage support to help households out of poverty.

     i. The U.S. Housing Choice Voucher Program. The U.S. has a tenant-based rental assistance
     program administered by the local Public Housing Authorities. Households contribute 30 percent
     of their income toward rent, and a voucher is paid to the landlord by the federal government up
     to a ‘fair market rent’ (FMR). The FMR is based on a percentile of market rents in the local housing
     market as determined by periodic survey. Target households must be poor (income 50% or less of
     area median income, adjusted for family size), and they must use the voucher (find and rent a flat)
     within 60 days of receipt, or they lose it. In 2010, the federal government provided over $50.2 billion
     in housing assistance to over 2.2 million households.

     ii. Chile’s Rental Housing Subsidy. Introduced in 2013, Chile’s rental housing subsidy is aimed at
     low- and moderate-income young families. The Ministry’s 15 regional offices carry out application,
     enrollment and housing inspections. Administration of the rental subsidy relies heavily on private
     banks. Chile uses a flat-rate, time-limited subsidy that offers a degree of administrative simplicity
     and payment flexibility for tenants facing income volatility. There is a considerable amount of
     flexibility built into the program – landlords agree on terms and tenants can miss a payment three
     times during their tenure before eviction proceedings.



10.3.C. Other Market-Making Measures to                   improving market information, supporting
Support Affordable Rental Housing                         development of suitable financial products and
                                                          providing technical assistance to build competent
There is also a set of supporting activities to           local governments and a set of capable rental
improve the market environment for private                housing providers.
sector provision of rental housing, by removing the
legal, technical and financial barriers. This includes    Activities to improve the market environment for
revision of the legal and taxation framework,             rental include the following:

79
   In the UK, the rental subsidy program is considered complex and difficult to both understand and
administer. The complexity of the calculation of the rate of rental subsidy leads to the occurrence of errors
in the administrative process, resulting in over-payment (£840 million in 1997/98) and delays in payment.
The US is similar to that of the UK. HUD estimates that there is an overpayment of US$2 billion (HK$15.6
billion) for all housing assistance each year because of incorrect rental calculations.
80
   In the U.S., households must pay 30% of their income, which acts like an income surtax, and incentivizes
them to avoid formal employment.
81
   In Australia, the CRA is exclusive of other forms of social housing assistance (i.e. public housing tenants
are not eligible). In the US, and particularly the UK, there is stacking of rental demand and supply-side
assistance in order to reduce rents to more affordable levels. In the UK, this is also used to provide the
cash flows necessary to secure private financing of capital loans for new social housing development.
Accordingly, there is a symbiotic relationship between rental assistance and separate supply programs.
82
   In Australia, France, Netherlands and the UK, the rental housing benefit programs are a means-tested
universal entitlement and thus broadly subscribed by low income households. In the US, roughly 1 in 4 eligible
households receives assistance, and the average time on a waiting list is many months, often many years.

                                                     Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   83
      a.	Strengthen the regulatory framework for                 banks could be engaged in discussions (e.g.
         rental housing, focusing in two primary areas:          using the VND 30 trillion stimulus package)
      - Clarify and balance the legal relationship               for new development and conversion of
         between tenant and landlords, building on               vacant/unfinished units into rental and
         the rights outlined in the new 2015 Housing             toward self-built affordable rental units84.
         Law by detailing into implementing decrees          ii.	In the medium-term, a credit line or liquidity
         and practice83.                                         facility for long-term rental loans can be
      - Increase flexibility in law on rental                    opened up to primary lenders in order to
         accommodation. Relax standards in Decision              stimulate the development of rental housing
         No. 77/2006 to help to regularize existing              finance. This credit should be provided
         landlords and informal rental units, including          at market rate through a limited-liability
         simplifying the business registration steps and         entity, such as a Secondary Mortgage
         minimum open space requirements.                        Facility or the Vietnam Development Bank
                                                                 and could be funded by government-issued
      b.	Explore income tax waivers to support                   bonds or other securities.
         affordable rental housing production.
         Consider introducing income tax waivers and         d.	Provide technical assistance to build
         land use fee waivers to registered businesses          capacity. Develop resource materials,
         providing rental housing at a low cost (e.g.           guidelines, toolkits and trainings to build
         below VND 2 million per month) in order to             capacity of rental housing providers and local
         facilitate a reduction in informality.                 governments. These materials could include a
                                                                standard template for rental housing contracts,
      c.	Stimulate innovation of supply-side                    guidelines for registration of businesses,
         development finance, including off take                structuring project finance for rental housing
         financing. Two types of development-                   and carrying out feasibility studies. TA should
         related finance essential for affordable rental        be aimed at small landlords, larger rental
         housing production at scale are largely                investors, as well as local governments to
         absent from Vietnam: (1) construction                  strengthen each actor’s role in developing the
         loan/ development loans, and (2) reliable              rental housing sector.
         ‘bulk offtake’ finance (e.g. for institutional
         investors seeking to buy completed and              e. Improve market information of the rental
         occupied properties). Banks that are properly         sector. MoC, through the Housing and
         incentivized with risk-mitigation measures            Management Information System, should
         will create or actively use specialized long-         build a system to regularly collect and report
         term financial products for investors                 out rental market information, including
         providing affordable rental or rent-to-buy            statistics on rental prices, default and eviction
         solutions, as well as housing microfinance for        proceedings. This will help to overcome
         self-built rental housing solutions.                  information asymmetries, so that investors can
                                                               more accurately assess risk, identify business
      i.	 In the short-term, guidelines on financial           opportunities, as well as help to inform
          product development could be developed and           government policy and subsidy targeting85.


      83
         For example, clarifying the contractual obligations of both parties, tenant and landlord rights, legal
      procedures for eviction, exploration of a simplified dispute resolution process for landlord-tenant
      disagreements.
      84
         The Revised Housing Law of 2014 states that affordable rental is a target of the credit package, however
      there are not yet clear guidelines on how these projects should be structured.
      85
         Public sector entities collect and publish figures on rent levels in both Germany and the United States.
      Reporting cases on non-payment of rent to financial information centers can also help landlords screening
      potential tenants and creates greater incentive to make payments. A Mexican rental insurance company
      has reported a drop in late payments from 30 percent to 5 percent, once this information was reported
      (Peppercorn and Taffin, 2013).

84	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                    Box 10.7 Thailand’s Long-Term Credit for Rental Housing Investors


     Thailand has had a successful experience in providing long-term credit for rental housing production
     via the Government Housing Bank (GHB). In Thailand, the GHB encourages small landlords that own
     land to construct low-cost rental apartments with very affordable loans. GHB provides up to 100
     percent of total construction cost with long repayment periods of up to 15 years. This compares to
     an average 5-7 year repayment period across other lenders.Rent for GHB-supported apartments is
     limited to between Bt2000 to 4000 per month (VND 1.3 – 2.6 million). Currently, more than 8,000
     landlords have developed rental apartments and rental housing loans outstanding have grown
     steadily from USD 489 million in 2006 to USD 2.1 billion in 2011 (an average increase of about 34
     percent per year)86.


10.4. Self-Built Housing                                 arise from completely self-provided solutions in
                                                         informalareas, such as public health issues due
The aim of these recommendations is to focus             to lack of basic infrastructure. In comparison,
government support on facilitating self-                 theproposed anticipatory strategythat uses
built housing, by providing assistance where             starter homes to accommodate urban growth
households are unable to formally self-provide,          is less costly. Infrastructure provision in already
including basic infrastructure, access to                established yet under-serviced slums costs
affordable housing microfinance and technical            about 2.5 to 8 times more than a core housing
assistance, and provision of basic core units that       approach, based on experience in Latin America.
provide a formal start and eventually become
decent through self-built improvements and               Detailed Description. Projects would include
expansions. There is also a broader set of               land acquisition and production of new starter
recommendations toward creating an enabling              units for ownership, lease and for rent-to-own.
environment for self-built housing development           Home-owners can then incrementally modify
in well-serviced and connected neighborhoods.            their core starter units according to their
                                                         needs, preferences and available resources in
10.4.A. Develop a Program for Expandable                 their own time.
Starter Homes
                                                         Core units maybe developed on large scale
Brief. Deliver incrementally expandable starter          by a private developer, through a cooperative
core units in serviced subdivisions in order to          movement, or through a mix of both.Core units
facilitate self-built production of new affordable       are typically one-floor with at least one room of
housing, provide households a formal start               twelve square meters or larger, and are move-
in their housing career and facilitateout well-          in ready, so that households do not need to
managed urban development.                               pay rent while self-developing the starter core.
                                                         Historically, development of both sites and
Target Group. Households in Q1 and Q2                    services can be very slow if low income households
income segments.                                         have to finance both. Support to further speed-
                                                         up incremental construction and improve the
Strategic Context. Households in Q1 and Q2               quality of expansions should be considered, in
income segment have low purchasing power and             particular, access to both affordable housing
most are unable to formally self-build a decent          microfinance and technical assistance.
housing unit in urban areas. The core house
initiative ensures that families have a basic            Land tenure may be provided in the form of
starter home and access to basic infrastructure,         shared or individual land use right certificates,
enabling a formal start in their housing career.         depending on market demand and household
Starter homes mitigate negative externalities that       preferences. It is possible to facilitate multi-


86
     Kritayanavaj, Ballobh. Affordable Housing in Thailand.Asia-Pacific Housing Journal. December 2012.

                                                   Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   85
      story starter cores in areas either with high land    starter core and/or infrastructure provision may
      cost, particularly if graded land use zoning and      receive financial support to mitigate negative
      infrastructure provision are unable to effectively    externalities; however, subsidies should be
      reduce land cost. However, multi-story starter        minimized to ensure that resources are sufficient
      core solutions are not recommended for the first      enough to address the housing challenge at
      pilot phase, due to their technical complexities.     the necessary scale. In urban areas with higher
                                                            land prices, a larger subsidy may be required;
      Economic simulations indicate that it is possible     however, the cost to government is expected to
      to finance formal starter cores without subsidies     be a fraction of the current 30T interest subsidy
      in many locations, particularly in expansion          scheme’s average per-unit cost to government
      areas of larger cities – provided there island        (approximately VND 115 million). Lastly,
      value capture of windfalls during urbanization.       where land is expensive, high-density housing
                                                            solutions, likely driven by developers but
      The main source of funds would be household           providing scope for user-driven improvement
      savings for a down-payment, typically covering        and expansions, can reduce cost. This approach
      the land cost and micro-housing loans to              can first be piloted to test the needs for trainings,
      finance the remaining cost of capital. The            as well as technical alternatives.

            Box 10.8 International Experience in Sites and Services and Incremental Housing Programs


       Sites and services and incremental housing programs at suitable locations and with cross-subsidies
       between different land uses are considered an international best practice. Davidson & Payne (2000)
       and Caminos & Goethert (1978) provide excellent textbooks on the matter. Governments, with
       support of bilateral and international agencies, have facilitated the development of many million
       housing units worldwide:

       i. The Egyptian case of ‘Build Your Own Home’ demonstrates a process for incremental expansion
       into multi-story homes, to address high land costs.This is made possibly through a clear incentive
       framework, allocating subsidies based on a timely construction process and vertical growth of the
       house. The allocation of appropriate land and physical planning of the districts are the government’s
       core responsibilities, including the arrangement of the plots and the provision of infrastructure and
       services – such as access to water, electricity and sanitation. Successful applicants receive a plot for
       self-development after a down-payment of 10 percent. The rest is financed over a period of seven
       years. To promote timely construction, beneficiaries are exempt from repaying any outstanding
       installments, once the three-floor house is completed and externally finished. In addition, the
       government subsidizes the construction of the ground floor unit in order to make it easier for the
       household to move in, and to speed up the construction process. This approach may be suitable for
       middle income households.

       ii. The Ciudad Bachué incremental housing project in Bogotá, Colombia provides walk-up
       blocks with expandable starter apartments. Ground floor maisonettes, sometimes with a fill-in
       mezzanine, are expanded horizontally. Upper floor apartments expand vertically on the rooftop.
       The structural core is designed to support up to 5 floors, which is enforced through collective
       action. The multi-story buildings and improved finishings provide an attractive modern image for
       a neighborhood. This approach could be adapted in locations with high land cost. In addition,
       the project provides single-story starter core row houses on narrow lanes, which are expanded
       vertically. This approach may be suitable for areas with low and medium land costs. Finally, the
       different characteristics of the stacked maisonettes and row houses suggest combining the two
       approaches on a single site, differentiating between locations with higher and lower land values, for
       example on larger access roads and smaller side lanes.

       iii. PREVI in Lima, Peru, is a famous international architecture competition facilitated by the
       government in collaboration with the UNDP: the competition sourced solutions from national and
       international experts for designing high-density, incrementally expandable starter homes. The


86	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
         Box 10.8 International Experience in Sites and Services and Incremental Housing Programs
                                                                                            (Continued)

     competition winner entries were later constructed, providing incremental housing for the middle
     class. Such an approach could be used to find innovative solutions.

     v. The case of Pekine in Dakar, Senegal validated the incremental concept by the fact that for every
     $1 of public funds, some $8.2 of private funds had been invested in housing in the neighborhood
     within approximately 5 years. However, the project also illustrates the risk that too high standards
     may lead to rapid gentrification through sale to higher income households.


10.4.B. Neighborhood Development and                    neighborhood improvements as well as
Improvement of Substandard Homes                        individual housing improvements. These are
                                                        described in more detail below:
Brief. Address the qualitative housing deficit
by providing underserved neighborhoods                  a. Improve under-serviced neighborhoods
with basic infrastructure and ‘crowding                 through provision of basic infrastructure
in’ microfinance integrated with technical
assistance to allow households to carry out             The first step in the process is to help eligible
quality home improvements and incremental               neighborhoods organize themselves on a
expansion.                                              community-based participatory platform as
                                                        the four different alternatives88 for community
Target Group. Households living in under-               development are assessed: (1) in-situ upgrading,
serviced or underdeveloped areas and/or in              (2) in-situ land sharing, (3) in-situ redevelopment
substandard units                                       or (4) relocation. Relocation disrupts household
                                                        livelihood and can be costly economically and so
Strategic Context. According to the 2009                this should only be considered if the area is unsafe
Census, there are an estimated 4 to 5                   for occupation or the cost of risk mitigation
million housing units that are substandard:             measures (i.e. flood retention or improved
approximately 1 million households live with            drainage) are prohibitively high. Relocation may
overcrowding, (sharing units or living on               also be required if the area is to serve for city-
less than 6 m2 per capita), 4 million units are         level arterial infrastructure, however, whenever
constructed of non-permanent materials, and             possible, this should be avoided through land
2.8 million units lack access to safe water and/or      sharing and project design alternatives. The
sanitation. Urban upgrading of affected housing         intervention includes the following aspects:
clusters provides economies of scale while
encouraging maximum contribution of efforts             - Organize the community according to the
and funds by the community. It also reduces             participatory framework
negative externalities caused by poor sanitation        - Provide basic physical and social infrastructure
and lack of infrastructure (such as public health       (e.g. water, sanitation, electricity, streetlights,
or social issues), and provides a platform for          drainage, street surfaces, education, health,
housing investments, such as incremental home           cultural     facilities)   in      under-serviced
improvements and development of housing                 communities.
microfinance87.                                         - Improve the de facto tenure security of
                                                        households, for instance, by organizing them
Detailed Description. There are two                     under collective tenure with debt-financed
main aspects to this program, supporting                LURC for a long-term land lease.

87
   For an international best practice, refer to the Parivartan Slum Networking Program in Ahmedabad,
India that was collectively implemented by the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation and the microfinance
institution and women union SEWA. A combination of similar actors already exist in Vietnam.
88
   Patel et Al (2011).

                                                   Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                   87
      - Mitigate hazards or relocate communities on               dwellings to access housing microfinance
      a voluntary basis, and increase the density of              combined with construction technical
      underdeveloped areas, if applicable.                        assistance. Suitable housing microfinance
      - Introduce housing microfinance to support                 loans are expected to be between VND 10 and
      incremental home improvements through a                     50million89 for neighborhood improvement,
      savings-linked housing-microfinance product.                home improvement, and expansions. Through
      Savings is a tool that ensures community buy-               financial simulation, it appears that incremental
      in while allowing lenders to assess the payment             home improvement loans are economically
      capacity of informally employed households.                 viable without subsidies to Q1 and Q2
      Once saving patterns are established,                       households. However, if the government decides
      microfinance institutions are able to provide               to allocate subsidies to other housing programs
      loans that are larger in size with longer terms for         it should consider supporting the sector to speed
      incremental housing investment (see the case of             up the incremental construction/loan cycles and,
      Parivartan in Box 12).                                      possibly, to increase the size of each investment
                                                                  cycle. Construction technical assistance is an
      b. Support improvements of existing dwelling                integral part of housing microfinance, ideally
      units through access to housing microfinance                financed through an interest rate spread, and
      and construction technical assistance                       can help to reduce the cost of construction while
                                                                  ensuring better construction quality.
      Improvements may include incremental
      expansion, the upgrade of structural safety or              Lastly, private rental units are typically created
      quality, and/or individual connections to basic             through incremental expansions particularly by
      utilities (e.g. individual water tap, individual            adding additional floors. Construction of private
      toilet, access to electricity). This will be facilitated    rental units may be supported in coordination
      by supporting households in substandard                     with the rental program.


                Box 10.9 International Experiences in Urban Poverty Reduction and Home Improvement


           i. The Parivartan Slum Networking Program in Gujarat, India provides basic infrastructure to
           underserviced communities working in close participation with residents. The program develops
           the infrastructure, based on community preferences and solutions, to minimize the potentially
           adverse impact of construction works. It also crowds in housing microfinance:by requiring a
           small co-payment of approximately 10 percent of total basic infrastructure development cost,
           beneficiaries establish a savings and credit history. Building on this history, residents are eligible to a
           subsidized loan for constructing individual water and sanitation facilities. After repaying the second
           loan, community members are eligible to small home improvement loans, which are typically not
           subsidized any more. All loans balance the affordability, project size and lending exposure in an
           optimal, incremental way. The program is complemented through enhancement of tenure security
           through a no-eviction guarantee, enabling the delivery of microfinance. The fact that no formal
           tenure is given also reduces the likelihood that better-off households capture subsidies (see on
           downzoning below). This case is a suitable example that, together with Vietnamese experiences such
           as VUUP, could inform the scaling up of a national urban poverty reduction and home improvement
           program.

           ii. Baan Mankong Upgrading Program, Thailand is a good example of a community-government
           partnership, which channeled government funds, infrastructure subsidies and soft housing loans
           directly to the poor who then jointly design and execute improvements to their homes, environment
           and basic services while managing the budget themselves. In 2003, the Thai Government announced
           an ambitious policy to address the housing needs of the urban poor,as part of this program



      89
        At present, VUUP loans are mainly VND 15 million. However, loan sizes may increase if reaching out to
      Q2 households.

88	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
       Box 10.9 International Experiences in Urban Poverty Reduction and Home Improvement
                                                                                        (Continued)
 implemented by the Community Organizations Development Institute (CODI), the poor in 200 Thai
 cities work in close collaboration with their local governments, universities and NGOs to survey all
 urban settlements and plan an upgrading process that attempts to uplift all settlements in that city
 within five years. Once these city-wide plans are finalized, CODI channels the budget, infrastructure
 subsidies and housing loans directly to communities.


10.4.C. Other Market-Making Measures to                 inclusive project that more likelyreflect the
Support the Self-Built Housing Sector                   needs and desires of the people who would
                                                        eventually reside there. The alternative
Beyond the two programs, there is a set of              - completed projects designed and built
other measures that allows the government to            through non-participatory processes – can
create an enabling environment and to support           be costly economically and socially.
self-built housing production, at minimal cost
to government. These include the following:          c.	 Consider shared tenure options for
                                                         collective management and investment.
a.	 Expand supply of serviced land                       Collective tenures, such as condominium-
    forallocation to self-built housing at               like land and housing certificates of pre-
    suitable locations and in close proximity            1975 apartment blocks, can support
    to economically viable areas. Land for               collective construction and management
    affordable housing may originate from                of shared infrastructure (e.g. construction
    multiple sources. Over the immediate and             of private alleys), collective financing
    medium term, land reserved under the 20              (group lending and solidarity funds),
    percent rule (Decree 188) is one source.             and can help to control entries and exits
    These could be allocated for formal self-built       to reduce gentrification and to improve
    housing by offering serviced subdivisions            subsidy control. Collective tenures can even
    (including minimum-size plots) or                    support collective livelihood initiatives
    expandable starter core homes at market              (e.g. by operating a shared production
    rates. Over the long-term, land should be            facility for home-based workers), thereby
    provided through pro-active urbanization of          increasing capacity to pay for housing.
    peri-urban lands adjacent to current built-          Lastly, shared tenure also helps compliance
    up areas or in proximity to new growth areas,        with minimum plot sizes, even though
    such as industrial zones, and upgrading of           individual households may use areas that
    underdeveloped central locations (provided           are smaller than the stipulated minimum.
    that an adequate participatory framework
    exists), for example, through Land Pooling       d.	 Eliminate costly one-off fees and time-
    and Land Readjustment (LPLR) including               consuming procedures that push
    provisions for land exactions or through             households into informality. The reduction
    Requests for Proposals (RFPs), taking into           of fees, together with a simple (possibly
    account the best interest of the public.             online) mechanism of construction and land
                                                         ownership registration, etc. is particularly
b.	 Create a framework for community                     important for the self-built housing sector.
    participation        in       neighborhood           Many self-providing households are trapped
    development. A framework that allows                 in a vicious cycle of under-investment and
    for fair and effective negotiation between           informality: they lack access to affordable
    the key stakeholders can facilitate open             credit and/or face a high level of investment
    discussion for planning of neighborhood              risk due to informality; while they are
    upgrading, land sharing, resettlement, and           forced to remain informal due to under-
    in-situ rebuilding alternatives. In each case,       investment. Thus, online registration,
    engagement of stakeholders supports a more           reducing the likelihood of informal fees
                                                Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                89
        and administrative charges are considered                         of formal subdivisions the public sector may
        central to enabling formal development.                           structure a vehicle for collective actions
                                                                          amongst a cluster of households (e.g. in
      e.	 Streamline legal and administrative                             the form of a cooperative with collective
          processes and allow for more flexibility,                       tenure) willing to settle on land with
          such as inclusive construction permits.                         initially off-grid infrastructure in exchange
          Consider strengthening the graded system of                     for upgrading this infrastructure within 5
          ‘deemed-to-satisfy’ and regular construction                    years, with adequate incentives and TA.
          permits (Decree No. 64/2012/ND-CP),
          depending on the complexity of the works                    g.	 Provide flanking measures to expand
          and the qualification of executing personnel.                   the payment capacity for housing and to
                                                                          reduce household income and expenditure
      f.	 Revise development standards to better                          volatility. International and Vietnamese
          reflect market demand. By reducing the                          experiences show that the lowest-income
          minimum plot size, for example to 25 m2 or                      households need income growth and
          less, more households will be able to afford                    stabilization before they can borrow capital-
          formal development. In turn, they will be                       intensive housing loans. Therefore, for
          able to more easily receive a LURC (through                     example VUUP lending institutions provide
          debt-financing or at nominal administrative                     a livelihood loan and technical assistance
          charges), and be able to invest into higher                     (e.g. vocational training and business skills)
          quality housing. Furthermore, staged                            before someone can access a housing loan. It
          infrastructure provision reduces the entry                      is recommended that these interventions be
          cost to formal housing. To reduce the cost                      also brought to scale.

                             Box 10.10 Participatory Frameworks for Neighborhood Development

       A famous reference for a participatory framework is the Million Housing Program in Sri Lanka
       based on Community Action Planning (Hamdi & Goethert, 1997). The program became possible
       through national leadership and international cooperation, including the World Bank and
       leading international academic institutions (MIT, UCL) that provided the technical assistance. The
       community-driven development framework was anchored in national law and regulations, based
       on the strategy developed by national policy makers and international experts and an evolution of
       lessons from initial pilot projects and replication and scale up. The Community Action Planning and
       variations thereof are used by UN-Habitat, the Cities Alliance, the Asian Coalition for Community
       Action (ACCA)and the Community Organization Development Institute (CODI) in Thailand.


       Table 10.7 Risks Related toSupporting the Self-Built Sector
             Risks					                                                 Mitigants
        Limited                This risk can be addressed with program phasing, careful selection of pilot areas and
        capacity for           investments in capacity building.
        implementation
        at the local level

        Lack of access to      This risk can be mitigated through measures outlined in the land and finance chapters, such
        land or finance        as land value sharing and land value taxation and access to affordable housing microfinance
                               linked to technical assistance.

        Lack of political      In addition to access to housing microfinance integrated with technical assistance to improve
        willingness to         the structural and visual quality of incremental housing, political risk can be addressed through
        support the self-      an awareness campaign about the efficiency and affordability of self-built housing, illustrating
        built housing          that the sector is capable of producing formal and affordable housing at a large scale without
        sector                 exhausting public resources and that the core house program eliminated negative attributes
                               commonly associated with low income self-built housing.



90	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
10.5. Developer-Built Housing                       locations to incentive and leverage private
                                                    sector participation, as well as to test new
Engage private sector and maximize their            models for RFPs, integrating tenure types
participation in the production of affordable       (such as affordable rental and starter homes),
housing to support delivery of a housing at         as well as mixed-uses and mixed income, which
different price points, configurations and          can also help to cross-subsidize social housing
tenure options to respond to different housing      production.
needs. Create an enabling environment and set
of incentives to harness private sector technical   Detailed Description. The MoC would act
capacity and direct their financial resources       as convener and national facilitator of PPP
toward national housing policy goals.               projects, starting with industrial worker
                                                    housing. At a program level, MoC would
10.5.A. Structure PPPs for Affordable               provide regulatory and technical support,
Housing Delivery                                    monitoring PPP progress, and evaluate
                                                    PPP performance upon completion. At a
Brief. Structure a clear and transparent            project level, a tri-party agreement would be
framework for local governments to engage           formed between local government, industrial
private sector in affordable housing provision.     corporation(s), and private developer.
This framework would outline the procedures
(e.g. competitive bidding, contractual              The below set of activities presents an example
agreements), and responsibilities (e.g.             of how the program can be implemented:
affordability levels, profit sharing obligations)
for the private sector actor, as well as public     - MoC identifies a shortlist of local
counterpart for affordable housing delivery           governments with high production of
in high priority areas (e.g. industrial zones,        industrial workers, available land, and
rundown public housing sites).                        capacity to participate in PPPs.
                                                    -	Local government identifies sites near
Targets. Industrial zone workers (higher Q1           industrial zones, with emphasis on proximity
to lower Q3) and households living in old             to city centers and social amenities.
public housing stocks (higher Q1 to Q2) in the      -	Local government identifies industrial zone
short term.Urban low income households, Q1            owners or large employers with interest in
through Q3, in the long-term.                         supporting employer-assisted housing.
                                                    -	Industrial zone owners or large employers
Strategic Context. Although the 30 trillion           can provide a combination of land, project
package has reoriented some private investors         capital, off-take commitment for unsold
and developers toward the low-cost and                units after sales, and rental and loan
affordable housing market segment, more can           payment management through direct payroll
still be done to attract and leverage private         deduction.
sector participation. This is particularly the      -	MoC and local governments work together
case in areas of high demand where there is           to select a small number of pilot projects
low-risk in finding end-users, such as large          with high success potential, for roll out,
and high growth cities, as well as industrial         oversight, assessment and replication.
zones. In industrial zones, there are large         -	Local government conducts an RFP process
underserved housing needs, where around 90            to select the participating developer.
percent of workers are estimated to live in poor    -	Depending on project site and available
conditions and an overwhelming majority of            resources, on top of regulatory provisions on
workers are migrants between the ages of 15           incentives to developers, local government
and 29. From a supply-perspective, lower              can consider support in streamlining land
costs of land in peri-urban areas and around          assembly and administrative.
industrial zones, coupled with support from         - National housing finance and subsidy
government to deliver a product to meets the          programs on the demand side can also be
needs of end customers, make these feasible           leveraged for workers’ rental or mortgage
                                               Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform              91
           payments. Rental housing components of             Allowing for mixed uses and income levels
           workers’ housing would be supported by             on the same site helps bring diversification to
           rental vouchers and supply-side incentives         the project site and strategically build toward
           that could include capital subsidies90.            integrated communities.

      Due to challenges in drawing developer                  It would be advantageous to study successes
      participation, some local governments have              and lessons learned in existing industrial
      considered allowing the developer to also act           zone housing projects to guide nationally
      as land developer and to sell off a segment of          applicable PPP structures. Notable existing
      the site for commercial and market-residential          projects include IDICO’s Dong Nai
      use. This model helps cross-subsidize the               industrial housing project and Saigon South
      break-even or low margins of social housing             Development Corp’s industrial workers
      production. Da Nang, in the Dien Nam                    housing in Tan Thuan export and process
      Dien Ngoc district, is exploring this model.            zone.



                      Box 10.11 International Experience in PPPs for Affordable Housing Delivery

           i. In Turkey,TOKI, a state-owned enterprise (SOE), is a PPP co-developer of middle income
           housing. Over the last 15 years, TOKI91, the National Housing Development Administration, has
           emerged as the principal driver of housing development and urban renewal in the Republic of
           Turkey. With consolidated powers including rights to all state-owned land, the power to override
           local zoning and impose new zoning, and the power of eminent domain, TOKI has established
           itself as a national developer or co-developer of housing, either directly (by hiring general
           contractors) or indirectly (via individual PPP joint ventures) whereby the resulting housing is
           typically a mixture of income levels, tenure options, and price points. As a result of this, TOKI is
           self-financing and has been responsible for supply of more than 640,000 homes created over the
           last 15 years92.

           ii. Singapore: Employer-assisted housing and provident funds. A ‘provident fund’ is a
           form of mandatory savings, deducted directly from the payroll of formally employed workers,
           that is used in later life for life needs: education, health care, retirement income, or housing.
           Singapore’s Central Provident fund (CPF) was begun in 1955 under British colonial rule and
           continues today; due to its large contributions (16% from the employer on top of salary, 20%
           from the employee), it has accumulated enormous capital sums, which it allocates among four
           accounts, one of which (the Ordinary Account) can be tapped for housing loans. The housing
           loans, in turn, are mainly used to buy new or existing flats developed by Singapore’s state-owned
           developer/ regulator, the Housing and Development Board (HDB; http://www.hdb.gov.sg/). In
           general, pries at both purchase and eventual sale are controlled and managed by the HDB, which
           acts as a monopsony (universal buyer) across the vast majority of all Singaporean housing. The
           system works extremely well in Singapore, in part because that is an island city-state which
           had an uninterrupted many decades of authoritarian-democratic rule coinciding with rising
           economic prosperity. Other countries often use employer-based provident funds, particularly
           where there are large employers who face challenges of employee retention and find lending on
           housing a good means of building employee loyalty93.




      90
         Refer to Chapter 10.2 on Affordable Rental Housing.
      91
         http://www.toki.gov.tr/en/housing-programs.html provides background on some of TOKI’s housing
      programs.
      92
         Additional context is provided at http://www.toki.gov.tr/en/background.html.
      93
          http://www.miningweekly.com/print-version/benchmark-project-provides-affordable-workforce-
      housing-2013-10-11 and http://www.bizcommunity.com/Article/196/568/96783.html describe South
      Arica’s workforce housing efforts.

92	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
 Table 10.8 Risks for PPPs for Affordable Housing Delivery
                Risks					                                            Mitigants
 Low developer participation           Begin PPPs with successful pilots that have capable developer, proactive
                                       local government, and clear end-users.

 Lack of site integration with other   Ensure sites are in proximity to existing urban amenities, such as markets,
 urban areas                           healthcare or schools. Promote mixed-use and mixed-income projects.

 Over-dependency of workers on         Structure ownership of built projects to belong to developer, local
 employers due to housing support      government, or both, and not to the employers.



10.5.B. Explore Introduction of Development               from zoning bonuses, while contributing
Right Incentives                                          toward affordable housing production.
                                                          Meanwhile, TDRs provide affordable housing
Brief. In the medium- and long-term, link                 developers with an additional source of income
social housing production with commercial                 aside from sales and help draws additional
real estate sector activities by better facilitating      affordable housing developers to the market.
payments in lieu of social housing development
and by allowing development incentives to be              Detailed Description. As the market for
transferred from social housing producers to              affordable housing matures, begin to consider
commercial developers.                                    introducing new tools that link commercial
                                                          sector production with affordable housing
Targets. All social housing production.                   funding by providing incentives related to
                                                          development rights. For example, instead
Strategic Context. Existing measures around               of delivering on Inclusionary Zoning (IZ)
payments in lieu of the social housing                    promises ‘in kind’ (i.e. with land contributions
requirement, as outlined in Decree 188/2013,              or affordable housing actually produced),
provides an alternative to developers who prefer          introduce alternative mechanisms fordevelopers
not to participate in social housing production.          to make contributions, either by making a
Local governments will need to establish                  stipulated cash payment (e.g. per apartment or
mechanisms around receipt, management, and                square meter of IZ land that would otherwise be
distribution of linkage payments. The model               required) or by buying a TDR from a successful
of Transferrable Development Rights (TDR)                 affordable housing developer, as illustrated by
gives developers a means of increasing returns            the examples in Box 10.12.


                Box 10.12 Examples of Development Right Incentives for Social Housing


 Linkage payments from commercial developers in lieu of IZ requirements. For example, in a development
 of 100 flats, a developer would ordinarily be expected to deliver land that would support 20 percent, or
 20 flats, at, for easy demonstration, 50 m² per flat, or 1,000 m² of ‘buildable FAR’. A linkage payment of,
 for example, VND 1 million per m², would amount to VND 1 billion of linkage payments, to be paid in
 installments starting at groundbreaking and ending at completion. The accumulative linkage payments
 would go toward funding the city’s or province’s affordable housing development. This would replace
 the current stipulation under Decree 188/2013 where developers are able to make a contribution
 equal to the land price framework value of the required 20 percent land contribution in lieu of on-site
 development. The GoV might also consider limiting linkage payment only to semi-urban and peri-urban
 sites, while requiring on-site affordable housing delivery for all centrally located projects.

 Transferrable development rights (TDRs) to commercial developers from affordable housing
 production. For demonstration purposes, a TDR model would have the GoV implementing TDRs
 at a ‘three-quarter’ (¾) rule: e.g. for each 4 m² of affordable housing built by a qualified entity (QE)
 (and approved as affordable housing by the locality), the QE is issued a ‘Transferable Development


                                                    Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                        93
                         Box 10.12 Examples of Development Right Incentives for Social Housing
                                                                                                     (Continued)
           Right Certificate’ for 3 m². Now the developer in the preceding commercial 100-flat properties needs
           1,000 m² of TDR Certificates, so it has to find a QE that has developed at least 1,333 m² (1,000 ÷ ¾) of
           approved affordable housing. The market developer buys that certificate from the QE, for cash, at
           whatever price they agree upon94. The cash flow generated by the sales of TDR by the QE would qualify
           toward funding the QE’s next affordable housing project.


      Currently, FAR is at 5.0 for residential                  for exemption allowances that are adjusted
      development, with an increase of a multiple               to each locality, which can be guided by each
      of 1.5 for affordable housing development.                city’s categorization. Complexities will arise
      Analysis would be necessary to determine                  in determining the numbers associated with
      the appropriate cap for TDR benefits                      development rights gains and linkage payments.
      purchasable    by    commercial    housing                It will be important to involve commercial
      developments. PPCs and DoCs could be                      sector feedback and appraisal in determining
      consulted as MoC formulates specifications                quantitative specifications of the programs.

                            Box 10.13 International Examples of Development Right Incentives


           i. Transferable Development Rights (TDRs) in India. In India, particularly the major cities (e.g.
           Mumbai, Delhi), well-located downtown parcels can become extremely valuable if they are allowed
           an increase in FAR. The government instituted aTDR scheme in Mumbai where, as described in Box
           10.12, there are ¾ contributions. Hence, each 4 m² of affordable housing built by suitable developers
           (usually non-profits) yields a TDR Certificate for 3 m² of increased FAR elsewhere in the city. The TDR
           market in Mumbai has existed for well over a decade, with prices rising and falling with changes in
           the city’s economy and thereal estate development market.

           ii. Linkage payments95, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Since 2000, under a series of decrees
           (executive orders96) issued by the long-serving mayor of Boston, developers seeking city approval
           for any scheme were and are required either (a) to include a stipulated percentage of affordable
           housing (i.e. mandatory IZ) or (b) to ‘buy their way out of the requirement’ by making a payment
           equal to so much per IZ apartment not produced; the figure started at $52,000 per apartment in
           2000 and is now $200,000 per apartment. Boston’s linkage payment model has worked in that (a)
           it is mandatory, because in practice all zoning in the city of Boston is controlled by a single city
           agency, the Boston Redevelopment authority (BRA), and (b) throughout the relevant period, the City
           of Boston has always been an attractive place to develop high-density downtown property (office,
           hotel, or residential).

           iii. Housing Overlay Zones, California, USA. In a Housing Overlay Zone (HOZ), a locality defines a
           target area (an aging downtown, say, or along the path of a proposed new public transportation
           network), in which new ‘voluntary’ zoning/ development/ density rules are available, at the property
           owner’s election; thus the existing zoning remains in place but the owner (or a developer) may elect
           the HOZ optional zoning for any property that also meets affordability targets (e.g. 30% affordable
           instead of 20%). HOZs often include greater FAR, higher height limits, fast-track permitting, and other
           exemptions or incentives. HOZs have become popular in California as they enable a progressive
           city council/ mayor to work with the business community on strategically targeted higher-density
           growth, without requiring rezoning or changes in the city’s zoning laws.



      94
         In Mumbai, the market price for TDRs fluctuates with supply and demand.
      95
         Some other US cities have also used similar linkage payments or impact fees.
      96
         For the series of executive orders, refer to: http://www.bostonredevelopmentauthority.org/
      getattachment/449e3e98-f724-4bbf-a43d-c7c04389ab15.

94	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
 Table 10.9 Risks Related toTransfer Development Rights

                 Risks					                                          Mitigants
  Poor management of payments in         Establish specialized entities or mechanisms to collect, management,
  lieu of housing development            and allocate funds from payments in lieu of housing development.
                                         Start with a small number of large and capable cities, and scale up.

  Enforcement of zoning and density      The market for TDRs cannot be formed until urban zoning and density
  regulations is not yet sufficient to   management systems are strongly in place. The finance sector will
  support TDR                            also need to be strong, so that market players can be familiar and
                                         comfortable with trading credits.




10.5.C. Other Market-Making Measures to                      related to older forms of deteriorated and
Support Developer-Built Housing                              poor quality public housing stock.

a. Track and manage data on social housing                c.	 Provide detailed guidelines and best
   land contributions at the national                         practices around HOA’s. Condominium
   level. It is recommended that the central                  and co-operative ownership structures are
   government monitor local government                        becoming more common in Vietnam’s
   enforcement and new developments’                          cities. Though basic laws exist to govern the
   compliance of land contributions to social                 legal shape of condo or co-op management
   housing, also known as inclusionary zoning                 entities, there is a need to further guide the
   (IZ). Central government can match data                    governance structure and responsibilities of
   on development and construction permits                    HOAs in more detail or provide support
   with data on IZ parcels contributed. Data                  for the development of professional
   tracked can include parcel location, size,                 property management companies. Effective
   development status, and capacity for                       HOAs will be important to the long-term
   affordable housing development. Once a                     maintenance, and hence value, of buildings
   year, central government might consider
   conducting assessments of new residential              d. Streamline private sector participation
   projects across major provinces, checking                 in redevelopment or upgrading of old
   for IZ compliance, and publishing results                 public housing stocks. Within the
   as a policy management tool or on the                     context of the 2015 Housing Law, MoC is
   public domain. MoC’s ICE could run such                   focusing on models to attract developers to
   a management database in conjunction                      participate in the upgrading of old public
   with ICE’s current responsibility for                     housing blocks. These are often rundown
   collecting and managing data on new local                 condominiums and collective housing,
   development projects. The combination                     known as khu tap the (KTTs), and located
   of affordable housing development                         in prime inner city areas, particularly in
   opportunities on IZ sites and public                      Hanoi. Local governments can extend the
   awareness of compliance will support local                PPP approach to affordable housing delivery
   governments to become better enforcers.                   with special directives for redevelopment
                                                             of old condominiums and apartment
b.	 Consider adjusting the terminology of                    stocks offering incentives (such as higher
    ‘social housing (nha o xa hoi)’ to ‘affordable           FAR, zone changes for mixed use etc.) and
    housing (nha o gia hop ly)’ to better reflect            facilitating organization and engagement of
    the policy focus. Social housing produced by             current residents. These would need to be
    private developers would benefit from being              considered on a case by case basis, but with
    rebranded as government-supported housing,               transparent and competitive bidding and
    as a means to reduce negative perceptions                procurement procedures.


                                                     Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                  95
                   Box 10.14 Urban Renewal Areas and Redevelopment Authorities (RDAs) in the U.S.


           Starting in the 1950s, older urban cores in American cities experienced blight, as higher-end
           households moved to the newly expanding suburbs, leaving the urban core to be re-occupied by
           rural-to-urban immigrants of much lower income. Many of these neighborhoods saw disinvestment,
           so the cities created urban renewal authorities (URAs) that became development arms of city
           government, with the broad power to acquire parcels via eminent domain (expropriation) or
           foreclosure of real estate tax liens97, to rezone or upzone land, and to convey the property to private
           developers for revitalization efforts. Several such authorities persist today in cities such as Boston
           and San Francisco98, and have become the critical urban-planning nexus for city government.
           Additionally, many jurisdictions have adopted a model of redevelopment areas (RDAs) that
           may use tax increment financing (TIF); in these models, the municipality designates an area for
           redevelopment, then commits to use a stipulated portion of the increase in real estate taxes in that
           area derived from rising property values as a dedicated source of subsidy for affordable housing,
           as one example. The rising revenue stream can in turn be financed in the capital markets, so that
           the municipality has up-front cash to fund its portion of urban renewal infrastructure that attracts
           employers and jobs. The model has been widely used throughout the US.



      10.6. Housing Sector Governance
                                                                Target. Central government ministries,
      Consolidate and strengthen government actors              directorates and agencies, as well as local
      and delivery systems for improved coordination            governments.
      and more effective implementation of housing
      policy, programs and initiatives. Invest in               Strategic Context. Although there have
      building out the foundations of effective                 been efforts to improve coordination in the
      housing sector governance, including real estate          housing sector, with the establishment of the
      information systems, a common targeting                   Central Steering Committee for Housing and
      framework, as well as monitoring and evaluation           Real Estate Policy, there are still not concrete
      standards for measuring the performance of                tools or procedures for real collaboration
      public housing initiatives.                               between central government agencies. Nor
                                                                are there clear guidelines and channels for
      10.6.A. Institutional Strengthening                       providing technical assistance to support and
                                                                empower local governments in preparation and
      Brief. Focus on creating capable government               implementation of projects locally. As a result,
      actors, by working towards strengthening                  many public housing programs are fragmented
      an overarching body to act as a housing                   and have not achieved expected results in local-
      coordinating body in preparation of policy and            level implementation. Structuring a central
      programs, channeling of subsidies and support             body at the national level that acts as the hub
      to local governments to help them become                  for all housing related initiatives and focuses on
      effective executing agents of national housing            interfacing with and building up the capacity
      policy. This body need not be a new institution,          of local governments will help GoV to become
      but for ease of understanding, has been referred          more effective in management of the sector and
      to in this report as the National Housing                 implementation of interventions.
      Authority (NHA).


      97
         Under US law, all real property is assessed annual real estate taxes, which are set by each municipality as a
      percentage of property fair market values. The cost of these taxes is a lien against the property title. If the owner
      does not pay the real estate tax arrearage, then the locality may foreclose and seize the property (land). These
      are called ‘in rem foreclosures’. This is apowerful tool necessary for the recapture of blighted or abandoned
      parcels or properties.
      98
         Boston’s entity is http://www.bostonredevelopmentauthority.org/ and San Francisco’s is http://www.sfocii.
      org/. Many others exist, some better, some worse.

96	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Detailed Description. In order to consolidate                -	Monitor housing sector through analysis of real
and strengthen institutions and delivery systems,              estate market information data
it is recommended to: (i) develop an over-arching
National Housing Authority (NHA) to carry                    The NHA would also engage and support local
out sector coordination and oversight; and (ii)              governments toward preparation and execution
focus on building capacity of local governments              of the Flagship Initiatives. Local governments
in at least five of Vietnam’s high-growth cities, to         play an important role in carrying out local
support them to become effective executing agents            needs assessments, identifying target households,
of national housing initiatives.                             facilitating land provision, administering subsidies,
                                                             engaging private sector and reporting back results
The National Housing Authority would act as                  for program monitoring. By creating common
an umbrella coordinating body across ministries              delivery systems, clear performance indicators and
and city governments to oversee housing sector               platforms for training and peer-to-peer sharing,
interventions. It could be anchored under a lead             central government can support and incentivize
ministry, determined by GoV, such as Ministry of             local governments to become more effective in
Construction, or by establishing a new executive             affordable housing provision.
body at a higher level of government, or by
expanding the mandate and capacity of the existing
                                                              Figure 10.3 Proposed Structure for Housing
Central Steering Committee.                                   Sector Governance
                                                                                     •	   Convenes Ministries/Public Agencies
Such an agency could have the following specific                   National          •	   Policy Analysis & Development
set of functions:                                                  Housing           •	   Channel Subsidies/Support to LGs
                                                                                     •	   Monitor & Evaluate Programs
                                                                   Authority         •	   Targeting & Segmentation
                                                                                     •	   Housing Real Estate Information System
-	Coordinate and convene public agencies
-	Carry out policy analysis and development                                          •	   Targeting & Selection
-	Channel subsidies and support to local                                             •	   Program Executing Agent
                                                                    Local            •	   Manage Land Resources
  governments                                                    Governments         •	   Deliver Infrastructure
-	Monitor and evaluate programs                                                      •	   Streamline Admin. Steps
                                                                                     •	   Reporting Back to NHA
-	Develop common targeting systems

 Table 10.10 Risks Related toInstitutional Reforms
       Risks					                                             Mitigants
  Legal hurdles        There will need to be flexibility in how the NHA, as a functional body, is set up. Reaching a
  to establish the     common agreement first among key ministries (MoC, MPI, MoF, SBV) to work towards the
  NHA                  establishment of the NHA would be important, and then agreeing on its functions, legal
                       standing and a plan to build its capacities and responsibilities over time.

  Lack of interest     Early engagement of local governments in 5 of the highest-growth cities will be important, in
  of local             order to ensure their buy-in and allow them to shape the national housing initiatives in line
  governments          with their needs and interest.




                     Box 10.15 International Examples of Housing Governance Structures


 i. Egypt: Social Housing Fund. With a post-revolution focus on affordable housing, Egypt
 established the Social Housing Fund (SHF) within the Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban
 Development in 2014. The SHF was created as a consolidation of several entities that come under
 theMinistry to transform the housing sector, improve the housing conditions of the underserved low
 income population (below 40th percentile of the income distribution) and fulfill the Government’s
 commitment to deliver one million homes for low income households. SHF is charged with
 designing housing laws and regulations, social housing programs, providing oversight for their
 implementation in consultation with relevant housing entities, and managing financial resources


                                                       Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                                   97
                           Box 10.15: International Examples of Housing Governance Structures
                                                                                                     (Continued)
           for social housing. A series of national-level policy reforms serve as a catalyst for SHF’s programs and
           policies, including streamlined land and property registration systems, an improved real estate tax
           law, building code and mortgage development framework.

           ii. Morocco. Al Omrane. Morocco consolidated its housing sector in 2003, after insecurity in bidonvilles
           (slums) prompted King Hassan to establish a National Urban Strategy. Under the broad direction of
           Morocco’s Ministry of Housing, the NUS specifically sought to prevent or alleviate the proliferation
           and expansion of informal settlements through new affordable housing production, mainly via
           PPPs. In addition to the MoH, Morocco in 2004 established Al Omrane Group99, as a consolidation
           of over a dozen public construction companies, to act as the main government entity to implement
           housingprograms and coordinate a number of government entities. With 14 subsidiaries regionally, Al
           Omrane implements four main programs: the Social Housing Program (via PPPs), Villes sans Bidonvilles
           (‘Cities without Slums’) for slum upgrading. A program for very low income housing (Logements a
           Faibles Valeur Immobiliere Totale, FVIT), and the development of new towns.



      10.6.B. Building Blocks of Housing Sector                  Detailed Description. MoC has been charged
      Governance                                                 to develop and manage the housing and real
                                                                 estate information system. A new decree has
      Brief. Develop a program to build out the                  been drafted to define the scope, the principles
      foundations of housing sector governance,                  and the role of key stakeholders in contributing
      including continuing efforts to put in place               to its establishment and maintenance. This
      a comprehensive management information                     would cover market data as well as account
      system for the housing sector, setting up                  for public spending in housing to allow
      M&E standards for better accounting of                     better monitoring of the real estate sector’s
      public spending on housing, and developing a               movements and development of more effective
      common affordability and targeting framework               housing policies and program.
      for housing programs.
                                                                 To put in place this Housing Management
      Target. All market actors, including                       Information System (HMIS), as a depository of
      government entities, private sector and                    reliable, up-to-date, publically-available housing
      households.                                                and real estate-related data, GoV will need to
                                                                 build out procedures to collect and update data
      Strategic     Context.      Limited       market           from local governments, all relevant ministries,
      information makes it difficult for government              as well as private sector actors to monitor market
      in Vietnam to formulate effective housing                  dynamics. Data may include basic geo-referenced
      interventions to support access to housing for             information on the location and characteristics
      thelow income, as well as for private sector               of slums and squatter settlements, supply data
      and households to investigate and evaluate                 on residential housing markets, rental housing
      market trends. More reliable information                   prices and housing finance information.
      supports all housing sector stakeholders to                Collection of this information may also require
      make better informed and evidence-based                    introducing new surveys or requesting further
      decisions. As a result, new efficiencies will be           questions be incorporated into the national
      introduced to help lower costs for housing and             living standards survey or the census.
      allow government to make more targeted and
      efficient policies to support the low income               Information can be collected and reported
      and maintain stability in the real estate market.          out using online systems, which have both


      99
           http://www.alomrane.ma/ ; the site’s text is principally in French.

98	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
government and public-access portals, to                    public spending and to ensure that subsidies do
maximize transparency and remove market                     reach the most vulnerable and needy households.
failures associated with lack of information.               This would require carrying out comprehensive
As such, the HMIS can also serve as a platform              analysis of incomes and affordability levels based
for consumer education and private sector                   on GSO VHLSS and census surveys, and then
engagement.                                                 putting in place easy-to-use and simple standards
Secondly, development of an income or                       for setting up local qualification criteria,
consumption-based targeting system is                       assessing beneficiary incomes and confirming
recommended to improve the efficiency of                    eligibility across public programs.

 Table 10.11 Risks Related to the Housing Sector Building Blocks
      Risks					                                              Mitigants
  Availability and quality Initially, the management information system should start with a few key market
  of housing data          indicators that are simply to collect and report, and then build out to more difficult
                           measures over time.

  Mistargeting            To mitigate mistargeting, a clear system for assessing income, based on consumption
                          levels and state of existing housing, can be used, as well as shared online systems, so that
                          local governments in different regions can share information on potential beneficiaries
                          (e.g. to assess whether they have property registered in another jurisdiction).




                      Box 10.16 Thailand’s Real Estate Information Center (REIC)


 Established in 2004 as a resolution by the Thai Cabinet, the REIC is a part of the Government Housing
 Bank though directed by its independent Board of Directors. The REIC missions are to (i) become the
 Real Estate Industry’s consultant center and knowledge base, (ii) develop housing and real estate
 research, analysis and forecasting capabilities, (iii) build tools and indicators that reliably forecast
 the Thai property market’s demand, supply and price levels and (iv) disseminate relevant real estate
 information to both the public and private sectors. The REIC is funded primarily by the Thai Ministry
 of Finance (through the Government Housing Bank), although over the last several years, around10
 percent of its budget has come from fees derived from services it provides to the private sector.

 The REIC collects data from three key sources:

 -	 Government Ministries (Department of Land, Bank of Thailand - the Central Bank, Ministry of Public
    Works, Ministry of Urban Planning, Bangkok Metro Public Company Ltd., National Statistics Office,
    National Housing Development Board, Legal Execution Department for foreclosure data);
 -	 Primary housing starts and housing completion data from key developers;
 -	 Quarterly consumer survey conducted across the 77 provinces outsourced by external research
    agencies.

 The REIC publishes a real estate annual report that includes data relating to home sales, housing
 starts, land allotment permits, building permits, housing transfers, housing completions, housing
 mortgages, a housing developer sentiment index and a condominium price index.


10.6.C. Other Measures to Strengthen                            compliance of housing subsidy programs.
Housing Sector Governance                                       Given the economic and social importance
                                                                of housing, as well as the complexity of the
a.	 Develop a monitoring and evaluation                         housing system, policy decisions should
    system of housing subsidies. One important                  be informed by an information system
    mandate of the National Housing                             showing their broad implications and
    Authority as a national-level coordinating                  potential outcomes, and by the evaluation
    body would be to ensure the efficiency and                  of the actual results of on-going programs.
                                                      Recommendations for Housing Policy Reform                          99
          Such a system should include:                     investors, who are fast-tracked as qualified
          -	 The impact of the housing sector on the        to implement public housing programs, and
             economy at large, in terms of employment       can act as a consultative committee for input
             creation and new activity.                     on government’s minimum construction
          -	 The measurement of the fiscal impact           standards and design of programs and
             of the sector: (i) the cost of all forms       delivery systems. Strengtheningsuch a
             of subsidies, direct or indirect, national     network will promote the development a
             and local should be measured; (ii) the         set of capable market actors committed to
             tax revenues generated by housing, and         affordable housing, will simplify measures
             in particular, those eventually resulting      to engage and socialize new programs with
             from public assistance programs should         private sector and promote high quality and
             be estimated to provide a clear picture        innovation in the design and construction
             of the real net cost of these programs to      of affordable housing. Working with the
             government                                     existing real estate and builder’s associations
          -	 The assessment of the social and               could be an effective starting point.
             economic      efficiency     of    subsidy
             programs: actual individual targeting,
             measurement of the allocation of the
             support through income segments, cost/
             benefit analysis of various programs.

       b.	 Conduct a ‘regulatory and administrative
           audit’ and introduce reforms to streamline
           procedures and increase flexibility. Launch
           a study that engages local governments,
           households and private sector to identify
           the key blockages in affordable housing
           delivery. A regulatory audit would identify
           the costs associated with regulations on
           housing construction and consumption,
           with the aim to minimize these and enhance
           affordability for lower income segments. The
           result would be a suite of reforms to simplify
           administrative steps, reduce time delays and
           costs, where possible.

       c.	 Create a platform for local governments for
           peer-to-peer knowledge sharing. GoV could
           create a collaborative environment where
           local governments can share best practices
           and lessons around urban development and
           affordable housing development. This can be
           achieved through conferences, workshops,
           online platforms, twinning arrangements,
           among other measures, to allow local
           governments to learn from one another’s
           experiences and replicate project models that
           have been successful.

       d.	 Support the development of a network of
           real estate professional. Develop a system for
           qualification of real estate professionals and
100	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                                                                                                                11
                                                                                                                Chapter


               Strategic Implementation Plan

  Policy            Immediate Term                      Short Term                     Medium Term
  Areas              (0-12 months)                      (1-2 years)                     (3-5 years)
1. Housing Deepen capacity for housing Improve access to                         Strengthen institutional
 Finance   financelending:                   housing finance:                    framework:
           -	 Enhance lending standards      -	 Develop, test and launch         -	 Develop and implement
              and practices and develop         specialized housing finance         a M&E system for housing
              risk management tools.            products. Consider savings          subsidies.
           -	 Conduct market assessment         schemes and subsidy              -	 Build monitoring
              of specialized housing            interventions, as needed,           tools and prudential
              finance products for the          for the different products.         regulations for sector
              different underserved             Explore options to set up a         stability.
              segments. Restructure the         long-term funding facility       -	 Develop consumer
              30T package to improve            or mortgage refinance               financial literacy and
              cost effectiveness by shifting    facility.                           protection program.
              from an interest rate to a
              buy-down subsidy.

 2. Land      Strengthen land                   Develop new instruments          Scale up land value
 Supply       management and                    to increase land supply:         capture and land
              administration:                   -	 Align LPF with market land    redevelopment models:
              -	 Assess options for reforming      prices.                       -	 Raise rates of land
                 land taxation and structure    -	 Design clear frameworks          taxation.
                 of fees.                          for Requests for Proposals    -	 Support pilot LPLR and/
              -	 Review and simplify               (RFPs).                          or land sharing projects
                 legal framework and            -	 Strengthen enforcement           in select cities, with
                 administrative procedures.        and systems for                  frameworks for national
              -	 Expand “one-stop-shop”            implementing the 20              replication.
                 model to streamline land-         percent inclusionary          -	 Contribute to review of
                 related services.                 zoning requirement.              master plans for selected
              -	 Explore creation of an         -	 Develop proposals                cities to integrate land
                 over-arching coordination         for integrated land              use and infrastructure
                 framework for land-related        development strategies,          projects.
                 functions.                        such as pilots for LPLR,
                                                   land sharing, or land value
                                                   capture instruments.

 3. Rental    Strengthen the Market for         Rental Housing Capital           Demand-Side Rental
 Housing      Rental Housing:                   Subsidy Program:                 Voucher Program:
              -	 Carry out assessment of        -	 Design and pilot supply-      -	 Detailed design and
                 regulations and revise            side capital subsidy             piloting of the demand-
                 standards for landlord-           program.                         side rental assistance
                 tenant rights.                 -	 Expand capacity-building         program.


                                                                        Strategic Implementation Plan                101
         Policy           Immediate Term                      Short Term                      Medium Term
         Areas             (0-12 months)                      (1-2 years)                      (3-5 years)
                    -	 Design TA and capacity-           program with a focus on      -	 Revise regulation and
                       building program for rental       Q1-Q2 and small landlords.      technical assistance
                       housing providers.             -	 Set up systems to integrate     program to respond to
                    -	 Create a set of guidelines for    rental housing indicators       sector needs and priorities.
                       development of financial          into the HMIS                -	 Scale capital subsidy
                       products for rental housing. -	 Consider creation of a            program to new
                       Carry out detailed market         credit-line to support          geographic regions of
                       assessment of rental housing      primary lenders to develop      Vietnam.
                       needs in select cities and        long-term financial products
                       industrial zones.                 for rental housing.

            4.     Create enabling environment        Provide direct support for       Expand support and
        Self-built for self-built housing:            self-built housing:              develop based on
        Housing -	 Plan and prepare pilot             -	 Pilot Starter Home program    integrated urban
                      programs for Starter Home          with core housing at select   strategies:
                      program for expandable core        localities.                   -	 Continue to expand core
                      units.                          -	 Continue to develop the          housing delivery and home
                   -	 Adjust development                 housing microfinance             improvement initiatives.
                      standards to support self-         sector                        -	 Introduce new mechanisms
                      built housing (e.g. citizen     -	 Refine, replicate and            to access land for self-built
                      participation, integrated          scale neighborhood               housing projects.
                      planning, plot sizes,              development and home
                      construction permits).             improvement.
                   -	 Conduct assessment
                      of under-serviced
                      neighborhoods for urban
                      upgrading.

           5.       Strengthen existing               Introduce new support for        Explore development right
       Developer-   incentives for developer-         developer-built housing:         incentives:
         built      built affordable housing:         -	 Carry out pilots for PPPs     -	 Roll out PPPs and
        Housing     -	 Enforce local implementation      for affordable housing in        redevelopment of old public
                       of inclusionary zoning and        industrial zones.                housing stock in partnership
                       track land contributions.      -	 Design guidelines                with commercial sector.
                    -	 Simplify verification of          for Home-Owners’              -	 Develop new mechanisms
                       eligibility for housing           Associations practices.          for development right
                       incentive programs.            -	 Explore new incentives           incentives, including
                    -	 Preliminary design of             around redevelopment of          payments in lieu of land
                       structure of PPPs for             old public housing stocks.       contributions, linkage
                       affordable housing delivery.                                       payments and transferable
                                                                                          development rights.

           6.       Build a national coordinating     Streamline governance            Continue to enhance
        Housing     body and strategy:                and delivery systems:            public sector performance:
         Sector     -	 Agree upon the                 -	 Conduct a regulatory          -	 Strengthen online M&E
       Governance      responsibilities of an            audit and reform any over        systems for measuring
                       overarching housing body.         lapping or unsuitable legal      performance of housing
                    -	 Agree on the integrated           standards.                       programs.
                       Roadmap for housing sector     -	 Create channels to support    -	 Set up a platform for LG
                       reform.                           local government-led             knowledge sharing and
                    -	 Continue efforts to develop       action, with resources, TA       peer-to-peer exchange.
                       the Housing and Real Estate       and knowledge sharing of
                       Information Systems.              best practice.


102	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
 Vietnam affordable housing




III
 Part




Annexes




                 A Way Forward   103
       A
       Annex

               Reference Data for
               Affordability Analyses

               Figure A.1 Urban Population by Province (thousand persons)

                Year        Red      Northern         North   Central            South Mekong Urban Hà Nội                    HCMC
                           River     midlands        Central Highlands            East  River Vietnam (ex.)                    (ex.)
                           Delta       and             and                              Delta  Total
                                     mountain        Central
                                      areas          coastal
                                                      areas
                 2005      4,917        1,649         4,095    1,305              6,923      3,443      22,332      2,046      5,145
                 2006      5,103        1,684         4,213    1,338              7,164      3,552      23,057      2,161      5,316
                 2007      5,319        1,722         4,345    1,374              7,440      3,674      23,877      2,307      5,510
                 2008      5,544        1,761         4,481    1,411              7,726      3,801      24,726      2,462      5,711
                 2009      5,778        1,801         4,621    1,449              8,023      3,932      25,605      2,627      5,920
                 2010      6,023        1,842         4,766    1,487              8,331      4,067      26,516      2,804      6,136
                 2011      6,131        1,921         4,893    1,511              9,060      4,204      27,719      2,858      6,248
                 2012      6,339        1,948         5,008    1,540              9,207      4,227      28,269      2,907      6,310
                 2013      6,558        1,974         5,074    1,570              9,411      4,287      28,875      2,951      6,450
                 2014      6,757        2,034         5,228    1,617              9,696      4,417      29,749      3,041      6,645
                 2015      6,974        2,080         5,352    1,650             10,079      4,516      30,649      3,136      6,794
                 2016      7,199        2,128         5,480    1,684             10,477      4,618      31,577      3,235      6,947
                 2017      7,431        2,177         5,611    1,719             10,891      4,722      32,532      3,336      7,103
                 2018      7,670        2,226         5,745    1,754             11,322      4,828      33,517      3,441      7,262
                 2019      7,917        2,277         5,882    1,790             11,769      4,936      34,531      3,549      7,425
                 2020      8,172        2,329         6,022    1,827             12,234      5,047      35,576      3,661      7,592

               Source: Statistical Yearbook 2013: Table 23, pp. 72ff.
               Note: Source years are 2005, 2010, 2011 and 2012, while the other years are extrapolated based on observed trends. The
               growth rate used for the forecast is the average annual change of the 2005 to 2012 and 2010 to 2012 periods, in order to
               reflect the decline in the growth rate. These projections are identical to the medium variant projection by GSO.




104	           Vietnam Affordable Housing
Figure A.2 Urban Household Size by Area

 Year        Red          Northern     North   Central            South Mekong Urban Hà Nội                   HCMC
            River         midlands    Central Highlands            East  River Vietnam (ex.)                   (ex.)
            Delta           and         and                              Delta  Total
                          mountain    Central
                           areas      coastal
                                       areas
  2002        -              -           -        -                -           -        4.27          -          -
  2012        -              -           -        -                -           -        3.83          -          -
  2009       3.7            3.5         4.0      4.0              4.1         4.2       3.96         3.7        4.1
  2010       3.6            3.4         4.0      4.0              4.1         4.2       3.91         3.6        4.1
  2011       3.6            3.4         3.9      3.9              4.0         4.1       3.87         3.6        4.0
  2012       3.6            3.3         3.9      3.9              4.0         4.1       3.83         3.6        4.0
  2013       3.5            3.3         3.8      3.8              3.9         4.0       3.79         3.5        3.9
  2014       3.5            3.3         3.8      3.8              3.9         4.0       3.75         3.5        3.9
  2015       3.4            3.2         3.7      3.7              3.8         3.9       3.71         3.4        3.8
  2016       3.4            3.2         3.7      3.7              3.8         3.9       3.67         3.4        3.8
  2017       3.4            3.2         3.7      3.7              3.8         3.9       3.63         3.4        3.8
  2018       3.3            3.1         3.6      3.6              3.7         3.8       3.59         3.3        3.7
  2019       3.3            3.1         3.6      3.6              3.7         3.8       3.55         3.3        3.7
  2020       3.3            3.1         3.5      3.5              3.6         3.7       3.51         3.3        3.6

Source: General Statistics Office, 2002 and 2012. Other years have been calculated based on interpolation and
projection, using the 2002 to 2012 rate of annual change (-1.09 percent). Regional estimates are based on earlier data
from GSO.


Figure A.3 Qualitative Housing Deficit by Area

                   Year                    Red       Northern        North   Central           South Mekong Urban Hà Nội               HCMC
                                          River      midlands       Central Highlands           East  River Vietnam (ex.)               (ex.)
                                          Delta        and            and                             Delta  Total
                                                     mountain       Central
                                                      areas         coastal
                                                                     areas
         Less than 6sqm                     3.0           1.2           2.9     2.3               3.0         8.1         4.4    4.6    8.7
           No water tap                    18.3          41.9          32.0    63.0              33.9        23.8        29.0    8.1   15.9
          No flush toilet                   6.6          31.7          16.1    31.4              30.0         5.6        14.7    1.3    2.8
      No water or sanitation               20.2          49.9          37.8    69.5              44.9        27.1        34.0    8.5   18.1
           No solid pier                    0.1           6.6           1.6     5.4              17.0         1.0         3.9    0.0    0.7
           No solid roof                    8.0          29.9          42.9    81.6              89.5        77.3        53.3    6.8   74.0
        No solid outer wall                 0.1           9.5           0.8     1.3              11.5         0.7         2.9    0.0    0.4
    No solid pier or roof or wall           8.1          34.8          43.5    83.0              90.0        77.3        54.0    6.8   74.0
             Pre-1975                       5.5           2.2           7.4     3.0               6.9        11.2         7.4    7.5   14.1
        Any combination                    32.1          61.7          68.8    94.9              93.8        82.8        69.1   23.4   79.4
Units: Percentages as a share of total households in each area.
Source: 2012 VHLSS long form.




                                                                                                 A Way Forward                          105
       Figure A.4 Low-End Commercial Housing

        Type/Company          Area                Location               m2   Unit  Source of information
                              (m2)                                      price price
                                                                       VND M VND M
            Star City          50          Hanoi inner fringe            35        1750        DoC Hanoi end 2013
        Apartment in 15        60        HCM Large new project           23        1380     Linan Joint Stock Company
       floor tower block
           Viet Hung           63.5    Hanoi inner fringe Long Bien      24        1524         DoC Hanoi end 2013
        CC Nang Huong          72       Hanoi 583 Nang Hurong St         26        1872         DoC Hanoi end 2013
       secondary market
               CC              65           Hanoi 335 Cau Giay           32        2080        DoC Hanoi end 2013
         Thaloga-econ          91          250 Minh Khai Hanoi           15        1365        DoC Hanoi end 2013/
                                                 inner city                                            internet
            Petroland          68             District 2, HCM            17.9      1220        http://nhadat24h.net/
                                                                                                     12-Mar-14
            Nam Do             75        609 Truong Dinh Hanoi           22       1650         Broker 12 March 2014
           Eco Park/           92          Xuan Quan Hanoi               20       1840       WB site visit 9 March 2014
           Nam Long                              HMC                               420      IFC meeting 12 March 2014
          w/ IFC equity                                                          to 1050

       Examples of smallest size, lowest-priced condominium apartments. Prices range from VND 420 – 2,080 million; typical
       above VND 1,500 million, as of March 2014.
       Source: Based on the Qualitative Research on Social Housing: Housing Market for Living and for Rent for Low-Income
       People in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho, 2014.


       Figure A.5 Low-End Social Housing

        Type/Company          Area                Location                  m2              Unit          Source of
                              (m2)                                         price            price       information
                                                                          VND M            VND M
           apartment          36-60                Hanoi                13-Aug       288 (lowest)
           apartment          36-60                 HCM                  12-Jul      252 (lowest)        MoC Housing
           apartment          36-60               Danang                7-May        180 (lowest)          Director
           apartment          36-60                 n.a.              Monthly rent: 20,000-40,000
        apartment tower       35-40      Bing Dok 12 km south of           10          340-400             Lay Tang
                                                 HMC center                                                Company
        apartment tower       60-70      Bing Dok 12 km south of          13.9        800-1000
            workers                              HMC center
        apartment block         36        Bao Cao Tom Tat, HCM             6             216             IDICO-ORBIZ
                                                  2nd floor                                               (prices not
                                36                5th floor               3.76           135               approved)
                                60         ground floor w/ shop           8.1            486
        apartment tower         66      Sai Dong New Urban Area,       12.7 excl.        800              Co3 Hadico
                                         east of Hanoi (lowest floor)      VAT
                               74                                         12.7           900
          apartment in         36       Dang XaII new urban area, 8.6 incl. VAT          310               Developer
            low-rise         69                 east of Hanoi                        593                    company

       Examples of Lowest End Social Housing Unit Prices as of March 2014
       Price range: VND 135 – 1,000M; typical approx. VND 400M
       Source: Based on the Qualitative Research on Social Housing: Housing Market for Living and for Rent for Low-Income
       People in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho, 2014.




106	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Figure A.6 Low-End Tube Housing in Hanoi

   District                Location                              Built Area       m2 Price          Unit Price
                                                                   (m2)           (VND M)           (VND M)
Bac Tu Liem     North inner fringe hot area                          33             14.9                 490
Bac Tu Liem     North inner fringe hot area                          48             14.2                 680
Bac Tu Liem     North inner fringe hot area                          46             13.4                 615
Bac Tu Liem     North inner fringe hot area                          80             11.5                 915
Bac Tu Liem     North inner fringe hot area                          42.7           15.3                 650
Thanh Xuan      West inner fringe                                    43             17.5                 750
Thanh Xuan      West inner fringe                                    60             18.4               1,100
Ha Dong         West -south inner fringe hot area                    40             9.5                  380
Ha Dong         West -south inner fringe hot area                    32.5           15                   490
Long Bien       East north fringe across river expensive area        41             18                   740
Cau Giay        West north fringe hot area                           36             15                   540
Cau Giay        West north fringe hot area                           36             15                   540
Cau Giay        West north fringe hot area                           46             15.5                 710
Cau Giay        West north fringe hot area                           42             14.3                 600
Hoai Duc        West fringe former rural, active                     44             10.5                 460
Hoai Duc        West fringe former rural, active                     32             10                   320
Examples of Small Tube Housing Units for Sale in Hanoi (May 2014):
Price range: VND 320 – 1,100M; typical approx. VND 500M
Source: Based on the Qualitative Research on Social Housing: Housing Market for Living and for Rent for Low-Income
People in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho, 2014.


Figure A.7 Low-End Tube Housing in HCMC

   District                Location                              Built Area       m2 Price          Unit Price
                                                                   (m2)           (VND M)           (VND M)
Binh Chanh      West far fringe                                      45             2.7                  120
Binh Chanh      West far fringe                                      50             2.8                  140
Thu Duc         East fringe with industry                            54             12.8                 688
Thu Duc         East fringe with industry                            38             9.7                  368
Quan 7                                                               40             12                   480
Quan 12         North far fringe rural                               42.6           9.3                  393
Quan 12                                                              42             9.2                  386
Tan Phu         West south far fringe                                42             9.5                  400
Tan Phu         West south far fringe                                49             16.3                 799
Examples of Small Tube Housing Units for Sale in HCMC, as of May 2014.
Price range: VND 120 – 799M; typical approx. VND 400M.
Source: Based on the Qualitative Research on Social Housing: Housing Market for Living and for Rent for Low-Income
People in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho, 2014.




                                                                                              A Way Forward          107
       Figure A.8 Lowest-Cost Self-Built Housing

                                           Item                                           m2 Price            Unit Price
                                                                                          (VND M)             (VND M)
        Cheapest land on smaller roads and alleyways (semi-formal?)                        2.5 to 5
        Construction cost (semi-formal?)                                                   2.5 to 4
        Normative unit type 2: single story                                                                     238
        Plot of 50sqm                                                                      2.5                  125
        Single-story unit of 45sqm                                                         2.5                  113
        Normative unit type 1: three stories                                                                    177
        1/3 of 1 plot of 50sqm                                                             2.5                   42
        3 units of 45sqm in G+2 tube house                                                 3                    135
        Normative unit type 2a: single story, small                                                             113
        1 plot of 25sqm                                                                    2.5                   50
        Single-story unit of 20sqm                                                         2.5                   63
        Normative unit type 1a: three stories, small                                                             81
        1/3 of 1 plot of 25sqm                                                             2.5                   21
        3 units of 20sqm in G+2 tube house                                                 3                     60

       Self-production of modest housing units, typical approx.: VND 80 to 240 million.
       Based on Self-Build Housing Survey in six low-income neighborhoods of Ho Chi Minh, Can Tho, and Haiphong
       (08-09/2014).
       Source: Based on the Qualitative Research on Social Housing: Housing Market for Living and for Rent for Low-Income
       People in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho, 2014.


       Figure A.9 Existing Rent levels in Various Cities in Vietnam

          City/Ward         Hai Phong (VND)	                Ho Chi Minh City (VND)	                   Can Tho (VND)
                            May Chai Vinh Niem Hiep Thanh Binh Hung Hoa A An Khanh Hung Loi
          6-9m2 Room        600,000-      500,000 -      ±1,000,000         ±1,000,000            800,000        800,000
                             800,000       800,000                                               1,000,000      1,000,000
        12-15 m2 room       800,000-      700,000-       1,000,000-          1,200,000-          800,000-       800,000-
            without         1,000,000     1,000,000      1,200,000           1,500,000           1,200,000      1,200,000
          mezzanine
        12-15 m2 Room          N/A           N/A         1,200,000-          1,800,000-          1,000,000      1,000,000
        with mezzanine                                   2,000,000           2,000,000           1,500,000      1,500,000
            (4-6 m2)
        20-25 m2 Room          N/A           N/A         1,500,000-          1,800.000-          1,200,000-    1,200,000-
                                                         2,000,000           2,500.000           1,500,000     1,500,000
       Individual house 1,200,000-        1,500,000      3,000,000           3,000,000           3,000,000     1,500,000
        (owner is away) 1,500,000                        4,000,000           5,000,000           5,000,000     5,000,000
        for rent (18 m2)

       Source: Based on the Qualitative Research on Social Housing: Housing Market for Living and for Rent for Low-Income
       People in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho, 2014.




108	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                          Annex

                                        Overview of
                            Public Housing Programs

The next section provides a brief overview of         government resources. As the number of
the main public housing programs that have            qualified recipients of this program is largely
been executed by the government of Vietnam            fixed, the government has stated its aims
since the Doi Moi period. Refer to Table B.1          to complete the remaining commitment to
for a summary of planned and recorded budget          beneficiaries by 2020, although it is unclear the
allocation and production numbers for each of         strategy in place to achieve this.
these programs.
                                                      2. Housing support for people living
1. Housing support for meritorious                    in flooding areas of Mekong Delta
people
                                                      This program targets households in rural
The housing program for meritorious people            areas of the Mekong Delta region affected by
was started in 1992. A target group of                flooding. The program has been overseen by
340,341 households have qualified for this            the MoC and implemented by five PPCs in the
program, either through contribution to the           Mekong River Delta region. Components of
revolution prior to 1945 or high national             the program include infrastructure investment
merit, such as leading academics or musicians.        by PPCs to prevent flooding risks, including
The qualification criteria and selection of           construction dykes, and a preferential credit
beneficiaries are determined by the Ministry of       program to households for repairs, upgrades
Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA).          and new constructions to reduce vulnerability
The MoC provides program oversight and                to flooding.
recommendations for budget allocation, which
is approved by the MoF.                               Until 2014, 40,536 units, or 71.7%, of the
                                                      planned 56,520 units have been delivered. Local
Funding is allocated from both central and local      governments have committed VND 231 billion
government budgets. The Provincial People’s           and central government has contributed VND
Committee (PPC) then purchases units, both            905 billion, in addition to VND 1.087 trillion
condominiums and houses, and allocates to             of preferential credit and VND 164 billion
qualified households on a gift basis. Grants can      of commercial credit delivered through state-
also be provided for capital improvements of          owned banks, primarily through the Vietnam
a beneficiary’s existing home. Households are         Bank of Social Policy (VBSP).
given full title and thereby are free to resell and
pass on as inheritance as desired. The program        Most units have been improved in-situ, although
is carried out on an ad hoc basis without clear       there are examples of land readjustment
conditions on the quality and price of units          where relocation is required. In these cases,
purchased and granted to eligible households,         land allocation has been agreed locally and
making the model economically inefficient.            facilitated by the people’s committees (PCs) at
                                                      the district and commune level. This program
Over 72,000 units have been delivered up              has largely been successful, with low default
until 2014, with VND 2.4 trillion of central          rates on housing loans and consistent progress.
                                                                                    A Way Forward                 109
       The program is still in implementation, and the        interface and operational aspects - from sourcing
       government aims to complete it by 2020, with           customers and lending appraisal, to loan
       an additional 16,000 households targeted.              disbursement and collection. The loan has had
                                                              very low default rates, helped by a 5 year grace
       3. Housing support for people living                   period and no penalty on advance payment. In
       in flooding areas in Central Region                    addition, a small number of the most vulnerable
                                                              households, such as poor farmers without
       This program for flood-affected households             family support, may be provided land and the
       in the Central Region is still in the planning         gift of a basic unit, of VND 20 - 40 million per
       phase and aims to replicate the success of the         unit, built and allocated by the Communal
       Mekong Delta program. The planned budget               People’s Committee.
       allocation is VND 543 billion from central
       budget, VND 6 billion from local budgets               In 2014 the Prime Minister decided to revise
       and VND 608 billion of preferential credit             the orientation of this program to be focused
       to reach 40,500 households. Implementation             on sustainable reduction of poverty, and there
       is likely to adapt from that of the Mekong             is a target of reaching an additional 510,700
       project, which combined local government               households from 2015-2019.
       investment in infrastructure with preferential
       credit to households for home improvement              5. Social housing for students
       and reconstruction provided by VBSP.
                                                              Launched in 2009 through Decree No. 65,
       4. Housing support for                       poor      the student housing program promotes state
       households in rural areas                              investment in dormitories for students100. The
                                                              initial goal was to provide accommodation to
       This program supports extremely low-income             meet around 60 percent of total students’ needs.
       households in rural areas without existing
       homes and has been in operation since 1994.            Student housing projects were primarily state-
       The program was revised in 2008 with Decree            funded through the issuance of government
       No. 167. Until 2010, 260,587, or 46 percent, of        bonds101, although there were contributions
       the planned 496,025 households have received           from the annual budget of the Ministry of
       support, mainly through the provision of very          Education and Training (MET), as well as local
       low-cost credit for home improvement and               budgets coming from land use, levies and land
       incremental construction administered by               lease. Once authorized by the Prime Minister
       VBSP. The budget spent on this program so far          and PPCs, student institutions are directly
       amounts to VND 5.798 trillion, and another             allocated budget for construction, according
       VND 12.712 trillion is planned in the coming           to MoC pre-approved designs. Decree No.
       5 years.                                               65 also provides incentives for investors using
                                                              non-state capital for student dormitories,
       Microfinance loans are provided to households          although these are too limited to stimulate
       at a highly subsidized flat interest rate of 3% that   sizeable supply102.
       is well below prevailing MFI rates (see further
       details in Chapter 5). Furthermore, VBSP relies        Since 2009, MoC has authorized 95 social
       heavily on the Women’s Union, the Farmers              housing projects for students, amounting to a
       Union, and the Youth Union for all customer            total investment of VND19.696 trillion and a


       100
           This includes students of public and private universities, colleges, professional secondary schools and
       vocational colleges and intermediate schools.
       101
           MPI and MoF initially planned around VND 8 trillion in government bonds to implement this program.
       102
           These include waivers on land use fees, VAT and reductions in CIT. In exchange, investors for
       dormitory projects are required to organize post-investment management, operation, and maintenance,
       or entrust a housing organization to carry out these services.

110	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
target of 330,000 units103. As of January 2015,       Investors could opt to build units themselves or
there were 75 projects completed, largely in          transfer land with infrastructure to developers
areas outside cities, delivering units to 145,000     to build houses for lease to workers. Land was
students. Another 20 projects are still in the        intended to be set-aside in industrial zones,
pipeline or under construction.                       where compensation is paid by the PPCs to
                                                      former land-owners, and through the 20 percent
Housing is primarily organized into multi-            social housing requirement for commercial or
person dorms in 5-6 storey walk-ups, which            new urban development projects, as specified
must have a minimum of 4 m2 per student104.           through Decree No. 188/2013. Local budget
For state-funded projects, rents are set              would be made available for compensation to
solely to offset management, operation and            land-owners, site clearance and construction of
maintenance, which are determined by                  infrastructure for industrial workers housing.
universities in coordination with PPCs.               The minimum living area for industrial workers
Rents did not account for cost of capital and         was set at 5 m2/person and rent levels must be
depreciation of property value. For non-state         approved by PPCs on the principle that state
funded projects, the law states that profit is        expenses are not included, that the investor
capped at 10 percent and the capital recovery         profit does not exceed 10 percent, and that the
period would cover a minimum of 20 years. In          capital recovery period is set at a minimum of
reality, there are few non-state-funded student       20 years. Additional incentives were provided to
housing projects, which only occur when land          investors regarding land use fees and taxes105.
and long-term finance is provided by the city or
the university themselves.                            It was intended that investors for industrial
                                                      worker housing could benefit from long-term
The program has played an important role in           credit at preferential rates provided through
student housing provision but has failed to           the Local Housing Development Funds.
reach targets, mainly as it has been difficult        However, HCMC is one of the very few local
for institutions in urban areas to identify land      governments with an operational LHDF
for projects. There also does not appear to be        able to finance this type of housing. Other
a lot of oversight once budget is delivered to        projects received financing from the Vietnam
institutions, such as reporting of results.           Development Bank (VDB), which offered loans
                                                      funded through the issuance of government-
6. Social housing for workers in                      guaranteed bonds directly to investors at long
industrial zones                                      terms and fixed interest rates (e.g. 15 years and
                                                      9.65 percent p.a.). Initially VDB prepared 44
A program for social housing for workers in           large projects that were approved by MoC. The
industrial zones was launched in 2009, pursuant       first VND 391 billion loan was made to the
to Decree No. 66. This decree required investors      Vietnam Glass and Ceramics for Construction
in industrial zones to plan areas for social          (Viglacera) to build 1000 social housing units
services and housing for their workers. The           in Hanoi’s Gia Lam District.
goal was initially to provide accommodation to
around 50 percent of the 2.2 million industrial       There were VND 1.129 trillion of local budget
park workers by 2015.                                 spending and VND 24.425 trillion of investors’


103
    When demand exceeds supply, managers of dormitories must assign leases using the following
priority: students from other provinces, poor students, students with good performance and first-year
students. Students with financial difficulties may take loans from the State to pay rents under the Prime
Minister’s Decision No. 157/2007, on credit for students.
104
    Student housing may also be built at 1.5 times the regulated construction density and land use ratio.
105
    Investors are exempt from land use levies and land rents, from VAT, as well as enterprise income tax
for 4 years, counting from the time of generating taxable incomes, a 50% reduction enterprise income
tax for 9 subsequent years and enjoyment of a 10% enterprise income tax rate for the whole project life.

                                                                                      A Way Forward         111
       funding planned for 2009-2015, though there             1.31 trillion of local budget for infrastructure
       are no records on actual spending. Although             provision and VND 27.24 trillion of equity
       6,039,898m2 of social housing for 960,264               provided by investors. Although slow to
       workers in industrial zones was set as the target,      disburse, there have been 129 projects of
       there have only been 123 projects approved              social housing approved by MoC through this
       as of 2014, of which 64 were completed                  program as of December 2014, which include
       (20,277 units) and 59 projects are still being          38 completed projects or 19,686 units and 91
       implemented (66,753 units).                             projects for 55,830 units in implementation.

       Interest in this program has waned for several          A detailed assessment of this Program is
       reasons. Many of the units provided for                 provided in Chapter 5.
       industrial workers consist of shared rooms with
       up to 10 tenants, which is not the preferred            8. Sale of state-owned houses to
       option for those workers with families or others        current tenants
       that opt to rent rooms from households in the
       surrounding areas and commute. Furthermore,             This program was launched in accordance with
       investors often do not have much interest in            Decree No. 61 in 1994. State-owned houses
       managing housing units. Finally, the process            were sold at preferential prices, much below
       and requirements that come with negotiating             market rate, to current tenants. Of the 362,500
       the local government support is not transparent         state-owned units, 286,300 units, or 86.3%, have
       and usually carried out on an ad hoc basis, which       been successfully privatized. Of the remaining
       makes it difficult for investors to plan.               units, some have been left in a legal stalemate.
                                                               For example, some units are occupied by more
       7. Social housing for low-income                        than one family, leading to conflicts as to who is
       people in urban areas                                   eligible to purchase the unit or how subdivision
                                                               could be done.
       Initially launched in 2009 (via Decree No. 67),
       investors of projects classified as social housing106   Since privatization, many units in this program
       became entitled to land, tax and credit benefits107.    have suffered from poor maintenance and have
       In 2013, this support was supplemented by               become dilapidated. Low-income families with
       preferential credit provided through the VND            granted title often under-invested in repairs
       30 trillion package. This package is administered       due to insufficient resources. Furthermore,
       by the central bank, SBV, for a limited 3-year          some of the units that were privatized were in
       period, and was initially delivered through five        Soviet style apartment blocks. Households here
       partner banks108 that offer mortgages to eligible       were given condominium title, yet no property
       purchasers at preferential rates (e.g. max tenure       management system was put in place, resulting
       of 15 years, max. ceiling of 6 percent fixed-rate       in no entity responsible for maintenance of
       interest and LTV of 70-80 percent), as well as to       common areas or the overall building. Many
       developers of social housing projects.                  of these buildings are in an extreme state of
                                                               disrepair as a result. Informal incremental
       Initial targets for this program included               expansion has been prevalent, and strategic
       7,106,272 m2 of social housing or 166,390 units,        redevelopment has become a political priority
       and budget allocation included the VND 30               stated in the 2020 housing strategy. Throughout
       trillion of preferential credit, as well as VND         Vietnam, there is an estimated 3 million m2 of


       106
           Social housing aims at the following target groups: public and government officials and employees,
       industrial workers, students, employees of socio-political organizations, military, and low-income
       households.
       107
           As with the student and industrial worker programs, social housing projects for low-income in urban
       areas benefit from land use fee exemptions, as well as VAT and corporate tax reductions.
       108
           To be expanded to 10 additional commercial banks.

112	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
old apartment complexes built before 1991 with         program funding usage and plans for further
more than 100,000 families living in them.             use, administrative files sent to borrowers, and
                                                       information on subsidiaries and branches. PFI’s
9. Official housing                                    are also expected to conduct quarterly on-site
                                                       assessment of a sample number of borrowers
The final public housing program is for housing        to ensure funds are used for the stated housing
leased to senior public and military officials, at     intent. Annual program auditing occurs to
provincial and national levels of government.          ensure PFI performance.
There are an estimated 315,280 m2 of this
type of housing, including 49 villas and 3,377         As far as Component C, a housing refinance
apartments. Buildings are mainly owned and             facility entity is still in the process of being
managed by central government as well as a small       evaluated by the SBV. Component C did
number of PPCs. There is no data related to new        establish a team for the HFF as governed by SBV,
building of official houses, but it is expected that   and technical staff received extensive training
new production is limited and most stock is            on policy issues, use of hedging instruments,
carried over and reallocated after changes of post.    and mortgage insurance. Efforts were made to
                                                       develop a preliminary housing demand database
9. Housing Finance Project                             for ULIHs lending and to create and implement
                                                       a project performance monitoring system that
Started in 2003 and financially closed in 2012,        would track lending data from Components
the Housing Finance Project, supported by ADB,         A and B. SBV’s experience managing lending
consisted of three components. Component               Components A and B and establishing an HFF
A consisted of mortgage lending to urban low-          technical team under Component C can be
income households (ULIHs) by participating             utilized in continued policy design efforts for
commercial institutions (PFIs) such as Dong A          low income housing finance.
Bank and Mekong Housing Bank. Component
B issued housing microfinance for urban poor           10. Vietnam Urban Upgrading
households (UPHs) through community                    Project’s (VUUP) Housing Upgrade
based financial institutions (CFIs) such as            Financing Component
Cooperative Bank. Component C sought to
establish a housing refinance facility (HFF) to        As part of the VUUP program, there is a
become in due course the apex institution in           housing upgrade financing component where a
helping to facilitate the healthy development of       line of credit of USD 15 million was provided to
the housing finance sector.                            MFIs and community networks to deliver home
                                                       improvement to low-income households in
The program had a slow start and this can be           HCMC, Hai Phong, Can Tho and Nam Dinh.
attributed to program design failure such as           The loan facility reached 90,000 households
tight eligibility criteria and strict administrative   under this lending program. Low-income
procedures but also due to market conditions           borrowers are able to borrower a max loan
such as scarcity in supply of housing products for     amount of VND 15 million with a maximum
the urban poor, to lack of real estate information     loan tenure of 5 years.
to guide program implementation, and to low
lender participation. Changes were made to             The origination, management and collection of
the program eligibility criteria with positive         the loans benefited from the institutions’ existing
results. Loan caps and income requirements for         lending and servicing framework, which includes
components A and B were annually adjusted              working closely with ward PC’s and community
to reflect economic changes, and urban centers         groups to assess loan history, educate consumers,
received higher caps to account for high costs.        and ensure loan repayment. Community
                                                       financial institutions acting as lenders also formed
From a management perspective, on a monthly            community savings groups, five people each, as a
and quarterly basis PFI’s are obligated to             required part of borrowing that creates social
report on outstanding loans and NPLs,                  collateral to lower the risk of the loans.
                                                                                       A Way Forward          113
       VUUP’s home improvement loans are among             to poor repayment rates for the housing loans
       the first non-income-generating loan products       issued by HEPRF.
       to be administered by many of the MFI’s and
       WU network, particularly in the urban area.         12. Asian Coalition for Community
       Lenders’ strong community based network and         Action’s Housing Upgrade Project
       supportof Ward PC’s contributed to healthy
       collection rates. The Women Union (Women’s          ACCA’s housing upgrade efforts occur hand
       Economic Development) WEDS Fund in HCM              in hand with its efforts in small community
       reported that home improvement performance          infrastructure upgrading through the Cities
       was good with a NPL of 0.01 percent.                Development Fund (CDF’s), as monitored by
                                                           the Association of Cities Vietnam. The process
       To expand lending activity and increase loan        starts first with community savings to ensure
       amounts, community lending institutions will        commitment and a voice from the community
       need to further tailor and build up their lending   members. The CDF’s were provided with
       framework.                                          seed funding from ACCA and together with
                                                           community savings provide intra-community
       11. Tan Hoa Lo Gom Resettlement                     lending for housing upgrading. The housing
       Project                                             upgrade program targets small communities in
                                                           urban area, with the most notable pilot effort in
       Tan Hoa Lo Gom (THLG) is an urban                   Vinh City.
       resettlement project in Binh Hung Hoa
       Ward, HCMC, where 72 families were                  With ACCA’s help, 29 families in Cua Nam
       moved from informal tenure and temporarily          ward proposed to redevelop their run down
       built housing into three 3-story apartment          collective workers housing in response to the
       blocks to enable the city to upgrade housing,       city’s redevelopment and resettlement plans.
       infrastructure, and waterway embankment.            ACCA provided housing loans, community
       Originally planned to take three years, the         training for housing planning and construction,
       program was extended to eight years due             and liaising between the community and
       to additional time needed for negotiations          local government authorities. The CDF’s also
       and construction work. Funded by Belgian            funded housing loans of 0% interest over 10
       Technical Cooperation through an ODA                years, of 150,000 VND/month. The pilot
       loan, the project was a joint effort between        yielded 2-story row houses on 45 m2 plots with
       a multi-sector blend of entities including          widened lanes and drainage. Upon project
       local government, Women’s Union, the                completion, Vinh city made plans to apply the
       Hunger Eradication & Poverty Reduction              same self-upgrading model to 135 communities
       Fund (HEPRF), and social workers. From              across the city. Throughout the process, the
       a pre-resettlement perspective, the project         city acted as the linchpin in creating the
       was relatively successful through the phases        necessary environment for the community to
       of community needs assessment and interest          connect with architects and financing, with
       building, mediation, program structuring,           provision of eased administrative procedures
       and implementation.                                 associated with land use rights and zoning and
                                                           construction guidelines.
       The project’s main challenges occurred after
       residents began living in the resettlement
       apartment blocks. Geographical relocation and
       formal vertical living caused many households
       to lose their informal jobs as peddlers and
       home-based workers. The savings groups were
       hardly maintained, and residents were not
       effectively educated about microfinance. Loss
       in employment and failed savings schemes led


114	   Vietnam Affordable Housing
Figure B.1 Budget Allocation for Public Housing Programs since 1995

         Program          		          Year           FUNDING SOURCES (Billion VND)			                                    Outputs
                                                 Central Local Preferential Commercial Investors’ Other Total              (HH –
                                                 Budget Budget    Credit      Credit     Fund     Fund                  Households)
Program on housing support         Planned       9,300 1,500                                                   10,800     340,341 HH
for meritorious people            1996-2015
                                Implemented in   2,400     No                                                             72,153 HH
                                  2013-2014               data

Program on housing support         Planned        905     231       1,087         164                          2,387      56,520 HH
for people living in flooding     2009-2014
areas in Mekong delta            Implemented                                                                              40,536 HH
                                                                  No data
                                  up to 2014                                                                               71.70%
Program on housing support         Planned        543      6          608                                      1,157      40,500 HH
for people living in flooding     2014-2016
areas in the Central Region

Program on housing                 Planned                                                              500    5,798      496,025 HH
support for poor households       up to 2010
in rural area                   Implemented in   2,554    400       2,344                                      12,712    260,587 HH
                                  2009-2010                                                                                46.00%
                                   Planned       4,724    328       7,660                                                510.700 HH
                                  2011-2015
                                 Implemented
                                  up to 2014

Social housing for students        Planned       38,000                                                        38,000 330,000 places
                                  2009-2015                                                                            for students
                                 Implemented     19,696                                                        19,696 330000 places
                                  up to 2014                                                                           for students

Social housing for workers in      Planned                1,129                              24,425            25,554 6,039,898 m2
industrial zones                  2009-2015                                                                          960,264 people
                                 Implemented               No                                No data             No   87,030 units
                                  up to 2014              data                                                  data

Social housing for low-            Planned                1,310     30,000                   27,240            28,550 7,106,272 m2
income people in urban areas      2009-2015                                                                           166,390 units
                                 Implemented               No       4,727                    No data                  75,516 units
                                  up to 2014              data

Sale of State own houses           Planned         The sale of State own houses for current tenants is made by           362.500 units
to current tenants in             1994-2010       preferential prices (prices are much lower than market prices),
accordance with the Decree      Implemented in     but it is difficult to calculate the State’s support in monetary      286.300 units
61/CP dated 05 July, 1994         1994-2010                                                                                 86.30%
                                                  No data related to new building of official houses. There are           315,280 m2
Official housing                Implemented in   only total constructed areas and units which include old houses            include
                                  2005-2014                       and newly constructed houses.                         49 villas & 6,377
                                                                                                                               apt.




                                                                                      A Way Forward                                115
       C
       Annex


               List of Key References

               List of Articles, Reports and Presentations

               1.	 Abdul, Nasir PKM; Huynh, Long Tuong. Vietnam Real Estate Law. Gide Loyrette Nouel Law
                   Firm. UK. 2014.
               2.	 Asian Development Bank. Vietnam: Housing Finance Project Completion Report. 2013.
               3.	 Brandsma, Judith; Duong, Loan. Vietnam Urban Upgrading Project. Housing Improvement
                   Micro Finance Component (3B): Design and Implementation Partners. 2014.
               4.	 BTC. Reflection Paper: Urban Upgrading in Ho Chi Minh City. The Unexpected Social Impact
                   of an Infrastructure Project. 2014.
               5.	 CBRE. Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City Market Insights. Quarter 3, 2014.
               6.	 Davidson, Forbes &G. Payne. Urban Projects Manual: A Guide to Preparing Upgrading and
                   New Development Projects Accessible to Low-Income Groups. 2nd Revised Edition. Liverpool
                   University Press. 2000.
               7.	 Dye, Richard & Richard England. Assessing the Theory and Practice of Land Value Taxation.
                   Lincoln Institute: Cambridge, MA. 2010.
               8.	 International Monetary Fund. Vietnam Article IV Consultation. Washington, DC. 2014.
               9.	 IMF. Vietnam: IMF Country Report No. 14/311. October 2014
               10.	Jung, Sanghoon, Du Huynh, and Peter G. Rowe. The Pattern of Foreign Property Investment
                    in Vietnam: The Apartment Market in Ho Chi Minh City. Habitat International 39: 105-113.
                    2013.
               11.	Kim, Annette. North versus South: The Impact of Social Norms in the Market Pricing of Private
                    Property Rights in Vietnam. World Development. 35(12): 2079–2095. 2007.
               12.	Leaf, Michael. 2002. A Tale of Two Villages – Globalization and Peri-Urban Change in China
                    and Vietnam. Cities 19(1): 23–31. 2002.
               13.	McCaig, B & N. Pavcnik. Moving Out of Agriculture: Structural Change in Vietnam. October
                    2013.
               14.	McKinsey & Company. Taking Vietnam’s Economy to the Next Level. February 2012.
               15.	Macquarie Equities Research. Vietnam Strategy: Reality May Force Some Changes. August
                    2013.
               16.	Ministry of Construction. Social Housing Program in Vietnam. Presentation by the Department
                    of Housing Management and Real Estate Market. 2014.
               17.	Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment. Report on Land Statistics. Hanoi. 2011.
               18.	Ngo, Alex, and Huynh The Du. Urban Development through Infrastructure Land-based
                    Financing: Cases in Ho Chi Minh City. Fulbright Economic Teaching Program. 2010.
               19.	Nguyen, Kim Anh; Le, Than Tam. The Sustainability of Microfinance Institutions in Vietnam:
                    Circumstances and Implications. 2013
               20.	Overseas Development Institute. Viet Nam’s Progress on Economic Growth and Poverty
                    Reduction: Impressive Improvements. ODI Development Progress Series. June 2011.
               21.	Partnership for Democratic Local Governance in South-East Asia (DELGOSEA); Do, Hau.
                    Prof. Dr. Local Government Structures and Status of Decentralization. www.delgosea.eu.
116	           Vietnam Affordable Housing
22.	The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). Vietnam Country Forecast. 2015.
23.	Tuan, T.B. PFM Reforms: The Lessons Learnt-Promises and Tears. Asian Regional Seminar on
    Public Financial Management. Phnom Penh. 26 November 2014.
24.	UNDP. Urban Poverty Assessment in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. September 2010.
25.	UN-HABITAT. Vietnam Housing Sector Profile. Hanoi: UN-HABITAT Vietnam. 2012.
26.	Verschure, Hasan; S. Boonyabanch; Nguyen; Tran. Final Report Evaluation & Recommendations
    for Infrastructure & Resettlement Pilot Project Tan Hoa – Lo Gom Canal Sanitation and Urban
    Upgrading. 2006.
27.	Vietnamnet. Industrial Park Development Requires Housing for Workers. 30 December 2014.
28.	VPBank Securities (VPBS). Vietnam Banking Industry Coverage. January 2014
29.	VPBS. Vietnam Construction Sector: Industry Coverage. Hanoi. March 2014.
30.	Waibel, Michael, Donald Eckert, Michael Bose, and Volker Martin. Housing for Low-Income
    Groups in Ho Chi Minh City between Re-Integration and Fragmentation, Approaches to
    Adequate Urban Typologies and Spatial Strategies. ASIEN 103: 59-78. 2007.
31.	World Bank. Compulsory Land Acquisition and Conversion in Vietnam: The Conceptual
    Approach, Land Valuation and Grievance Redress Mechanisms. Hanoi. 2011.
32.	World Bank. Well Begun, Not Yet Done: Vietnam’s Remarkable Progress on Poverty Reduction
    and the Emerging Challenges. Vietnam Poverty Assessment. Hanoi. 2012.
33.	World Bank. Assessment of the Financing Framework for Municipal Infrastructure in Vietnam.
    Washington, DC. 2013.
34.	World Bank, Hinh T. Dinh. Light Manufacturing in Vietnam: Creating Jobs and Prosperity in
    a Middle-Income Economy. Directions in Development: Private Sector Development. 2013.
35.	World Bank. Presentation by G. Demombynes, Senior Economist. The Household Registration
    System in Vietnam: What We Know and Ideas for a New Study. 1 August 2014.
36.	World Bank. Report of Evaluation Results of Qualitative Research on Social Housing. Qualitative
    Research in Hai Phong, Ho Chi Minh City, Can Tho. November 2014.
37.	World Bank. The Asian Coalition for Community Action’s Approach to Slum Upgrading.
    2014.
38.	World Bank. Taking Stock: An Update on Vietnam’s Recent Economic Developments.
    December 2014.
39.	World Bank. Vietnam Development Report 2014. Skilling up Vietnam: Preparing the Workforce
    for Modern Market Economy. 2014.
40.	World Bank. Vietnam Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) Report. June 2014
41.	World Bank. East Asia’s Changing Urban Landscape. Washington, DC. 2015.

List of Websites:

1.	 General Statistics Office of Vietnam: www.gso.gov.vn
2.	 Ho Chi Minh City People’s Committee: www.hochiminhcity.gov.vn
3.	 Ministry of Construction: www.moc.gov.vn
4.	 Ministry of Finance: www.mof.gov.vn
5.	 Ministry of Planning and Investment: www.mpi.gov.vn
6.	 Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment: www.monre.gov.vn
7.	 State Bank of Vietnam: www.sbv.gov.vn
8.	 Vietnam Trade Promotion Agency. www.vietrade.gov.vn




                                                                                 A Way Forward        117
