                           100898
    CANCER CARE AND CONTROL
SOUTH-SOUTH KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE
 DISCUSSION PAPER    NOVEMBER 2015




 Miriam Schneidman
 Joanne Jeffers
 Kalina Duncan
            CANCER CARE AND CONTROL
        SOUTH-SOUTH KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE




Miriam Schneidman, Joanne Jeffers, and Kalina Duncan




                  November 2015




                                                       i
    HEALTH, NUTRITION AND POPULATION (HNP) DISCUSSION PAPER
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The papers in this
series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its
affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they
represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into account this
provisional character.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin
Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.


Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-
2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




© 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                                                                                  ii
    HEALTH, NUTRITION AND POPULATION (HNP) DISCUSSION PAPER

                             CANCER CARE AND CONTROL
                      SOUTH-SOUTH KNOWLEDGE EXCHANGE

                      Miriam Schneidmana, Joanne Jeffersb, Kalina Duncanc
a Lead  Health Specialist, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, World Bank
b Health Specialist, Independent Consultant
c Public Health Advisor, Center for Global Health, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of

Health

    This document synthesizes the main themes covered during a South-South Knowledge
 Exchange (SSKE) on Cancer Care and Control in Africa that aimed to increase knowledge and
 uptake of effective strategies, and bolster regional collaboration through peer-to-peer learning.
 The SSKE was funded by the Africa South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund (SEETF),
                 supported by multiple donors and managed by the World Bank.

Abstract:

Worldwide, deaths from cancer exceed those caused by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
combined. Seventy percent of deaths due to cancer occur in low-and middle-income countries,
which are often poorly prepared to deal with the growing burden of chronic disease. In Africa,
cancer rates are projected to double by 2020, due in large part to changing lifestyles, increasing
urbanization, and aging populations. Countries throughout Africa face similar challenges, and can
learn from regional successes and experiences in trying to identify cost effective ways to organize,
deliver and finance critical cancer care and control interventions. Over a period of 18 months, the
Cancer Care and Control South-South Knowledge Exchange brought together a group of
stakeholders from five countries in Africa -- Botswana, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia-- to
share experiences, lessons and good practices through a set of video conferences and a site visit
to Zambia. All five countries have demonstrated commitment, initiated various cancer control and
cancer screening programs, and expressed interest in sharing their experiences. The Knowledge
Exchange on cancer care and control aimed to raise awareness, increase knowledge of effective
strategies, and strengthen regional collaboration in cancer control planning and expanding
equitable access to cancer treatment.

This paper presents highlights of the country experiences shared, common challenges discussed,
and innovative solutions explored during the Knowledge Exchange. Topics addressed include
population-based surveillance and data collection to better document the burden of cancer;
strategies for designing and implementing successful national cancer care and control programs;
innovative approaches for strengthening cancer prevention efforts such as HPV vaccination
programs; task sharing and other strategies to build capacity and increase access to services;
analytical tools for understanding the costs of programs; financing models, including public private
partnerships, to increase cancer prevention and care; policy reforms needed to improve access to
palliative care; and opportunities for regional collaboration.




                                                                                                  iii
KEYWORDS: Cancer care and cancer control in Africa, disease burden, prevention, treatment,
palliative care, financing, surveillance, peer-to-peer learning.

DISCLAIMER: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely
those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, or its member countries.

CORRESPONDENCE DETAILS: Miriam Schneidman, Health, Nutrition and Population Global
Practice, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Email: mschneidman@worldbank.org




                                                                                              iv
                                                 T ABLE OF CONTENTS


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................................................................. VII
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................................. VIII
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................. 1
OVERVIEW OF CANCER IN AFRICA............................................................................................ 2
CANCER CARE AND CONTROL CONTINUUM ........................................................................... 4
CANCER REGISTRIES AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS ............................................................. 5
CANCER CONTROL PLANNING AND PROGRAMMING ............................................................ 7
CANCER PREVENTION IN AFRICA WITH A FOCUS ON CERVICAL CANCER ..................... 12
EARLY DETECTION, CANCER DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT.............................................. 14
INCREASING ACCESS TO PALLIATIVE CARE ......................................................................... 19
INCREASING ACCESS TO AN ESSENTIAL CANCER CARE PACKAGE................................ 23
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS - THE EXPERIENCE OF AMPATH ONCOLOGY IN
ELDORET, KENYA ....................................................................................................................... 27
OPPORTUNITIES FOR REGIONAL COLLABORATION ............................................................ 29
CCC SSKE - SHARING KNOWLEDGE, EXPERIENCES AND COLLABORATING TO
INCREASE ACCESS TO CCC ..................................................................................................... 29
CCC SSKE - MAIN RESULTS, LESSONS LEARNED AND NEXT STEPS................................ 30
ANNEX 1 - CCC SSKE PRESENTATIONS ................................................................................. 33




                                                                                                                                          v
                            LIST OF ACRONYMS

AFCRN      Africa Cancer Registration Network
APCA       Africa Palliative Care Association
ART        Antiretroviral Therapy
CANREG     Cancer Registration Software
CCC        Cancer Care and Control
CDC        US Centers for Disease Control
CEA        Cost Effectiveness Analysis
CGH        NCI Center for Global Health
COPECSA    College of Pathologists of East, Central and Southern Africa
C4P        Comprehensive Cervical Cancer Costing and Planning Tool
DALY       Disability Adjusted Life Years
DCP3       Disease Control Priorities Project
DNA        Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DfID       Department for International Development
EAOI       East African Oncology Institute
FHCRC      Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Hep B      Hepatitis B
HIV+       Human Immune Deficiency Virus Positive
HIV/AIDS   Human Immune Deficiency Virus / Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
HPV        Human Papilloma Virus
GAVI       Global Alliance for Vaccine and Immunization
GHIS       Ghana National Health Insurance Scheme
GICR       Global Initiative for Cancer Registries
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GSK        Glaxo Smith Kline
IAEA       International Atomic Energy Agency
IACR       International Association for Cancer Registries
IARC       International Agency for Research on Cancer
KCR        Kampala Cancer Registry
KEMRI      Kenya Medical Research Institute
LEEP       Loop Electrosurgical Extension Procedure
LMICs      Low and Middle-Income Countries
MOH        Ministry of Health
MOU        Memorandum of Understanding
MTRH       Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital
NCCPP      Botswana National Cervical Cancer Prevention Program
NCD        Non-communicable Disease
NCI        National Cancer Institute
NGO        Non-governmental
Pap        Papanicolaou
PBCR       Population-based Cancer Registry
PC         Palliative Care
PEPFAR     President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
PPP        Public Private Partnership
PLHA       People Living with HIV/AIDS
SRH        Sexual and Reproductive Health
SSKE       South-South Knowledge Exchange
TWG        Technical Working Group
VIA        Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid
WHO        World Health Organization
UHC        Universal Health Coverage
UN         United Nations
UNDP       United Nations Development Program




                                                                                 vi
                                   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This paper was prepared under the Cancer Care and Control Knowledge Exchange funded by
the Africa South-South Experience Exchange Trust Fund (SEETF), supported by multiple donors.

The paper benefitted from comments of peer reviewers, Sheila Dutta (Senior Health Specialist),
Susana Carrillo (Senior Partnership Specialist), and Annette Galassi (Public Health Advisor,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health). Yvette Atkins provided valuable assistance
with the production of the final report.

We would like to recognize the high quality presentations and contributions from participating
countries (Botswana, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia). This Knowledge Exchange would
not have been possible without the leadership and commitment of these highly dedicated
individuals. We would like to acknowledge both the quality of the presentations and the
discussions which enriched the Knowledge Exchange and provided new insights.

The Knowledge Exchange also benefitted from the excellent contributions made by various
technical experts from the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of Health, African
Palliative Care Association, Academic Model for Prevention and Treatment of HIV (AMPATH),
Nairobi University Pathology Department, and Zambia Cancer Diseases Hospital.

The authors also wish to acknowledge the collective effort of health care providers in Africa
working to make a difference in the lives of those afflicted by cancer.

Finally, the authors wish to express their appreciation to the World Bank for publishing this report
as part of the HNP Discussion Paper Series.




                                                                                                     vii
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
I.         Context

Currently 80 percent of the disability-adjusted years of life (DALY) lost to cancer is in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs), but only 5 percent of global cancer resources are spent in these
countries. This disparity will grow dramatically as changing lifestyles, increasing urbanization, and
aging populations lead to a projected doubling of the incidence of cancer in Africa in the next five
years. In 2010, the economic costs of productivity losses combined with treatment costs for cancer
were estimated to be US$1.6 trillion, approximately two to four percent of global Gross Domestic
Product (GDP). If action is not taken now, future costs will be exorbitant. While some cancer control
programs have been initiated, including cervical cancer screening, human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccination, and cancer specialty care centers, comprehensive coverage with the full range of
services remains low across Africa. Cancer control programs should be rolled out to advance
progress towards the WHO non-communicable diseases (NCD) Global Targets for 2025, that call
for a 25 percent reduction in premature mortality from NCDs, including cancer, a 30 percent drop
in tobacco use, and 80 percent availability of affordable drugs and technology. Given that African
countries face common challenges and can benefit from sharing knowledge and learning from one
another’s experiences developing and implementing critical interventions to address the growing
burden of cancer, a South-South Knowledge Exchange (SSKE) was initiated by the World Bank.

II.        The Cancer Care and Control South-South Knowledge Exchange

The Cancer Care and Control (CCC) South-South Knowledge Exchange was a
collaborative effort of the World Bank and the United States National Cancer Institute
(NCI)/National Institutes of Health (NIH), designed to support knowledge sharing and
networking among participants and global technical experts through a series of knowledge
exchange activities. Botswana, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia were selected to
participate in the CCC SSKE because they are each at a different stage in the development
and implementation of CCC programs, have different strengths, and have much to learn from
one another’s experiences.
III.       Effective Cancer Care and Control Interventions

Comprehensive CCC programs provide a range of services that meet the evolving needs of
patients along the cancer continuum, from prevention to treatment to palliative care, as noted
below.

•      Primary Prevention - HPV and Hep B vaccination campaigns; behavior change campaigns to
       promote healthy lifestyles; anti-tobacco and no smoking campaigns; and “sin” taxes to curb
       tobacco and alcohol use.
•      Secondary Prevention (screening) - information and education campaigns to encourage
       breast and cervical cancer screening; cytology (Pap) screening; visual inspection with acetic
       acid (VIA); and HPV DNA testing.
•      Secondary Prevention (treatment) - increased access to cryotherapy; loop electrosurgical
       excision procedure (LEEP); and cone biopsy.
•      Cancer Treatment – provision of specialized care for early and late stage treatment, including
       standard surgical techniques, radiation, and chemotherapy.
•      Palliative Care – palliative, home based or institutional care programs and expanded access
       to opioids and radiation.




                                                                                                 viii
Effective systematic implementation of these interventions requires a health system in which
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and pain management are well integrated at both clinical and
community levels. Virtually no country in Africa, save South Africa, has capacity at all these levels.
However, several have initiated promising programs to address selective aspects that were
covered during the CCC SSKE.

Intervening early in the continuum of care will save lives and resources. There is growing evidence
that many of the interventions in the continuum of care are cost effective. Immunization with the
HPV vaccine and cervical cancer screening can reduce deaths from cervical cancer by 80 percent.
Early stage treatment of most cancers increase long-term survival by 50 percent, and palliative
care can reduce suffering of terminally ill patients.

IV.       Common Challenges and Innovative Solutions

Participants shared innovative approaches to common challenges in the planning, management,
implementation, and financing of CCC initiatives. The main themes, key issues, and good practices
covered during the CCC SSKE are summarized below.

         Improving Surveillance to Better Understand the Burden of Disease
Levels of knowledge about the magnitude of the cancer burden remain inadequate in most
countries in Africa. Lack of comprehensive, timely data, and information impedes effective program
planning and service delivery. Population-based cancer registries (PBCRs) are vital components
in comprehensive CCC programs and document the nature and scope of the cancer burden.
PBCRs are used to collect data on new cancer cases in geographically defined populations.
Planners, policy makers, and researchers use this information to better understand the cancer
burden and improve treatment and prevention options.

Uganda has one of the longest standing and most comprehensive population-based cancer
registries in Africa. A number of key lessons have emerged, including the importance of:

         Ensuring ongoing political commitment, and mobilizing resources to make
          population-based cancer registration a key component of the national cancer control
          program.
         Strengthening data reliability by enhanced data verification; standardization; improved
          hospital data systems, including electronic patient records; and promotion of new
          technologies such as smart phones for more rapid data transmittal.
         Increasing population coverage to capture data from rural areas with the Kampala
          Cancer Registry linking its work with four regional cancer registries to expand coverage to
          almost 30 percent of the population, a representative sample that can be used to estimate
          the national cancer burden.

         Identifying National Leaders to Champion the Program
Highly motivated, visible champions can mobilize support and create opportunities for CCC
initiatives. The Zambia program received strong political support from former Zambian First Lady
Dr. Christine Kaseba-Sata, a gynecologist by training. Dr. Kaseba-Sata hosted the 6th Stop
Cervical Cancer in Africa Conference and generated a great deal of visibility and political support
for CCC initiatives in Zambia, as well as throughout Africa. Similarly, the Kenya Cancer Control




                                                                                                    ix
Program benefited from the support of Ministers of Health who had personal experiences with
cancer.

       Identifying champions and influential stakeholders is critical - Key stakeholders need
        to be mobilized, including Ministries of Health, advocacy groups; cancer survivor and
        patient support groups; cancer experts; NCD experts; tobacco control experts; and private
        sector representatives. Additional allies include officials from Ministries of Finance.

       Designing Successful National CCC Plans and Programs
Cancer planning is critical to obtaining political support, prioritizing and costing key interventions,
and identifying opportunities for strategic partnerships. Successful national plans are evidence-
based and informed by locally-relevant research; developed in a participatory fashion by a diverse
group of stakeholders; comprehensive in nature, with a full range of activities that strengthen
prevention, diagnosis, treatment, palliative care and survivorship; and include a strong monitoring
and evaluation component. A number of common lessons have emerged from the design and
implementation of national cancer plans and programs:

       Creating linkages between cancer-specific programs and broad national health
        programs at the central, regional and district levels as well as between public and
        private sectors taps potential synergies and efficiencies - Effective linkages need to
        be established with sexual and reproductive health, maternal and child heath, NCD and
        HIV/AIDS care and treatment programs. Partnering with the private sector and leveraging
        their expertise and resources is critical to increasing access and improving quality of care.
       Demonstrating economic impact can facilitate support - Ministries of Health need to
        make the economic case for investing in cancer, in order to mobilize support and
        resources.
       Overcoming lack of awareness, stigma, discrimination and denial about cancer
        is critical to generating broad-based support for the program - While support for
        CCC initiatives is growing in many countries, as increasingly everyone knows
        someone who is affected by the disease, much more needs to be done to improve
        knowledge and awareness and early detection.

       Innovative Approaches for Strengthening Cancer Prevention, Early Detection,
        Diagnosis and Treatment
With the rapidly growing number of cancer cases, many countries have initiated programs to
strengthen prevention, promote early detection, and establish capacity to diagnose and treat early
stage cancers. The CCC South-South Knowledge Exchange permitted countries to share their
individual successes and promising approaches, inspiring each other to expand the range of
interventions along the cancer continuum of care. A number of generic lessons and country specific
examples emerged.

       Generating demand for HPV vaccination and cervical cancer screening services is
        critical to improving uptake of these services and ensuring cases are prevented or
        found at earlier stages - Countries draw on their national resources and use unique
        approaches to accomplish this goal in their respective settings. Zambia uses chiefs,
        churches, traditional marriage counselors and other community leaders to raise awareness
        of the importance of HPV vaccination and cancer screening. Botswana uses census data
        strategically to target program activities, and is in the midst of implementing a national HPV




                                                                                                     x
    vaccination program. Rwanda has used its extensive network of Community Health
    Workers (CHWs) to educate women about the importance of cancer screening and
    improve uptake.

   Raising awareness through innovative social mobilization efforts to reach a younger
    target population and to overcome misperceptions and traditional beliefs
    concerning cervical cancer - The Zambia program found that the best advocates are
    women returning to their communities after receiving care. The program also introduced
    health clubs at the secondary education level to raise awareness of cervical cancer
    screening among younger people.

   Using innovative telemedicine and mobile phone communication strategies can
    increase access to services in sparsely populated areas - One notable example is the
    innovative use of mobile phone technologies in Zambia to communicate and follow-up with
    patients and of telemedicine to ensure quality of care and accuracy of diagnoses.

   Promoting innovative human resources strategies is key to building capacity and
    addressing the acute shortages of trained health personnel – Given the acute
    shortages of qualified oncology specialists it is critical to not only expand training but also
    identify opportunities for task sharing. Rwanda, Zambia and Botswana have effectively
    used task sharing to expand the role of nurses in the provision of cervical cancer screening
    and introduced quality assurance programs, training, and supervision to enhance their
    performance. Zambia increased its capacity to provide cervical cancer screening by
    piggybacking upon an existing, well-functioning infectious disease platform.

   Building pathology capacity can serve as an entry point for cancer care - Pathology
    capacity and manpower is limited but essential for the provision of quality CCC services.
    In the absence of accurate diagnosis it is difficult to make informed decisions about
    treatment options. Several countries have now placed emphasis on establishing pathology
    services. Kenya has equipped pathology labs at selected sites while a roving pathologist
    travels from site to site to provide services. The University of Nairobi has developed
    pathology training programs that are benefitting individuals from both Kenya and
    neighboring countries. Zambia is using telemedicine to extend its pathology capacity to
    rural areas. Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda have developed twinning arrangements with
    medical schools in developed countries and put in place quality assurance schemes to
    strengthen their pathology capacity.

   Strengthening the referral system and ensuring patient follow-up is important for
    quality care - Given the complexities of providing cancer treatment across the continuum
    of care, it is important to establish a sound referral system. Zambia has implemented a
    mobile patient tracking system that is effectively used by nurses to remind patients of
    follow-up appointments. Rwanda uses its network of Community Health Workers to follow
    up with patients, and Botswana has strengthened its monitoring and evaluation system to
    ensure patient follow-up and referral work effectively. However, referral systems and
    patient follow up remain a challenge for most countries in Africa.

   Reducing the time between diagnosis and treatment is key to minimizing risk of loss
    to follow up – Both Zambia and Botswana have introduced the Visual Inspection with
    Acetic Acid, “See and Treat” services, because they allow immediate treatment of



                                                                                                 xi
        precancerous lesions on the cervix and represent a cost effective treatment option in low
        income settings.

       Leveraging ongoing platforms can generate cost efficiencies and contribute to
        sustainability – Given both cost and physiological considerations it is sensible to
        piggyback cancer interventions onto existing primary health or communicable disease
        platforms that are well established. Zambia has strengthened the sustainability of its
        cervical cancer screening program by integrating the service into the MCH program of the
        Ministry of Health. Botswana has also strengthened linkages and leveraged resources
        from other parts of the health system (e.g. HIV/AIDS program) to enhance chances of
        sustainability. Similarly, Kenya has built an oncology program from health system
        infrastructure and specialty care centers originally dedicated to HIV/AIDS.

       Increasing Access to Palliative Care (PC)

Access to urgently needed palliative care for terminally ill patients is very limited and
constrained by legal, regulatory, and procurement issues. Several countries are beginning
to tackle this constraint by:
       Mobilizing both public and private sector support and resources for PC - Kenya has
        increased access to PC by offering services through a range of public and private sector
        providers and raising awareness of the importance of PC for all life threatening illnesses.

       Increasing access to cost effective drugs - Rwanda and Uganda procure a more cost
        effective solution of morphine that is dispensed by trained pharmacists and use public
        private partnerships to increase access to services.

       Authorizing trained nurses to prescribe and better utilizing pharmacists to dispense
        opioids - Outdated regulations and practices for procuring and dispensing drugs limit
        access to PC in most countries. Uganda has authorized trained nurses to prescribe
        morphine thereby increasing access.

       Increasing Access to an Essential Cancer Care Package

While most countries in Africa are focused on designing an essential health care package towards
Universal Health Coverage, cancer care and control planners and policymakers have largely not
been active partners in this process. To this end, there is a need to:

       Identify the most cost-effective essential cancer care package and determine the
        cost of its implementation as well as its potential impact - Research conducted under
        the Disease Control Priorities, Third Edition (DCP3) has determined that HPV vaccination
        programs, tobacco control measures and tobacco taxes are cost effective interventions in
        cancer control in many country contexts. For example, Kenya has implemented tobacco
        control measures and Rwanda has successfully achieved national coverage of HPV
        immunization.

       Use economic analyses to make the case for investing in cancer and mobilize
        additional resources to support cancer interventions - Economic analyses are effective
        tools for making the economic case to support CCC programs. Several countries (i.e.
        Ghana and Tanzania) that did not participate in the Knowledge Exchange had valuable




                                                                                                xii
         experiences with economic analyses to inform public policy. Ghana has conducted a cost
         effectiveness analysis to determine the most cost effective way of expanding its breast
         cancer prevention program and is using the results to mobilize national health care
         resources to expand the program. Tanzania used a WHO toolkit to assess the cost
         effectiveness of alternative strategies for providing HPV vaccination to young girls. Uganda
         has recently conducted an economic analysis of their cancer registry with the US CDC.

        Increasing Engagement of the Private Sector, Including through Public Private
         Partnerships (PPPs)

While governments need to ensure financing of cancer programs, they do not necessarily need to
deliver the services. It may be more cost-effective for governments to purchase services from
private sector hospitals and clinics through public private partnerships. In countries with a vibrant
private sector, the public sector needs to remove barriers that impede private sector provision of
cancer care and establish a strong enabling environment; create incentives to encourage private
sector provision of cancer care; and explore opportunities to form public private partnerships.

AMPATH Oncology and Chronic Care Program in Kenya is an example of an innovative public
private partnership between government agencies, academic institutions and private companies
that provides access to cancer care for a population of 18 million. Several key lessons have
emerged from the success of AMPATH.

         Public Private Partnerships function best when they have a flexible structure that
          allows public, private and academic partners to each play to their strength - In the
          AMPATH PPP, government agencies, at all levels, ensure oversight and stewardship,
          support research, and provide an enabling environment; academic institutions contribute
          scientific and research expertise and negotiate agreements; and private organizations
          provide in-kind resources such as bioassays, targeted funding, and resource personnel.

         Ongoing education of patients, service providers, policymakers and the
          community is needed to maintain political support for the program; address
          misperceptions and increase demand for services; and improve understanding of
          side effects to enhance treatment compliance and improve quality of care -
          AMPATH conducts community and patient education and supports the formation of
          patient support groups; conducts continuing education and other forms of multidisciplinary
          provider training to improve quality of care; disseminates research findings and best
          practices; and provides technical expertise to the MOH to improve policies, guidelines
          and treatment protocols.

         Increasing access to cost effective drug supplies is critical to improving
          affordability and sustainability of services - AMPATH has worked with pharmaceutical
          companies to access generic drugs at lower prices; explored the cost implications of
          including chemotherapy as a benefit in the National Hospital Insurance Fund; researched
          willingness and ability to pay; formed Public Private Partnerships; and raised awareness
          among decision makers of the urgent need to prevent and control cancer to mobilize
          resources and advance philanthropic efforts of groups such as pharmaceutical
          companies.




                                                                                                 xiii
       Sharing Knowledge, Experiences and Collaborating to Expand Access to CCC
There are important opportunities for countries to collaborate by sharing knowledge and
experiences. The CCC SSKE provided an effective platform for sharing information about the
design and implementation of various programs and learning what works and what does not work.
CCC SSKE participants reported improvements in knowledge and gains from networking with one
another as they continue their efforts to mobilize resources and increase access to services in their
countries. Participants reported the knowledge gained would enhance policy and program design
in their own countries. Beyond sharing information there are also important opportunities for
countries to collaborate on joint activities. During the culminating face-to-face meeting in Lusaka,
participants discussed possibilities for collaboration in addressing the shortage of qualified
personnel; mobilizing resources by making a better economic case for investing in cancer care and
control; and conducting joint research to inform policy and generate knowledge of science of
delivery. Several countries have developed regional training programs to build capacity for
pathology, oncology, and radiation therapy. Participants plan on building on these nascent efforts
to continue networking and support one another to tackle the growing cancer burden.




                                                                                                 xiv
INTRODUCTION
Currently 80 percent of the disability adjusted years of life (DALY) lost to cancer is in low-and
middle-income countries (LMICs). However, only 5 percent of global cancer resources are spent
in these countries. This disparity will grow dramatically as changing lifestyles, increasing
urbanization and aging populations lead to a projected doubling of the incidence of cancer in Africa
by 2020. Each year, 50 percent of new cancer cases and 77 percent of cancer deaths occur in
LMICs. Global health leaders are calling for greater attention to non-communicable diseases
(NCDs), including cancer care and control. At the 63rd World Health Organization (WHO) Regional
Committee for Africa meeting, Ministers called for action to address cancer. While some programs,
including cervical cancer screening, HPV vaccination, and cancer specialty centers are getting
underway, much more needs to be done in Africa. Given that African countries face common
challenges and can benefit from sharing knowledge and learning from one another’s experiences
developing and implementing CCC programs, a South-South Knowledge Exchange was initiated
by the World Bank.

The Cancer Care and Control South-South Knowledge Exchange aimed to: (i) raise awareness
of the growing importance of CCC in Africa, (ii) encourage cross-fertilization of experiences, with
an emphasis on cervical and breast cancers, and (iii) facilitate access to information among
participating countries. The CCC SSKE was a joint effort of the World Bank and the US National
Cancer Institute (NCI)/National Institutes of Health (NIH), designed to support knowledge sharing
and networking among participants and global technical experts through a series of knowledge
exchange activities.

The countries that participated in the CCC SSKE include Botswana, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and
Zambia. They were selected because they are each at a different stage in the development and
implementation of CCC programs, have different strengths, and have much to learn from one
another’s experiences. They have also learned important lessons while addressing HIV/AIDS that
can inform their efforts addressing cancer. During a period of 18 months, from August 2013 to
February 2015, CCC SSKE stakeholders from the five participating countries attended nine
videoconferences during which they benefited from presentations on key issues, discussed
common challenges and shared relevant experiences. The CCC SSKE program was developed
in collaboration with participants, so that it responded to their needs and concerns and connected
them with technical experts who presented current information on evidence-based interventions
and recent global developments. The virtual meetings were then followed by a regional workshop
in Lusaka, Zambia in February 2015 at which participants learned firsthand of the achievements of
Zambia’s Cancer Diseases Hospital and the African Center of Excellence for Women’s Cancer
Control at the Center for Infectious Disease of Zambia; and identified future opportunities for
collaboration. This document summarizes the highlights of the CCC SSKE presentations and
discussions. It provides a brief overview of cancer in Africa and synthesizes participating country
experiences, common challenges, and innovative solutions.

    “Thank you for inviting me to the CCC SSKE Taking a Regional Approach
Workshop - It was an eye opener in many ways. I believe there is a lot of potential
  in Africa and we should maximize it. Money alone is not the only solution.”

      Dr. Zipporah Ali, Executive Director, Kenya Hospices and Palliative Care
                                     Association




                                                                                                  1
OVERVIEW OF CANCER IN
AFRICA                                            KENYA MORTALITY PROJECTIONS
LMICs in sub-Saharan Africa are
shouldering a double burden of
disease. While they continue to face
high levels of infectious and
reproductive     health    diseases
associated with poverty and under
development,     they    are    also
experiencing rapidly increasing
incidence of NCDs. Worldwide,
deaths from cancer exceed those
caused by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis
and malaria combined, and 70
percent of cancer deaths occur in
LMICs. Estimates show that by
2030, LMICs will bear the brunt of
the estimated 27 million new cancer
cases and 17 million cancer deaths. Much of this morbidity and mortality can be avoided if steps
are taken today to strengthen CCC programs.

In addition to presenting a significant burden in terms of morbidity and mortality, cancer also has
tremendous economic consequences. Cancer care imposes very high direct costs on health
systems, communities, and households. Cancer also exacts very high indirect costs of income
foregone by patients, families and caregivers; lost productivity of patients; and premature death
and disability. The World Economic Forum lists the burden of chronic disease as one of three
leading global economic risks based on potential impact on global productivity and economic
growth. In 2010, the economic costs of productivity losses combined with treatment costs for
cancer were estimated to be US$1.6 trillion, approximately two to four percent of global Gross
Domestic Product. If action is not taken now, future costs will be exorbitant.




                                                                                                 2
In 2012, approximately 715,000 new cancer cases and 542,000
cancer deaths occurred in Africa. Breast cancer contributed roughly
24 percent and cervical cancer 21 percent of all female cancers in
Africa. The continent has the highest incidence and mortality from
cervical cancer in the world. The most prevalent male cancers are
prostrate and liver cancers.

There are proven interventions that can prevent some cancers and
improve survival. An estimated fifty to sixty percent of cancer
mortality in LMICs can be avoided. Most cases of cervical cancer
are caused by a viral infection that is sexually transmitted and can
be prevented by the HPV vaccine. Liver cancer is often caused by
a virus and can be prevented by the Hepatitis B vaccine. Lung cancer is caused primarily by
smoking and can be prevented by implementing policies and programs to curb smoking and
promote healthy lifestyles. Early detection programs, strengthened care and treatment, and better
palliative care can extend cancer survival and improve quality of life. Programs need to be
developed to advance progress towards the WHO NCD Global Targets for 2025 that call for a 25
percent reduction in mortality from NCDs, including cancer, a 30 percent drop in tobacco use, and
80 percent availability of affordable drugs and technology.




                                                                                               3
C ANCER C ARE AND CONTROL CONTINUUM




Comprehensive CCC programs provide a range of services that meet the evolving needs of
patients along the cancer continuum. Cancer prevention and control is crucial because early
detection and treatment can cure 30 percent of cancers; prolong survival in another 30 percent;
and improve quality of life through adequate disease management and palliative care. As illustrated
by the Zambian model above, CCC initiatives can be designed to intervene at different stages of
the disease as well as to strengthen specific building blocks of the health system, thereby
addressing not only cancer, but also other NCDs. The WHO health system building blocks include
information systems; leadership and governance; service delivery; medical products, vaccines,
supplies and technology; trained medical personnel; and financing. CCC initiatives can also be
integrated into programs that address other aspects of health and/or promote economic
development.

Potential areas of intervention along the CCC continuum include:

•   Primary Prevention - HPV and Hep B vaccination campaigns; behavior change campaigns to
    promote healthy lifestyles; anti-tobacco initiatives and no smoking campaigns; and “sin” taxes
    to curb tobacco and alcohol use.

•   Secondary Prevention (screening) - information and education campaigns to encourage
    breast and cervical cancer screening; cytology (Pap) screening; visual inspection with acetic
    acid (VIA); and HPV DNA testing.




                                                                                                 4
•   Secondary Prevention (treatment) - increased access to cryotherapy; loop electrosurgical
    excision procedure (LEEP); and cone biopsy.

•   Cancer Treatment- effective linkages with specialized care providing early and late stage
    treatment, including standard surgical techniques, radiation, and chemotherapy.

•   Palliative Care - linkages with palliative care programs and expanded access to opioids and
    radiation.

There is growing evidence demonstrating that many of these interventions are cost effective; make
a significant impact on cancer prevention; prolong survival of cancer patients; and improve quality
of life of both patients and their families. To be effective, these interventions require a health system
in which surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, pain management and outpatient and acute care
services are well integrated. Immunization with the HPV vaccine and cervical cancer screening can
reduce deaths from cervical cancer by 80 percent. Early stage treatment of cancer can increase
long-term survival by 50 percent and palliative care can reduce suffering in 100 percent of late
stage patients.

The five countries participating in the CCC SSKE are at different stages of developing and
implementing CCC programs and have a range of experiences. The CCC SSKE activities
addressed common challenges and innovative solutions to various aspects of designing and
implementing CCC initiatives. Topics included data collection to better document the burden of
disease; strategies for designing and implementing successful national CCC programs; innovative
approaches for strengthening cancer prevention efforts such as HPV vaccination programs; task
sharing and other strategies to build capacity and increase access to cancer screening and
treatment; analytical tools for understanding the costs of CCC; financing models, including Public
Private Partnerships, to increase access to CCC treatment and care; policy reforms needed to
increase access to palliative care; and opportunities for regional collaboration. Highlights of the
country experiences shared, common challenges discussed and innovative solutions explored
during the CCC SSKE activities are synthesized and presented in the following sections.

C ANCER REGISTRIES AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Population-based cancer registries (PBCRs) are vital components in comprehensive CCC
programs and document the nature and scope of the cancer burden. PBCRs are used to collect
data on new cancer cases in geographically defined populations. Planners, policy makers, and
researchers use this information to better understand the cancer burden and improve treatment
and prevention options.

Cancer surveillance provides information on the burden of cancer - incidence, prevalence and
survival; identifies priorities for preventive and curative programs; supports investigation into
causes of cancer; and can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of cancer control activities.
Coverage of population-based cancer registries needs to be expanded, particularly in LMICs, in
order to obtain more complete and reliable data and improve understanding of both current and
future cancer burdens as well as site-specific patterns of incidence. There are few population-
based cancer registries in Africa. One notable example is the Kampala Cancer Registry (KCR)
described below.




                                                                                                       5
                                                                   UGANDA’S EXPERIENCE
                                                                   WITH THE KAMPALA
                                                                   CANCER REGISTRY
                                                                  The Kampala Cancer Registry
                                                                  (KCR) was established in 1951 and
                                                                  is based at the Makerere Medical
                                                                  School. It has collected a unique
                                                                  data set that has been instrumental
                                                                  in improving understanding of
                                                                  cancer in Uganda and informing
                                                                  health policymaking and planning.
                                                                  The       registry      collects:     (i)
                                                                  demographic information – name,
                                                                  age,     gender;      (ii)    diagnosis
                                                                  information; and (iii) the source of
                                                                  the data. The KCR has contributed
                                                                  data     to    global      publications;
                                                                  catalyzed       collaboration       and
                                                                  research        opportunities       with
                                                                  universities and other organizations;
supported training; and guided design of cancer control programs. Currently, the KCR is located
in the Department of Pathology at Makerere College of Health Sciences and is staffed by a director
and two registrars. It is supported by record clerks at six collaborating hospitals, laboratories and a
hospice center and has computerized its data management using the cancer registration software,
CANREG5. While other cancer registries have been established in Uganda, none has had the
ongoing success of the KCR. This success results from its governance structure as part of
Makerere University; its collaborative relationships with the International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) and African Cancer Registry Network (AFCRN); continuous effective and committed
leadership; a defined mission and clear agenda; and focused approach.

COMMON CHALLENGES AND INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS IN INFORMATION
SYSTEMS
•   Ensuring ongoing political commitment and mobilizing resources - Uganda has made
    cancer registration a key component of the National Cancer Control Program and charged the
    Uganda Cancer Institute with its implementation. Recognizing the importance of sustainable
    population-based data collection to inform their cancer control program, Zambia has partnered
    with NCI and UICC to hire and train a registry director to develop a PBCR. In Kenya, the MOH,
    in coordination with the US Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention (CDC), has developed
    a tool to determine the cost of registering one case of cancer that it will use to advocate for
    resources to strengthen and expand the national cancer registry.

•   Ensuring reliability - The KCR data collection system has control points for review and
    verification by both the CANREG5 software and by manual comparison of data entries with
    hard copy records. KCR staff members maintain collaborative working relationships with
    clinicians, pathologists, as well as private sector health providers in order to obtain high quality
    data. They also work to standardize and improve hospital databases, and, when possible, link




                                                                                                         6
    to electronic patient records. Other strategies to ensure data reliability include using new
    technologies such as smart phones.

•   Increasing population coverage, particularly of rural populations – Uganda increased the
    personnel and infrastructure of the KCR registry and linked it with four regional cancer registries
    and a registry at a community cancer treatment center to reach coverage of 30 percent of the
    population. This level of coverage is sufficient for estimating the national cancer burden. The
    community cancer registry is at a cancer treatment center in Eastern Uganda and collects
    information about a rural population that is less dynamic than the urban population of Kampala.
    The Center aims to collect a time series of information about individual patients so that it can
    improve its treatment interventions and gain insights into site-specific incidence of cancer in a
    rural community.

C ANCER CONTROL PLANNING AND PROGRAMMING
National health systems need to address the growing challenge of cancer by: (i) strengthening
evidence-based planning to maximize program impact and efficiency; (ii) forming strategic
partnerships to leverage resources and expertise; (iii) building capacity; and (iv) developing
sustainable cancer control programs. Experience demonstrates that successful national plans are
evidence-based and informed by research; have been developed by a diverse group of
stakeholders; are comprehensive and include a range of activities that strengthen prevention,
diagnosis, treatment, palliative care and survivorship; and include a strong monitoring and
evaluation component.

THE KENYA CANCER CONTROL PROGRAM
Kenya has developed and implemented several landmark policies and strategies to advance its
National Cancer Control Programme. These include passage and implementation of the 2012
Cancer Control Act, the 2007 Tobacco Control Act, the 2012 Alcoholic Beverages Control Act, the
2011 National Food and Nutrition Security Policy and the 2013 National Occupational Safety and
Health Policy. In addition, Kenya has a number of official planning documents that guide their
national strategy, including: 2011-2016 National Cancer Control Strategy; National Cervical Cancer
Programme Strategic Plan (2012 – 2015); National Guidelines for Cancer Management (2013);
Palliative Care and Training (2013); and Prevention and Management of Cervical, Breast and
Prostate Cancers (2012). These milestones were achieved because the Ministries of Health
(MOHs) provided strong leadership and stewardship and mobilized a diverse group of
stakeholders, including representatives from academia, the private sector, hospitals, faith-based
organizations, civil society organizations and patients’ groups, who developed, reviewed,
disseminated and implemented comprehensive policies, plans, and roadmaps.

The National Cancer Control Strategic Plan is comprehensive and provides a sound framework for
action. Significant strides have been made in each of its seven strategic areas:

   Promote cancer prevention and early detection – Interventions have focused on lowering
    risk factors by: (i) reducing access to tobacco through smoking bans, increased taxation and
    advertising limitations; (ii) promoting healthy lifestyles, including improved diet and reduced
    alcohol use, through behavior change programs; (iii) reducing environmental exposure to
    carcinogens; and (iv) preventing infectious diseases associated with cancer through HIV
    prevention and HPV and Hep B immunization programs.




                                                                                                     7
   Improve diagnosis and treatment, including palliative care – Screening interventions have
    focused on cervical, breast and prostate cancers. Cervical cancer screening programs (VIA
    and Pap smear) have been expanded and HPV testing, while expensive, is available through
    private providers. Diagnostic and treatment services are available primarily in Nairobi and large
    towns and capacity is being expanded to increase geographic access. Since over 80 percent
    of cancer cases present late, the MOH has established 11 palliative care centers in public
    regional referral hospitals and several faith-based and private sector organizations provide
    hospice.  

   Promote cancer surveillance, registration and research – Two sites, the Kenya Medical
    Research Institute (KEMRI) and the Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital (MTRH), have cancer
    registries and the MOH has developed a cancer registry tool that will be disseminated to
    expand these efforts. Efforts to develop population-based registries are also underway in
    Kisumu and Nyeri Counties.

   Promote partnerships and collaboration in cancer control – To ensure that all providers
    are working toward common goals, they work collaboratively to develop guidelines and conduct
    joint training programs. Additional work will be done to develop treatment protocols and joint
    drug procurement systems.  

   Advocate for cancer prevention and control legislation – To operationalize the National
    Cancer Act a National Cancer Institute is being established.  

   Integrate cancer prevention and control activities with national health and socio-
    economic plans – Recently developed strategies and guidelines are being disseminated and
    implemented at the service delivery level.  

   Promote community involvement and participation in cancer control and prevention –
    Including a diverse group of stakeholders in the development of policies and strategies has
    ensured buy-in and community participation.  

THE UGANDA COMPREHENSIVE NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAM
The Uganda Cancer Institute (UCI) and Ministry of Health are implementing the Uganda
Comprehensive National Cancer Control Program. The central strategy of this program is a
comprehensive cancer service network comprised of UCI, as a National Centre of Excellence,
supporting highly specialized Regional Cancer Centres staffed by multidisciplinary teams. UCI’s
mandate is to research the cause, treatment and prevention of common cancers in Uganda; provide
high quality, evidence-based cancer care; provide cancer training using common cancers as
models; and reduce the risk of cancer through awareness raising and information. UCI provides
oncology services, including chemotherapy and radiation; gynecology and surgery services; cancer
screening services; specialized oncology pharmaceutical services; hematologic clinical care;
laboratory and imaging services; physiotherapy services; psychosocial support and training. Both
the 2010 Uganda National Development Plan and the 2010 Uganda National Health Policy state
the need for increased capacity to address cancer through a specialized unit such as the UCI. A
draft cancer policy and a draft bill to establish the UCI by an Act of Parliament are in place.

UCI has collaborated effectively with Makerere University, Mulago Teaching Hospital and the Fred
Hutch Cancer Research Center in its efforts to research and treat childhood lymphoma and other
malignancies; research pathogens and their role in causing cancers; and improve strategies for




                                                                                                   8
cancer prevention and treatment. UCI also provides countrywide cancer consultation services and
trains oncologists. UCI is responsible for many ground breaking scientific discoveries that have
enriched the understanding of cancer and led to innovative strategies for more effective prevention
and treatment of the disease. It is governed by a board and is a self-accounting government entity
under the Ministry of Health. UCI has recently built a six-story facility and its funding has increased
from about 5.4 billion Shillings in 2009/2010 to roughly 13.5 billion Shillings in 2013/2014. It was
accorded the status of a WHO Regional Centre for Cancer Research in Africa and is currently being
reviewed to have that status renewed.

Two outreach regional clinics have been established in Western and North Western Uganda and
land has been offered to establish two more. The Comprehensive National Cancer Control
Program also includes a Comprehensive Community Cancer Program comprised of community
outreach efforts to provide health education and screening for breast, cervical and prostate
cancers; cancer awareness and screening at the UCI Centre; continuous medical education for
lower level health care workers; television and radio talk shows about cancer; and development
and production of information, education and communication materials. The Program also includes
satellite surveillance centres that promote cancer research and registration; conduct community
level surveillance; raise awareness to promote prevention and early detection; and provide simple
treatment and patient follow-up.

The key elements for the success of the UCI and the Comprehensive National Cancer Control
Program are effective partnerships, strong coordination, high level leadership, resources and
research. UCI collaborates and partners with many international organizations and agencies,
including International Atomic Energy Agency, International Agency for Research on Cancer,
National Cancer Institute and Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center to achieve several national
cancer control goals. Working in partnership with civil society groups, such as the Uganda Cancer
Society and the Uganda Non-communicable Disease Alliance, has also been critical for success.

THE RWANDA NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN FOR CANCER DISEASES
Rwanda’s National Strategic Plan for Cancer Diseases aims to improve primary and specialized
health care and treatment; increase prevention and control of risk factors; and sensitize the
community to change risk behaviors and promote early detection. The Plan focuses on reinforcing
primary and specialized health care and treatment by: (i) decentralizing services and training and
mentoring lower level health workers to improve screening and early diagnosis; (ii) increasing
access to NCD services by strengthening procurement and logistics systems for drugs, medical
supplies, and equipment, and building capacity of one regional hospital to provide radiotherapy and
chemotherapy; and (iii) improving quality of NCD services by establishing cancer units inside five
regional hospitals, adding radiotherapy services to one regional hospital and increasing the number
of pathology units to a total of three nationwide.

Rwanda has five specialized facilities to treat cancer. In the country there is one clinical oncologist,
one hemo pathologist, 1 surgical oncologist and one gynecologic oncologist. General practitioners
provide most cancer care. There are thirty dedicated oncology nurses and ten dedicated histo-
technologists. Rwanda has developed national protocols for treating twelve adult cancers,
including breast, colon, rectal, gastric, cervical and prostate cancers; and five pediatric cancers,
including Burkitt’s lymphoma and Hodgkin’s lymphoma. There are thirty-one recommended cancer
medicines on the Rwanda List of Essential Medicines and in 2014 the country spent close to US$
630,000 for them.




                                                                                                      9
Rwanda has built the capacity of its cancer program with funding, training and other types of support
from many organizations including the Government of Rwanda, Partners in Health, GSK, DfID,
CDC, WHO, and GAVI. Over a three-year period, the program has trained 241 doctors on topics
such as baseline cancer training, LEEP and VIA/cryo; 406 nurses on baseline cancer training and
in-service chemotherapy; and 40 pathology technicians on topics such as pathology outreach. Two
pathologists have attended international training. The Rwanda Cancer Program runs monthly inter-
facility cancer care symposia to increase cancer awareness among health care providers and
enable them to share experiences and harmonize cancer management. To further promote cancer
prevention and early detection the Program conducted the National Breast Cancer Symposium,
the Breast Cancer Public Awareness Campaign, and the HPV/VIA screening campaign. Finally,
the Program has integrated early cancer detection into annual community medical check-ups. To
address current gaps the program aims to: extend the cancer registry at the five referral hospitals
to also include district hospitals; ensure availability of essential medicines; conduct training in
cervical and breast cancer prevention and management; procure screening and diagnostic
equipment for additional district-level facilities; and complete expansion of radiotherapy
infrastructure.

CANCER MANAGEMENT IN ZAMBIA
In 2009 the Ministry of Health developed the National Cancer Control Strategy that aims to provide
a comprehensive and coordinated national response to strengthen prevention, awareness,
diagnosis, treatment and care of cancer. The strategy focuses on cervical, breast, and prostate
adult cancers and retinoblastoma, a childhood cancer. They are currently in the process of
renewing and revitalizing this strategy. The next iteration will include policies to prevent cancer,
including incorporating HPV vaccination into national policy and developing and implementing a
national tobacco control program. The program also aims to strengthen prevention and early
diagnosis of cancer by building capacity to conduct cervical cancer screening. Zambia has
developed the Center of Excellence for Women’s Cancers as well as the Cancer Diseases Hospital,
a Regional Center of Excellence for Cancer and Oncology Training. Currently cervical cancer
screening is available at all provincial hospitals and 31 clinics. Fifteen of these sites provide LEEP
and will serve as referral sites at the provincial level. The program has also built breast cancer
screening capacity with ten mammography machines, one in each province in the public sector and
three in the private sector. Staff members are being trained to conduct breast cancer screening
and capacity is being expanded. Finally, the program is beginning to build capacity to provide PSA
tests and to perform colonoscopies for early diagnosis of prostate and colon cancers.

Zambia has established the Cancer Diseases Hospital (CDH) to be a regional Centre of Excellence
by 2025 and to clinically drive implementation of the national program as well as serve as a hub for
workforce training. CDH’s mission is to “provide equitable access to cost effective and quality
cancer care services as close to the family as possible in order to save, prolong, and contribute to
improvement in the quality of life.” CDH aims to increase cancer cure rates by 15 percent and
reduce late stage presentation of cancer cases in Zambia by 2016. The state-of-the-art facility will
include the latest equipment for treatment of cancer with radiotherapy and chemotherapy. To
achieve program goals the hospital provides timely, quality care to reduce morbidity and mortality;
develops and implements a cancer early detection and prevention program; effectively manages
and develops human resources; mobilizes financial resources to deliver and expand services;
provides logistical and administrative support to the program; and develops and implements a
comprehensive Health Management Information System to plan, monitor and evaluate program
implementation. The hospital developed its 2011-2015 Human Resources for Health Strategic Plan




                                                                                                   10
in which it has set the following goals: (i) increase the number employed of specialized personnel
and ensure the health workforce is equitably distributed; (ii) increase training outputs and
harmonize them to respond to the health sector’s needs; (iii) improve performance and productivity
of health workers; and (iv) strengthen health systems and structures to support expansion and
performance of personnel. Since inception the number of trained health workers has increased
and currently the hospital has 35 staff specialized in oncology. The government has been
supportive of the program and has funded the hospital to conduct training programs for Radiation
Therapy Technology, Clinical Oncology, Radiology and Oncology Nursing.

COMMON CHALLENGES AND INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS IN CANCER
CONTROL PLANNING AND PROGRAMMING
•   Identifying champions, allies, and influential stakeholders who need to be at the table
    for successful program planning and implementation - Key stakeholders include advocacy
    groups; cancer advisory boards; survivor and patient support groups; cancer experts; NCD
    experts; tobacco control experts; private sector representatives; as well as civil society. Other
    allies can be found in government ministries in many sectors (i.e. education and labor), not to
    mention, in key Ministry of Health units (i.e. NCD, oncology, family health, and, sexual and
    reproductive health) at the district, regional and central levels. Finally, it is essential to involve
    Ministry of Finance officials. The Kenya Cancer Control Program benefited from the support
    of two very visible champions -- Ministers of both Ministries of Health had personal experiences
    with cancer and were active supporters of the program.

•   Creating linkages between cancer-specific programs and broad national health
    programs at the central, regional and district levels as well as between public and private
    sectors - Effective linkages need to be made with sexual and reproductive health, maternal
    and child heath, NCD and HIV/AIDS care and treatment programs. Also, opportunities to
    partner with the private sector and leverage their expertise and resources are critical to
    increasing the impact and effectiveness of CCC interventions.

•   Demonstrating economic impact can facilitate support - Ministries of Health need to make
    the economic case for investing in cancer in order to mobilize support and resources. The
    Government of Kenya supported the Tobacco Control Program because it recognized that the
    savings resulting from reduced future expenditures for cancer-related health services, not to
    mention reduced productivity resulting from disease, far exceed the tax revenues lost from
    fewer tobacco sales as well as the cost of the program. While there has been some
    interference from industry, the government has been very supportive in the implementation of
    the tobacco control program.

•   Overcoming lack of awareness, stigma, discrimination and denial about cancer to
    generate broad-based support for the program - Increasingly, Kenyans have experience
    with cancer or know someone who has cancer and misperceptions are being dispelled.
    Continued research, including population-based surveys, such as a module in the
    Demographic and Health Survey, can help programs track changes in awareness and
    knowledge; contribute to better designed programs; assist in targeting resources; and help
    develop effective behavior change and communication programs. Highly motivated visible
    champions can also mobilize support for programs. While broad base support for CCC
    initiatives is growing in many countries much more needs to be done to improve knowledge
    and awareness and early detection.




                                                                                                       11
C ANCER PREVENTION IN AFRICA WITH A FOCUS ON CERVICAL CANCER

  “Cervical cancer is an African holocaust. Many women in Africa suffer and die
                   from this preventable and treatable disease.”
    Dr. G. Parham, Co-Director of the Cervical Cancer Screening Programme of
                                      Zambia




More than 85 percent of the global burden of cervical cancer occurs in developing countries.
Cervical cancer accounts for 21 percent of all female cancers in Africa. Cervical cancer is caused
by infection with the HPV virus that is transmitted sexually. There are two vaccines that protect
against the HPV virus, Gardasil and Cervarix. HPV vaccination programs have been difficult to
implement and scale up in LMICs because vaccines and immunization programs are complex and
costly when considering the full cost of delivery; social stigma hinders uptake of the vaccines; and
reaching adolescent girls is challenging.

RWANDA’S EXPERIENCE PROVIDING THE HPV VACCINE
The Ministry of Health spearheaded a Technical Working Group (TWG) to prepare and implement
a comprehensive strategy for the HPV vaccination program. The TWG included technical experts,
such as clinicians and health professionals engaged in cancer care, and representatives from the
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Gender and Family Promotion, the Center for Treatment and
Research on AIDS, Tuberculosis, Malaria and other Epidemics, and other key development
partners. The TWG formed technical subcommittees to address key issues such as monitoring
and evaluation; cold chain requirements; strategies for reaching the target populations of girls in
and out of school; capacity building for nurses and community health workers; procurement and
logistics; financing; education; and social mobilization. A key component of the program was the
comprehensive communication strategy. It included a nationwide sensitization campaign that
involved all stakeholders; was supported by political and religious leaders; used newspaper, radio
and TV; and trained teachers to discuss cervical cancer and the HPV vaccine. The program
received support and technical assistance from the Rwanda MOH, the United States Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and the International Center for AIDS Care and Treatment




                                                                                                 12
Programs at Columbia University. Local leaders, community health workers and teachers worked
together to implement the program in a “public-private community partnership.”

The MOH chose a school-based strategy because 98 percent of Rwandan girls attend school. It
included: (i) targeting girls enrolled in Primary 6 to receive the full 3-dose course; (ii) a catch-up
phase targeting girls in Secondary 3; and (iii) targeting out-of-school girls age 12. Vaccinations
were provided at “health days” and other educational activities at the school. All vaccinations were
voluntary and parents provided consent when their daughters received the first dose.

Challenges of the program include adhering to the eligibility requirements and tracing girls who
were absent from school. To address these impediments, the program conducted further education
to explain the eligibility requirements; used community health workers to trace the girls who were
12 but not enrolled in school; and used the local health center to vaccinate out-of-school girls.
Additionally, there were concerns about the high cost of the program and possibly diverting scarce
resources from other priority health programs. To make the program more affordable, Rwanda
developed a tiered pricing agreement and negotiated a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with
Merck pharmaceutical company. By 2012, the program had vaccinated 97 percent of the target
population with the required three doses.

The success of the program can be attributed to: (i) a well-established vaccine delivery system with
a cold chain, transportation, human resources, and monitoring capacity; (ii) strong national
leadership and ownership, including excellent collaboration between public and private institutions;
and (iii) a health system with strong outreach capacity. To continue the program, Rwanda
developed a favorable pricing agreement with Merck so that each dose of Gardasil cost US$5. It
is also increasing access to the vaccine through the private health sector.

COMMON CHALLENGES AND INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS IN HPV
VACCINATION
       Debunking myths and misperceptions about cervical cancer and the HPV vaccine -
        Prior to developing the communication campaign, Rwandan health education experts
        conducted focus groups to learn about people’s knowledge and attitudes towards the
        vaccine and cervical cancer. There was a great deal of fear that the vaccination could
        cause sterility and even that it was a plot by the government to slow population growth.
        There were also questions about why the program targeted only 12 year old girls. This
        information was invaluable in developing the comprehensive communication campaign
        that addressed misperceptions and explained cervical cancer and the vaccine at the launch
        of the program.

       Reaching 12 year old girls, in and out of school - The program was integrated into
        school-based programs such as health education, hygiene and reproductive health and
        sought other opportunities throughout the school year during which the second and third
        doses could be provided. Reaching the entire target population required identifying absent
        students, vaccinating them, and following up to ensure they received all three doses. It
        also required close coordination between schools, teachers, and community health
        workers.

       Monitoring the vaccination campaign - When the first dose was administered, girls
        received a card to keep and bring back in order to receive the second and third doses. A
        copy of the card was also kept at the school. Monitoring is important not only to track




                                                                                                   13
        coverage but also, so that as countries strengthen their cancer surveillance registries, they
        can measure the impact of the immunization program over time.

EARLY DETECTION, C ANCER DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

ZAMBIA’S EXPERIENCE STRENGTHENING CERVICAL CANCER SCREENING
-- USING NURSE-LED SCREENING TO INCREASE ACCESS
In 2005, health officials determined that it would be feasible to introduce a nurse- led VIA-based,
“Screen and Treat” program with a referral system of LEEP centers. To ensure quality, the program
added digital cervicography. The program initially focused on HIV+ women and was supported by
external resources from the United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR).
To ensure sustainability the services were subsequently integrated into the Maternal Child Health
program of the Ministry of Health. Currently, services are provided as part of the gynecology exam,
providing an opportunity to screen for both cervical cancer and HIV. A strong quality assurance
system has been put in place, whereby digital images taken by nurses from different areas of the
country are systematically reviewed in Lusaka. The MOH pays for staff and facilities and provincial-
level MOH staff plan special “gyne” days. While 80 percent of women accepted being treated by
nurses, follow-up has been difficult, especially in rural areas. The program added mobile patient
tracking so that nurses can remind patients of appointments and follow-up with text messages.
Community health workers, marriage counselors, traditional chiefs and church leaders conduct
outreach. The program received strong political support from former Zambian First Lady – Dr.
Christine Kaseba-Sata. Dr. Kaseba-Sata is a gynecologist who has been a highly visible champion
for CCC activities, including hosting the 6th Stop Cervical Cancer in Africa Conference that
generated a great deal of visibility and political support for the program, not only in Zambia, but
throughout Africa.

  “I was especially impressed by the organization of the clinic, starting with no
missed opportunity for screening. The data managers plus case managers is also
   an excellent idea.” Dr. Anne Nganga, Program Manager Reproductive Tract
                      Cancers Program, MOH, Nairobi, Kenya

The comprehensive program has all of the key components and provides care nationwide through
31 centers in all provinces. In addition, the program serves as a regional training center. To date,
over 200,000 women have been screened for cervical cancer. Key challenges facing the program
include the need to screen more women, faster; decreasing overtreatment rates; improving
compliance of patients who have been referred to LEEP; enhancing capacity to perform radical
surgery; and transitioning the program to government.

The program’s success can be attributed to: (i) piggybacking on an existing, well-funded and well-
functioning infectious disease (HIV/AIDS) platform to build capacity for the treatment and
prevention of an NCD (cervical cancer); (ii) adapting interventions to the local environment; (iii)
assessing all phases of the program during implementation through a rigorous process of quality
control and monitoring and evaluation to quickly identify and correct any weaknesses; (iv) investing
heavily in surgical excision (LEEP ) infrastructure and expanding histology diagnostic services to
facilitate management of complex cervical lesions that exceed the therapeutic limitations of
cryotherapy; and (v) strengthening the existing healthcare delivery system when weaknesses are
identified during program implementation in order to innovate, enhance sustainability, and
strengthen long-term success.




                                                                                                  14
BOTSWANA’S EXPERIENCE STRENGTHENING CERVICAL CANCER
PREVENTION - USING DATA AND TASK SHARING TO STREAMLINE
SERVICES
Cervical cancer is the second most diagnosed cancer in women 15-49 years old, and the number
one cancer killer in Botswana. From 2004 – 2009 the national screening program was Pap–based
and suffered from a backlog of PAP smear slides that needed to be read, weak referral services
and poor program monitoring and evaluation. In 2012, the National Cervical Prevention Program
(NCCPP) developed a new strategy that includes: (i) education and HPV vaccinations; (ii)
screening and treatment of pre-cancer; and (iii) cervical cancer treatment. The screening and
treatment component continued Pap screening, but also introduced “See and Treat” services at ten
locations and in demonstration projects of both HPV DNA testing and the HPV vaccine.

Unlike other countries in the region, awareness of the need for cancer screening among the
population of Botswana is high. In order to ensure that the program did not suffer delays, the MOH
strengthened planning and used recent census data to estimate the number of women ages 30 –
49 in the different regions and asked political officials and community leaders to inform them of the
screening service. The MOH introduced VIA, cryotherapy and LEEP and used task shifting so that
women who have been screened with Pap smear and are awaiting cone biopsy treatment by
specialists can access treatment at outpatient LEEP clinics run by non-specialized medical officers.
Since 2012, the first of eleven “See and Treat” centers has become operational, twenty healthcare
workers have been trained at the regional training center in Lusaka, cryotherapy and LEEP
machines have been procured, the program has formed the Botswana-University of Pennsylvania
Partnership, and cervical cancer prevention variables have been added to the MOH health
management information system.

Current challenges include developing new reporting indicators, streamlining the cumbersome
paper-based monitoring system, improving the tracking of referrals, and ensuring staffing and
funding. Lessons learned include the importance of leveraging resources and strengthening
linkages with other parts of the health system such as Sexual and Reproductive Health, HIV
Prevention, the Expanded Program on Immunization and the Infectious Diseases Care Clinic;
strengthening planning and strategy development; involving key stakeholders; continuing
education and advocacy at all levels of the health system; and strengthening monitoring and
evaluation to track performance.

RWANDA’S EXPERIENCE WITH BUILDING CAPACITY OF COMMUNITY
HEALTH WORKERS AND THE TASK SHIFTING PROGRAM
The Rwandese health system consists of:- (i) five regional hospitals; (ii) 42 district hospitals in 30
districts; (iii) 474 health centers in 416 health sectors; (iv) 2,148 health community posts; and (v)
14,873 villages with one male and two female community health workers -- one of whom is
responsible for maternal and infant health. CHWs are trusted, literate, community members
between the ages of 20 and 50 who are elected by the community. They provide community-based
prevention, screening and treatment of malnutrition; integrated community case management for
malaria, diarrhea, acute respiratory infection, and malnutrition; community-based maternal and
neonatal care; community-based provision of family planning; community direct observation and
treatment for tuberculosis; and community behavior change communication. CHWs report health
information about their village through a health management information system (HMIS) called
RapidSMS. The information is aggregated from all villages on a monthly basis through the SISCom



                                                                                                   15
system. The CHW program uses performance-based financing to create incentives for CHWs to
report quality information in a timely manner and support thirteen maternal child health
interventions. It also provides community-based health insurance for CHWs. The CHWs are
organized into cooperatives that provide opportunities to generate additional income through
activities such as pig and poultry farming. The challenges facing the CHW program include need
for continual training; providing support and supervision; and ensuring timely supplies of medicines
and other commodities. The CHW program has increased coverage of key MCH interventions;
benefits from strong political commitment at all levels; has contributed to the empowerment of
women; and has helped to implement innovative health financing systems.

Rwanda has developed and implemented a Task Shifting Program to fill the gap of trained medical
                                                            personnel needed to initially address
                                                            HIV/AIDS, and now being used to
                                                            address cancer. From 2005-2007 the
                                                            Ministry of Health and the Treatment
                                                            and Research Center (TRAC) on
                                                            HIV/AIDS worked with Family Health
                                                            International to develop and pilot test
                                                            the Task Shifting Program to
                                                            decentralize services and authorize
                                                            nurses to prescribe antiretroviral
                                                            therapy (ART). Nurses were trained to
                                                            prescribe     ART;    provide     quality
                                                            HIV/AIDS prevention counseling and
                                                            testing; teach patients to manage the
                                                            challenges of compromised immune
                                                            systems as well as the side effects of
 TASK SHIFTING AT ALL LEVELS OF THE SYSTEM
                                                            the medicines; and provide counseling
                                                            to prevent maternal to child HIV
transmission. The Task Shifting Program was approved by the Minister and scaled up in 2009.
The Program shifted responsibilities at every level of the system: from specialized doctors to non-
physician clinicians; from non-physicians to nurses; from nurses to nursing assistants and
community health workers; and from community health workers to people living with HIV/AIDS
(PLHA). The Program required revision of the regulatory framework, a strong quality assurance
system, and involvement of service users. Its ongoing success depends upon coordination of all
stakeholders at all levels of the health system as well as effective supervision; delegation of
authority and responsibility; empowerment; and strong mentoring. Lessons learned include: task
shifting and task sharing can strengthen the overall health system; require both a comprehensive
regulatory framework that defines tasks and competencies, as well as a coordinated and
standardized training program; and requires a quality assurance system that features ongoing
supervision. Task shifting and task sharing are not cost savings strategies but rather strategies for
increasing access to services.

KENYA’S EXPERIENCE TRAINING PATHOLOGISTS
The 2013-2018 Kenya Health Sector Strategic and Investment Plan has set the following 5-year
targets for indicators tracking progress towards its objective of “halting, and reversing the rising
burden of non-communicable conditions”: (i) 75 percent of women of reproductive age are screened
for cervical cancer; and (ii) 2 percent of patients are admitted with cancer. Key strategies of the




                                                                                                  16
national cancer screening programme are: (i) target diseases should be a common form of cancer
with high associated morbidity or mortality; (ii) effective treatment, capable of reducing morbidity
and mortality should be available; (iii) test procedures should be acceptable, safe, and relatively
inexpensive; and (iv) facilities that can undertake subsequent diagnosis and treatment and follow-
up should be available and accessible. The service package includes breast cancer screening and
fecal occult blood testing for bowel cancers and breast cancer screening and annual prostate
examination for all men over 50 years of age.

Pathology services play a key role in several stages of cancer care and control, including accurate
surveillance, reliability of cancer registries, primary prevention, cancer screening, diagnosis and
staging, treatment planning, and detection of recurrence. Historically, Kenyan pathologists
received their training in 5-year programs in the UK and were able to specialize in anatomic
pathology, cytopathology, haematopathology, chemical pathology, immunopathology, and clinical
microbiology. Pathology training capacity has been developed at the University of Nairobi (UON)
that now offers a 3-year Master of Medicine General Pathology Training program, experiential
mentorship training at the sub-speciality level, as well as professional certificates as a Specialist
Pathologist. Since 1986, the UON program has trained 70 pathologists who now work in four
teaching hospitals, provincial and district level-level hospitals, and private hospitals, as well as in
other hospitals in the East Africa region. In 2006, the Aga Khan University Hospital developed a
4-year pathology residency program that has tracks in anatomic pathology, histopathology,
cytology and forensic, as well as clinical pathology (haematology, chemical pathology,
immunopathology and clinical microbiology). To date, the program has trained twelve anatomic
pathologists and 11 clinical pathologists. In addition, postgraduate cytology programs have been
developed and UON now offers a Master of Science in Clinical Cytology. Trainees include
technologists and clinicians. This program has built regional capacity and trained pathologists from
Malawi, Zimbabwe and Zambia.

UON has collaborated with regional and international professional associations such as the Kenya
Association of Clinical Pathologists; the Kenya Society of Haematologists and Oncologists; the
Association of Pathologists in East, Central and Southern Africa; and the International Association
of Pathologists to develop post MMed Training, fellowships, continuing education seminars and
workshops, and teleconferences. Currently, the College of Pathologists in East, Central and
Southern Africa (COPECSA) is forming the Regional College of Pathologists and aims to establish
standards of pathology training for the region and offer pathology fellowships. UON is also
collaborating with the University of Stellenbosch to develop a training and research program.

Kenya is making significant efforts to increase human resources capacity to support cancer
diagnosis and treatment follow-up in the region. Several regional opportunities are being
developed, however, they face several challenges, including lack of space and infrastructure;
shortages of resources and supplies, including teaching microscopes, staining supplies, and
reference books; lack of quality assurance schemes; and limited research funding.

ZAMBIA’S EXPERIENCE TRAINING RADIATION THERAPY TECHNOLOGISTS
Zambia has developed a cost effective regional training program in Radiation Therapy Technology.
The program uses a mixed model approach that emphasizes both clinical and academic training.
It is implemented by the Cancer Diseases Hospital Training College and provides hands on
experience through training that is integrated into clinical operations. The program conducted a
Training of Trainers in 2010 and developed its curriculum through a collaborative participatory
process that involved all key stakeholders. The program has developed an evaluation and quality




                                                                                                    17
assurance system and has been accredited. The program graduated two cohorts of students in
2014, including 17 Zambians, 1 Malawian, 2 Eritreans, and 3 Ethiopians.

COMMON CHALLENGES AND INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS TO EARLY
DETECTION AND CANCER DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
•   Generating demand for services - Zambia uses chiefs, churches, and traditional marriage
    counselors as advocates and other community leaders to conduct community outreach and
    educate women about the importance of cancer screening. Botswana used census data to
    plan outreach efforts and target program activities towards women between the ages of 30 -
    49. Finally, Rwanda has used its extensive network of Community Health Workers to educate
    women about the importance of cancer screening.

•   Raising awareness through innovative social mobilization efforts to reach a younger
    target population and to overcome misperceptions and traditional beliefs concerning
    cervical cancer - The Zambia program found that the best advocates are women returning to
    their communities after receiving care. The program also introduced health clubs at the
    secondary education level to raise awareness of cervical cancer screening among younger
    people.

•   Using innovative telemedicine and mobile phone communication strategies to increase
    access to services in sparsely populated areas- Zambia uses mobile phones to
    communicate and follow-up with patients and telemedicine to ensure quality of care and
    accuracy of diagnoses.

•   Building capacity and addressing shortages of trained health personnel - Zambia
    increased its capacity to provide cervical cancer screening by piggybacking upon an existing,
    well-functioning infectious disease platform. Countries have used a wide range of strategies
    for increasing the capacity of their health system staff including: on-the-job training to build
    capacity for job specific tasks; task shifting and task sharing that reassign tasks to different
    levels of personnel and, as in the Rwanda experience, require reorganizing policies and
    procedures throughout an organization or system; reviewing and revising curricula of
    existing degree programs; and developing new training programs to train nurses, doctors
    and other levels of health care personnel. Rwanda, Zambia and Botswana have effectively
    used task shifting and task sharing and developed new training programs to expand the role of
    nurses in the provision of cervical cancer screening and support their work with quality
    assurance programs, training and supervision.

   Building pathology capacity - Countries have used several strategies to build their pathology
    capacity. Kenya has equipped pathology labs at selected sites and uses roving pathologists
    to travel from site to site and provide services. The University of Nairobi has also developed
    training programs to train pathologists and now students can pursue a 3-year Master of
    Medicine General Pathology Training program; a Master of Science in Clinical Cytology;
    participate in mentoring programs at the sub-speciality level; or receive a professional
    certificate as a Specialist Pathologist. Since 1986, the University of Nairobi program has
    trained 70 pathologists who now work in four teaching hospitals; provincial and district level
    hospitals; private hospitals; as well as hospitals in the region. In 2006, the Aga Khan University
    Hospital developed a 4-year pathology residency program that offers tracks in anatomic
    pathology, histopathology, cytology and forensic, as well as clinical pathology (haematology,




                                                                                                   18
    chemical pathology, immunopathology and clinical microbiology).                Zambia is using
    telemedicine to extend its pathology capacity to rural areas.

    Increasing capacity and quality of pathology services is critical to the expansion of CCC
    services. Many countries have developed twinning arrangements with cancer programs and
    medical schools in developed countries. For example, Uganda has been working with the Fred
    Hutchinson Institute in the United States to build its pathology capacity and improve the quality
    of diagnoses. Kenya, in the AMPATH Program has developed many institutional
    partnerships with academic and research institutions, including Indiana University and
    Toronto University. AMPATH is emphasizing quality control during its training to improve the
    accuracy of its pathology testing. While international collaboration has been critical to the
    development of pathology capacity, strong quality control during training has been
    essential to assuring that Kenyan and Ugandan pathologists develop good skills and arrive at
    diagnoses that are comparable to those of internationally trained pathologists. A recent study
    showed that 56 percent of diagnoses made by Ugandan pathologists matched those made by
    US pathologists.

   Strengthening the referral system and ensuring patient follow-up - Zambia has
    implemented a mobile patient tracking system that enables nurses to remind patients of the
    need for follow-up appointments. Rwanda uses its network of Community Health Workers to
    follow up with patients and Botswana has strengthened its monitoring and evaluation system
    to ensure patient follow-up.

•   Reducing the time between diagnosis and treatment - Both Zambia and Botswana have
    introduced VIA “See and Treat” services because they allow immediate treatment of
    precancerous lesions. Zambia has been tracking the stage of disease of patients presenting
    for treatment and has recently seen an increase in the number of stage two women presenting,
    indicating that the referral and screening programs are making an impact.

•   Leveraging ongoing platforms can generate cost efficiencies and contribute to
    sustainability - Zambia has strengthened the sustainability of its cervical cancer screening
    program by integrating services into the MCH program of the Ministry of Health. Botswana has
    strengthened linkages and leveraged resources from other parts of the health system, including
    Sexual and Reproductive Health, HIV Prevention, the Expanded Program on Immunization and
    the Infectious Diseases Care Clinic in order to strengthen sustainability of its cancer-screening
    program.

INCREASING ACCESS TO PALLIATIVE C ARE
Palliative Care is “an approach that improves the quality of life of patients and their families facing
problems associated with life-threatening illness, through prevention and relief of suffering”. PC
begins at diagnosis and continues through and beyond treatment. Issues related to palliative and
hospice care include limited access to appropriate symptom management and support to sustain
function and prolong survival. Appropriate palliative care requires family support; a holistic
approach; maintenance of hope and dignity; and open communication for informed decision
making.

Opioids are indispensable for the relief of pain and suffering and appropriate policies need to be in
place to ensure they are both available for medical use and not abused. Since the early 1960s the
United Nations and WHO have worked to develop policies and frameworks that both prevent abuse




                                                                                                    19
and diversion and ensure availability of the drugs for medical purposes. In the mid-1980s
pharmaceutical companies began manufacturing opioids in sustained release forms that are easier
to administer. There is tremendous disparity in the availability and consumption of opioids. In 2010
it was estimated that 16 percent of the world’s population living in high-income countries consumed
90 percent of the morphine used globally. In Africa, South Africa has the highest per capita opioid
consumption followed by Kenya, Ghana, and Zambia.

In 1990, WHO developed guidelines for using opioids to relieve cancer pain. Despite published
guidelines, a 1994 study published in the New England Journal of Medicine found that 42 percent
of cancer patients received inadequate cancer pain treatment and minorities, women and older
patients were more likely to receive inadequate cancer pain treatment. Barriers to accessing PC
and medication to manage pain include lack of knowledge among patients and providers; myths
and misperceptions; provider bias; lack of coordination of care and services; procurement policies
and supply chain issues; eligibility restrictions limiting facilities authorized to dispense the drugs
and health care providers authorized to prescribe them; additional prescription requirements
hindering access, such as specialized prescription pads, limits to the length of prescriptions, and
referral requirements; general laws that limit access; and lack of accountability.

There are several global and regional frameworks that aim to increase access to PC including the
WHO Guidelines for Cancer Pain Relief; the WHO May 2014 PC Resolution that focuses on
integration, education, research and funding; and the International Narcotics Control Board
efforts to strengthen control and access to narcotics. There are also several North-South Initiatives
that are working to develop and advance PC integration as well as expand the evidence base.

INTEGRATING PALLIATIVE CARE INTO AFRICAN HEALTH PROGRAMS AND
POLICIES
African countries are gaining experience with the integration of PC into existing health services.
For example, Uganda formed a Public Private Partnership to provide free access to liquid oral
morphine; authorized nurses to prescribe opioids; integrated PC into the curricula for health
workers, as well as for diploma, bachelors and masters level students; formed a Country PC Team
comprised of both public and private sector stakeholders; and integrated PC into national HIV,
Cervical Cancer and Health Sector Strategic Plans. Facilities providing PC services can now be
found in 70 percent of Uganda’s districts. Swaziland has also made rapid progress in developing a
national PC policy and implementation guidelines; developing and implementing a national training
curricula and setting up a procurement system for oral morphine with a corresponding monitoring
system.




                                                                                                   20
                         Level of Palliative Care Development




African countries with national PC Policies and Strategies include Tanzania, Botswana,
Mozambique, Malawi, Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Uganda and Rwanda. The key components of a PC
policy and program include: (i) leadership and governance that include locally appropriate and
sustainable policy guidance, information and oversight, collaboration and coalition building,
regulation, system design and accountability, especially as pertains to morphine procurement and
prescription; (ii) service delivery packages and models that are sustainable, equitable and
evidence-based; (iii) financing that promotes sustainable access to an effective mix of preventive,
curative, rehabilitative and palliative services; (iv) development of human resources for health that
promotes task sharing as well as task shifting; (v) health information systems that are used to inform
programming and improve health outcomes; and (vi) access to quality medical products, vaccines
and technologies.

The African Palliative Care Association (APCA) is a pan-African organization founded in 2004 that
works to improve access to PC in all of Africa and to ensure that PC is well-understood and
integrated into health systems at all levels and underpinned by evidence. The APCA works
collaboratively with local, national, regional and international partners to: (i) increase knowledge
and awareness; (ii) facilitate integration of PC into national policies and education; (iii) ensure
access to essential medicines and existing health services; (iv) build the evidence base for PC in
Africa; and (v) increase sustainability of programs.

IMPLEMENTING PALLIATIVE CARE – KENYA’S EXPERIENCE
Increasing access to PC has been a key component of the Kenya Cancer Control Programme
because over 80 percent of cancer cases present late when PC is the only treatment option. To
address this growing need and make the best use of scarce resources, Kenya has strategically
linked PC to cancer prevention, early detection and treatment for both adults and children. It has
also mobilized both public and private sector partners and formed partnerships with key




                                                                                                   21
international organizations. The Kenya Hospices and Palliative Care Association has been
instrumental in initiatives to establish PC centers and train public and private sector health workers.
To date Kenya has established 11 PC centers in public regional referral hospitals; 25 PC centers
in county public hospitals; 9 PC centers in hospitals operated by faith-based organizations in
various regions; and, established 17 free-standing hospices. PC has been integrated into training
provided by most medical and nursing schools, including the Kenya Medical Training College. Five
thousand health workers have participated in one-week training courses and 52 health workers
have received advanced PC training. Kenya has also mobilized political leaders to support PC and
has integrated PC into the 2011-2016 National Cancer Control Strategy and the 2013 National
Guidelines for Cancer Management, and promulgated the 2013 National Palliative Care
Guidelines. Finally, Kenya is the first African country to have the health minister, a cabinet
secretary, include PC in his performance contract in order to ensure continued government action
to increase access to PC.

IMPLEMENTING PALLIATIVE CARE – BOTSWANA’S EXPERIENCE
In 2003, Botswana participated in a WHO-supported five-country project aimed to improve PC
initiatives and the quality of life of people living with HIV/AIDS and cancer. As a result, Botswana
developed a comprehensive National Palliative Care Strategy. Its key components include:
ensuring access to pain and PC medications at facility and community levels; building local capacity
for PC provision in health care settings, hospices, day centers and homes; providing psycho-social
support and wrap around care; and improving end-of-life care and bereavement support. The
program was launched in 2013.

The MOH is currently implementing the
PC Strategy by: (i) addressing
misperceptions        and      improving
understanding;        (ii)   developing
guidelines and protocols for PC, as well
as for pain management; (iii)
implementing 5-day training programs
and      integrating    PC    into   the
undergraduate health curricula; (iv)
increasing availability of opioids; (v)
forming the Botswana Hospice and
Palliative Care Association to improve
coordination; (vi) improving continuity
of care by strengthening linkages
between acute care and PC providers;
and (vii) mobilizing resources. Next
steps      include   incorporating   PC
implementation plans into the National
Cancer Control Plan; increasing access to opioids and training health personnel to prescribe them;
and reviewing opioid regulations.

IMPLEMENTING PALLIATIVE CARE – RWANDA’S EXPERIENCE
In 2006, Rwanda’s MOH developed a PC program and introduced PC training for hospital and non-
governmental organization (NGO) staff. In 2007, PC was added to the clinical care package. In
2008, an advocacy workshop was conducted to strengthen PC delivery and morphine was added



                                                                                                    22
to the Essential Drugs List. In 2011 a National Palliative Care Policy was approved, district level
hospital workers were trained and the Palliative Care Center at Kibagabaga was created. In 2013
the National Palliative Care Policy was integrated into the National Strategic Plan. PC is
implemented at all levels of the health system and referral, provincial and district hospitals, as well
as health centers and health posts provide a clinical care package while community health workers
follow-up with patients and support treatment compliance and home-based care. The program uses
multidisciplinary teams from provincial and district hospitals and the community to coordinate care.

Priority areas for the PC program include strengthening PC at all levels of the health system;
educating health care workers and conducting refresher training of district hospital staff in morphine
use and pain management; raising awareness of both patients and health care personnel;
improving access to services and quality of care; and conducting research to inform and improve
care. Strategies used to expand the program include: (i) gaining government ownership to expand
a program initially led by civil society; (ii) using the national health plan to integrate PC into services
at all levels of the health system; (iii) using a core team of national trainers at the Provincial Hospital
level and a cascade system of training staff throughout the system; (iv) relying on the national
supply chain system to procure and distribute drugs; and (v) establishing a technical working group
to advise the Ministry of Health and advocate for continued program support.

COMMON CHALLENGES AND INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS IN INCREASING
ACCESS TO PALLIATIVE CARE
   Mobilizing public and private sector support and resources for PC - Public and private
    sector policymakers need to be educated in the strategic link between PC and cancer
    prevention, early detection and treatment for adults and children as well as the risks of opioid
    addiction. In Kenya, the PC program began as a cancer-related program and then raised its
    visibility by demonstrating that PC services can benefit persons facing all kinds of life-
    threatening illnesses. It further expanded its services by working with hospice-providers; by
    improving linkages with cancer prevention and treatment and mobilizing MOH resources to
    integrate PC into hospital care, and by collaborating with donor organizations interested in
    improving access to PC.

   Increasing access to drugs - Rwanda and Uganda have procured morphine in an inexpensive
    solution form and trained compounding pharmacists to dispense it. Both countries have also
    used Public Private Partnerships to increase access. Finally, global efforts to negotiate with
    pharmaceutical companies for lower price drugs, as has been done for ART, are needed.

   Authorizing trained nurses to prescribe and better utilizing pharmacists to dispense
    opioids - It is essential that policy assessments and situation analyses be conducted in each
    country to understand the laws, policies and guidelines on the books, how they are
    implemented, and what their impact is on hindering access to PC. Once this information is
    collected, it is important to involve all stakeholders in the review and revision of regulations and
    policies to build consensus among doctors, nurses and pharmacists for new prescribing
    practices that can increase access to PC. Uganda has authorized trained nurses to prescribe
    morphine.




                                                                                                        23
INCREASING ACCESS TO AN ESSENTIAL C ANCER C ARE P ACKAGE
Because cancer care is costly, complex and chronic, identifying strategies for financing the
continuum of CCC interventions is challenging and efforts must be made to identify cost-effective
interventions. The Disease Control Priorities, Third Edition (DCP3) has for the first time a
volume on cancer that provides the state of the art evidence on cost effectiveness of various
interventions. As part of DCP3 a framework has been developed to first analyze the cancer burden
in a country; then determine the cost effectiveness of specified health interventions within the
country context, and finally estimate the feasibility and potential impact of scaling-up the
interventions. This information is then used to identify the most cost effective essential cancer care
package and determine the cost of its implementation as well as its potential impact. Global
financing to support cancer programs in Africa is limited and programs are typically financed
through large out-of-pocket payments with some public sector support. To design a cost effective
essential cancer care package the disease burden must be understood; cost effective interventions
identified; and the feasibility of scaling up interventions in the specific health care setting assessed.

Cost effectiveness analyses of selected cancer control interventions conducted for the DCP3
demonstrate that HPV vaccination; comprehensive tobacco measures; and tobacco taxes are very
cost effective. Similarly, high quality treatment of selected paediatric cancers for patients below
age 15 can significantly reduce mortality and be cost effective. The DCP3 estimates that the
marginal per capita cost of a comprehensive essential cancer package that includes these
interventions ranges from about US$1.7 in low-income countries to roughly US$5.7 in upper
middle-income countries.

DCP3 provides a strong economic rationale for financing selected cancer interventions and
presents several potential sources of funding the addition of an essential cancer package into
current health programs. If the essential cancer package were provided to approximately 5.8 billion
people, approximately 3.2 million cancer deaths in people below age 70 would be averted. This
would cost 3 percent of public spending for health in upper- middle-income countries; 5 percent in
lower- middle-income countries; and 14 percent in low-income countries. Since the per capita
income in these countries is growing, more money will become available and cancer interventions
can be domestically financed. Funds can also be generated through tobacco taxes. Another
important source of funds is international donor support. Currently, global priorities for reducing
the costs of the essential cancer package include: (i) lowering the cost of key inputs, such as drugs
and vaccines, through large scale purchasing and/or negotiated drug prices; (ii) providing technical
assistance; (iii) formalizing communities of practice; and (iv) conducting research. Research
priorities include: registries to better understand the disease burden; implementation science;
biology; and economics, including costing.

Health system reforms being implemented in many African countries that provide opportunities for
increasing access to CCC include: (i) Universal Health Coverage (UHC) to ensure financial
protection through pooled, publicly-financed health care; (ii) performance-based financing
programs that provide financial incentives to providers and community workers, based on the
quantity and quality of services delivered; and (iii) Public Private Partnerships that involve contracts
between public and private entities for the provision of services, facilities and/or equipment. When
developing strategies for financing CCC programs within the context of these broader health
system reforms, it is essential to ensure that all people can obtain health services without suffering
financial hardship.




                                                                                                      24
INTRODUCING CCC INTO UNIVERSAL HEALTH COVERAGE PROGRAMS
“for cancer to be part of Universal Health Coverage, we need to start building the
   evidence base. There is urgent need for more information on the burden of
    disease, on priority interventions, and on the most cost effective ways of
  delivering services, bearing in mind value for money. This information will be
    critical to defining benefit packages, and determining what is affordable.”
                                Karima Saleh, Senior Health Economist, World Bank

The World Bank is working with many African countries to support progress towards Universal
Health Coverage; a process that depends upon a thorough understanding of the country and its
capacity to collect revenues, pool funds, and purchase services. Key considerations for the design
of programs to introduce cancer care into UHC programs include: clearly defining the population of
beneficiaries who will receive services; determining which services to include in the benefit
package; estimating the cost of services to be covered; and developing a strategy for shifting to
prepayments and reducing out-of-pocket payments for care. When making these choices it is
important to ensure that coverage and use are based on need; to maximize benefits and cost
effectiveness by prioritizing policies that generate the greatest sum of health-related well-being in
a given population; ensure that contributions are fair and based on ability to pay; and ensure
accountability through robust monitoring. Additional research is needed to inform these decisions
and better understand the disease burden; the cost effectiveness of interventions; household out-
of-pocket spending; and the incidence of catastrophic spending, especially among the poor.

Key lessons from the experiences introducing cancer care coverage into UHC programs in
Thailand, Mexico, Columbia, and Peru are: (i) strategies to include cancer care coverage into
national health insurance programs need to focus on improving survivorship and reducing out-of-
pocket payments for the poor; (ii) separate catastrophic illness funds can be established and
revenues can be generated from “sin taxes”; (iii) introduction of benefits needs to be slow,
sequenced and structured, focusing first on selected interventions for high incidence cancers and
targeted populations and gradually expanding to include additional services and beneficiaries; (iv)
solid data on costs and burden of disease, and efforts to ensure that entitlements translate into
effective coverage are essential to success; and (v) political will is key.

COSTING OF COMPREHENSIVE CERVICAL CANCER PREVENTION – THE
COMPREHENSIVE CERVICAL CANCER COSTING AND PLANNING TOOL
Reducing the burden of cervical cancer requires a comprehensive approach that includes
vaccination; screening and treatment of precancerous lesions; detection and treatment of early to
mid-stage cancers; and provision of palliative care. To plan for and provide these services it is
essential to know both the financial and economic cost, including the cost of training programs;
procurement and distribution of vaccines; social sensitization; delivery of services; supervision;
monitoring; and program evaluation. To better understand these costs, WHO has supported
development of a Comprehensive Cervical Cancer Costing and Planning (C4P) Tool. The tool
can be accessed at: www.who.int/immunization/hpv/en/

The C4P Tool facilitates the process of estimating costs and designing a cervical cancer prevention
program. It helps decision makers understand the components of various service delivery
strategies; compare their costs; estimate their anticipated impact; discuss trade-offs; and clarify
policies. It uses population data from the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), vaccine
cost data from the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunizations (GAVI), data on the number of



                                                                                                  25
schools from Ministries of Education, and data on costs of other inputs such as per diem, transport,
and allowances from Ministries of Finance. The C4P Tool estimates both investment and recurrent
costs; predicts outputs in terms of health systems strengthening and population coverage; and
allows users to compare the costs of various strategies and scenarios such as facility-based versus
community-based service delivery and school-based versus community-based immunization
campaigns.

The C4P Tool has been applied in 12 countries and has shown that: (i) even though financing
through GAVI has reduced costs and Gardasil is now available for $4.5 per dose the cost of the
vaccine remains significant; (ii) vaccine delivery costs (excluding the cost of the vaccine) are more
expensive than those of routine vaccinations largely due to the challenges of reaching girls ages 9
- 13; (iii) costs for vaccine delivery per fully immunized girl range from $3.9 - $5.8 across countries;
and (iv) factors contributing to cost differences include variations in country settings (geography,
population etc.) and strategies for administering the vaccines. The C4P Tool has also
demonstrated that effective and timely interventions can reduce morbidity and mortality from
cervical cancer, however, successful programs require planning and a comprehensive approach.

COST EFFECTIVENESS OF BREAST CANCER PREVENTION - GHANA’S
EXPERIENCE
In 2012, Ghana’s breast cancer diagnosis and treatment program covered ten percent of the
population, cost $1.6 million and averted 437 DALYs (disability adjusted life years). The average
cost effectiveness ratio was estimated to be $3,745. Currently, the Ghana National Health
Insurance Service (GHIS) covers breast (and cervical) cancer diagnosis and treatment for its
beneficiaries. However, GHIS only covers 34 percent of the Ghanaian population. Policymakers
conducted a cost effectiveness analysis (CEA) to identify the most cost effective way to deliver
breast cancer diagnostic services and treatment and explore strategies for increasing financing and
expanding access. To conduct a CEA the DALYs resulting from a health condition in a population
that can be averted by the health intervention are measured; then the cost of the health intervention
is determined; and, finally, the CEA ratio (DALYs averted by the program ÷ the cost of the program)
is calculated. The CEA ratios are then used to compare the cost effectiveness of several different
health interventions.

Ghanaian policymakers used CEA to compare three components of the breast cancer program,
namely, mass media awareness, clinical breast exams, and mammography screening. The CEA
indicated that in Ghana, both mass media awareness with a CEA ratio of $1364 and the clinical
breast exam if provided with continuity of care with a CEA ratio of $1299 were cost effective.
Mammography screening with a CEA ratio of $12,908 was not cost effective in Ghana. The CEA
demonstrated that increasing the coverage of the program to 100 percent of the population would
cost $16 million and would avert 12,560 DALYs annually. It also demonstrated that a package of
interventions that includes mass media awareness, diagnosis, treatment and care is more cost
effective than a single intervention for treatment.

Priorities for expanding the breast cancer program in Ghana include: (i) strengthening evidence of
the disease burden; the costs and cost effectiveness of key interventions; and the benefits of
investments in prevention and early detection; (ii) initiating a dialogue with health finance reformers
to expand access to effective interventions and GHIS coverage; (iii) exploring possibilities of
purchasing services from established private treatment centers; (iv) continuing to integrate breast
cancer and cervical cancer screening into key programs (Maternal and Child Health, Sexual




                                                                                                     26
Reproductive Health, and HIV/AIDS prevention) and new initiatives (Every Women, Every Child);
and (v) continuing to build service delivery capacity.

Common Challenges and Innovative Solutions in Financing
Cancer Care
   •   Identifying the most cost effective essential cancer care package and determining
       the cost of its implementation as well as its potential impact - the DCP3 research
       project has developed a framework for analyzing the cancer burden in a country and
       determining the cost effectiveness of interventions within the country context. The most
       cost effective interventions in many country contexts are HPV vaccination programs,
       tobacco control measures and implementation of tobacco taxes. Kenya has successfully
       implemented tobacco control measures. Additional research is needed to expand the
       evidence base.

   •   Using economic analyses to make the case for investing in cancer and mobilize
       additional resources to support cancer interventions - Economic analyses can be
       effective tools for generating political support and mobilizing both global and national
       resources to support CCC programs. Rwanda has mobilized global resources in the form
       of reduced costs for HPV vaccines. Ghana has conducted a cost effectiveness analysis to
       determine the most cost effective way of expanding its breast cancer prevention program
       and is using the results to mobilize national health care resources to increase access to
       breast cancer screening.

   •   Introducing cancer care into Universal Health Coverage - strategies to include cancer
       care coverage into national health insurance programs need to focus on improving
       survivorship and reducing out-of-pocket payments for the poor. Coverage of cancer care
       benefits needs to be introduced in a slow, sequenced and structured manner that focuses
       first on selected interventions for high incidence cancers and targeted populations and
       gradually expands to include additional services and beneficiaries.

   •   Assessing the cost effectiveness of alternative delivery strategies—tools can be used
       to determine the cost effectiveness of delivering critical services using different delivery
       modes (for example, school-based versus community-based programs to provide the HPV
       vaccination to girls). This type of analysis is instrumental to making smart decisions in
       resource-constrained environments.

PUBLIC PRIVATE P ARTNERSHIPS - THE EXPERIENCE OF AMPATH
ONCOLOGY IN ELDORET, KENYA
The AMPATH Oncology and Chronic Care Program is an innovative partnership between:
government agencies, academic institutions and private companies. Its flexible structure allows
each partner to play to its strength: government agencies support research, provide an enabling
environment, and ensure oversight; academic institutions contribute scientific and research
expertise and negotiate agreements; and private organizations provide in-kind resources such as
bioassays, targeted funding, and resource personnel.

AMPATH is based in Western Kenya and provides CCC services to a population of 18 million. It
combines care and research to pursue its mission of “Care Leads the Way.” To better meet the




                                                                                                27
increasing needs of its patients, AMPATH expanded its original platform of HIV/AIDS services to
provide a range of integrated services. As of 2013, AMPATH Oncology and Hematology Outpatient
Clinic provides a variety of services for men, women and children, including for Kaposi’s sarcoma,
breast cancer, lymphoma, head and neck cancers, gastro intestinal cancers, leukemia both acute
and chronic, breast, cervical and ovarian cancer, and screening for cervical, prostate and breast
cancers. AMPATH has developed collaborative relationships with nine academic institutions;
multiple US and Kenyan government agencies; several pharmaceutical companies; foundations
and research organizations.

Strategies AMPATH is implementing to address CCC barriers include:

       Improving infrastructure - AMPATH is strengthening pathology infrastructure since
        cancer treatment can only be as good as the diagnosis. It has improved chemotherapy
        services by installing chemo prep hoods, improving chemo storage facilities, and installing
        both hardware and software programs designed to improve management and
        administration of chemotherapy treatment. AMPATH is also building radiotherapy bunkers
        in its new cancer treatment center. Since the majority of patients present with advanced
        cancers, AMPATH has established a palliative and hospice care unit. To strengthen
        surveillance, AMPATH has provided hardware and software support and developed a
        reliable cancer registry. Finally, AMPATH is collaborating with Moi Teaching and Referral
        Hospital to develop surgery resources dedicated to oncology cases.

       Supporting research and clinical training – AMPATH is supporting collaborative
        arrangements between Moi, Indiana and Toronto Universities to develop curricula, train
        trainers, and train medical personnel through both long- and short-term research and
        clinical training courses.

       Improving affordability and sustainability of services –AMPATH has worked with
        pharmaceutical companies to provide generic drugs for lower costs; explored the cost
        implications and possibility of including chemotherapy in the benefits provided by the
        National Hospital Insurance Fund; researched willingness and ability to pay; formed Public
        Private Partnerships; and raised awareness of the importance of controlling cancer to
        mobilize resources and advance philanthropic efforts of groups such as pharmaceutical
        companies.

       Increasing access to palliative care – AMPATH has improved the acceptability and use
        of morphine for pain management; explored the possibility of including narcotics on the
        essential drug list to make them more affordable; developed and conducted multiple short-
        term trainings on palliative care; and promoted the use of multidisciplinary teams to
        improve coordination and quality of care.

       Educating patients, service providers, policymakers and the community -Patient
        education is essential for addressing misperceptions to increase demand for services
        and improving understanding of side effects to enhance treatment compliance.
        AMPATH has developed materials on chemotherapy for patients; held multiple meetings
        and conferences; and disseminated research findings. Provider education through
        continuing education is essential for improving quality of care. AMPATH has supported
        chemotherapy administration courses and tumor boards -- multidisciplinary meetings of
        medical personnel to discuss current cases, to disseminate and promote best practices.
        AMPATH has also supported the formation of patient support groups that have been




                                                                                                28
        very effective in raising awareness and generating demand for cancer screening services.
        Finally, AMPATH has provided technical expertise to the MOH in support of efforts to
        develop policies, guidelines and treatment protocols.

Additional areas of capacity building that AMPATH has supported include conducting and
disseminating research and using new technologies to improve service delivery and quality of care.
Ongoing challenges AMPATH faces include: generating continued political leadership and
goodwill; consistent funding; collaboration at all levels in country, especially within the decentralized
system; and maintaining access to cost effective drug supplies.

COMMON CHALLENGES AND INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS IN PPPS
       Improving coordination of public and private sector CCC providers and increasing
        engagement of the private sector, including through PPPs - While governments need
        to ensure financing of cancer programs, they do not necessarily need to deliver the
        services. In countries with a vibrant private sector, it may be more cost effective for
        governments to purchase services from private sector hospitals and clinics. In some
        countries, however, there are impediments to private sector provision of cancer care, such
        as high costs and low demand for services. Policymakers need to explore these issues
        and work with the private sector to identify ways to increase private sector engagement,
        including opportunities for Public Private Partnerships. Zambia has used a traditional PPP
        in which a mining company has sponsored gynecology days for the wives of employees.
        Currently Zambia is hoping to form a PPP to add six satellite centers for radiology.

       Advancing research and ensuring that it is relevant and informs local programs -
        Strengthening the capacity of local Institutional Review Boards for both scientific and
        ethical reviews is essential to ensuring that research is relevant and useful. Also, including
        health care providers at all levels of the system, policymakers and other stakeholders in
        the review of research proposals helps to both ensure its relevance and build ownership of
        research results.

OPPORTUNITIES FOR REGIONAL COLLABORATION
There are important opportunities for countries to join together and collaborate to address the
shortages of qualified personnel and limited training; serious underfunding of programs and the
need to maker a better economic case for investing in cancer care and control; and the limited
attention to research to inform policy and generate knowledge of science of delivery. Already
countries have developed regional training programs to build capacity for pathology, oncology,
radiation therapy, and other needed skills. Countries are also building important regional networks
of resources to support one another in addressing cancer. Zambia has developed the Center of
Excellence for Womens’ Cancers and is rolling out nationwide the HPV screening program. CCC
SSKE participants were inspired after seeing the Zambia program in action and commented, “I
wish my Minister of Health could visit Zambia and learn from the Zambian government what it takes
to allocate resources for cancer care.” Another stated, “the Cancer Control Programme for Zambia
is a shining example as it has components of prevention at the African Center of Excellence for
Women’s Cancers and another Center of Excellence in Cancer Treatment at the Cancer Diseases
Hospital.” Rwanda has established the Butero Center of Excellence on Comprehensive Cancer
Care, the first cancer facility in a rural area in Africa. Botswana aims to excel in pediatric cancers.
And with support of the African Development Bank, additional centers of excellence are being
established. Kenya is developing a Center of Excellence in renal medicine and Uganda in




                                                                                                      29
developing the East Africa Oncology Institute, an East African Center of Excellence for oncology
training and tertiary education in biomedical sciences. These institutions will collaborate with one
another to conduct research, train staff and build CCC capacity in Africa.

CCC SSKE - SHARING KNOWLEDGE, EXPERIENCES AND
COLLABORATING TO INCREASE ACCESS TO CCC
The CCC SSKE provided a platform for technical experts and policymakers to share experiences,
discuss common challenges and explore innovative solutions to address the rapidly rising burden
of cancer in Africa. The World Bank served as convener and organizer of the knowledge exchange.
The Bank mobilized the United States National Cancer Institute (NCI)/National Institute of Health
(NIH) to participate in the initiative, leveraging technical expertise in highly specialized areas (for
example, cancer epidemiology, planning, treatment, pathology). The Knowledge Exchange is in
line with the World Bank’s role as a knowledge institution, facilitating the sharing of promising
approaches and providing a platform for learning. Given the modest technical capacity, limited
training and meager funding allocated to cancer care and control in Africa, the Knowledge
Exchange played an important role in inspiring participants to scale up interventions in their own
countries, using domestic resources or donor funding when available.

Common challenges discussed during the Knowledge Exchange include: serious shortages of
trained specialists; few facilities that provide care; and underfunding of CCC services that leaves
families shouldering, not only the tremendous burden of illness imposed by the disease, but also
the high costs of seeking care. The CCC SSKE participating countries, Botswana, Kenya, Rwanda,
Uganda and Zambia are at different stages in the development and implementation of CCC
programs, are gaining experience and have many lessons to share. As one CCC SSKE participant
stated: “Regional partnerships are key…countries need to put efforts into supporting each other to
ease the patients’ burdens.”

Many important strides are being made. As has been seen throughout the CCC SSKE discussions,
countries are designing and implementing programs and learning what works, and what does not
work. CCC SSKE participants said the knowledge they gained through the exchange will enhance
policy and program design. As one participant noted, “I have shared the information with my
colleagues at work and also with the Ministry of Health….when engaged at the policy level, I will
share the knowledge that I gained with the hope that it will help influence policy in my own country.”

CCC SSKE participants reported improvements in knowledge and gains from networking with one
another as they continue their efforts to mobilize resources and increase access to CCC in their
countries. As one participant noted, “I intend to advocate for increased regional capacity for
laboratory diagnosis for cancer in Kenya” and another stated, “I plan to hold a stakeholders’
workshop to share the experience of Zambia. I will lobby for government support in setting up a
cancer treatment center in Kenya. We are hosting the First Ladies Conference in Kenya this year
and we shall use the platform to lobby government for more resources for cancer care.” CCC
SSKE participants aim to continue sharing and exchanging knowledge and to work together to curb
the cancer disease burden in their countries.

CCC SSKE – Main Results, Lessons Learned and Next Steps

In the short to medium term, the SSKE generated important results in terms of learning from
promising experiences and identifying opportunities for future collaboration. Most importantly, it




                                                                                                    30
established a platform for clients to continue sharing tools, experiences and lessons. While not
easy to measure or monitor, in the longer term, the Knowledge Exchange also will contribute to
improved policies, greater collaboration, and expanded programs, funded by governments and
partners. To summarize, the main results to date are as follows:

•   Shared knowledge and experiences on the main building blocks of cancer care and control
    programs with a full range of topics covered, including:
    o Innovative approaches for strengthening cancer prevention efforts.
    o Strategies for implementing successful national CCC programs.
    o Task shifting and task sharing to increase access to care.
    o Tools for analyzing CCC costs.
    o Financing models, including public private partnerships, to increase access to CCC
         treatment and care.
    o Data collection to better document the burden of disease.
    o Policy reforms needed to increase access to palliative care.
•   Established a platform for cross country collaboration. The organizers facilitated
    communications across countries, to enable continual sharing of tools, experiences and latest
    research findings.
•   Identified opportunities for collaboration (for example, join training, technical support,
    research) with one another and with institutions in the region such as the Center of
    Excellence for Women’s Cancers in Zambia, the Butaro Center of Excellence on
    Comprehensive Cancer Care in Rwanda and the East Africa Oncology Institute in Uganda.
    International activity in South-South collaboration was also spurred with coordinating partners
    like Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon, The National Cancer Institute, and US academic institutions.

Lessons Learned

•   Peer-to-peer learning through a client-oriented, participatory process offers a collegial and
    collaborative environment for sharing insights, experiences, and lessons. This type of
    learning is highly valuable, relevant, and timely as reflected in feedback from participants.
•   Face-to-face interactions between practitioners and policymakers from the participating
    countries strengthened understanding of how innovative programs were spearheaded,
    resources were mobilized, and political commitment was bolstered.
•   A demand-driven approach was critical to soliciting views of participants about the most
    relevant topics to be covered and ensuring the knowledge exchange responded to client
    needs.
•   Strong collaboration with other technical partners was requested by participants and proved
    highly effective. Technical partners brought a global perspective and offered complementary
    information which was appreciated by all stakeholders.
•   Regional partnerships are key to maximizing learning, tapping comparative advantages of
    different players, and promoting specialization in delivery of training programs, cancer
    services and research.
•   Strong preparation is essential to success. The knowledge exchange activities need to be
    well organized, materials need to be concise, and communication channels need to run
    smoothly, to maximize learning for busy practitioners and policymakers. Soliciting regular
    feedback from participants is critical to ascertaining views and ensuring that the knowledge
    exchange is tailored to country demands.




                                                                                                31
Next Steps

The knowledge exchange established a platform for collaboration and information sharing which
continues beyond the formal closing date. Participants are in the process of incorporating lessons
learned into their national programs, continuing to exchange information and materials with peers
in other countries, and deepening their collaboration with technical partners on several aspects
covered during the period (cancer planning, cancer registries). Examples worth noting include: the
Bank-funded East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project, which will be used as a
vehicle for strengthening the availability of pathology services at project-supported laboratories in
Kenya and Uganda; progress in Zambia, Kenya, and Uganda on national cancer control planning,
facilitated in part by the regional lessons learned and collaborations highlighted in this paper;
progress on cancer registration in Kenya and Zambia, drawing from expertise from Ugandan
colleagues and from bi-lateral exchange between the two countries, supported by international
organizations like the NCI, CDC and PRRR; and the formation of research networks on niche
cancers like Burkitt Lymphoma or esophageal cancer across countries more heavily affected in this
region.




                                                                                                  32
                                            Annex 1
                                    CCC SSKE Presentations

Videoconference 1:       Cancer Care and Control Knowledge Exchange Launch
September 17, 2013

South South Knowledge Exchange: Cancer Care and Control presented by Miriam Schneidman,
Lead Health Specialist, World Bank

Videoconference 2:       National Cancer Screening Programs – Experiences of Zambia
October 29, 2013         and Botswana

The National Cancer Institute and Cervical Cancer Screening in Africa, Overview presented by
Dr. John Flanigan, Center for Global Health, National Cancer Institute

A Zambian Approach to Cervical Cancer Prevention presented by Dr. Sharon Kapambwe, CIDRZ
Programme Head, Cervical Cancer Prevention Programme

Cervical Cancer Secondary Prevention Programming: Experience and Lessons Learnt from
Botswana presented by Dr. Heluf Medhin, Head Non-communicable Disease Division, Department
of Public Health

Videoconference 3:       Developing National Cancer Strategies: The Kenyan Experience
December 4, 2013

Operationalizing the Kenya Cancer Control Program presented by Dr. Izaq Odongo, Head
Oncology Unit, Division of Internal Medicine, Ministry of Health and Dr. Mary Wangai, Head
National Cancer Prevention and Control Unit, Ministry of Health

The National Cancer Institute and Cancer Control Planning and Implementation presented by Dr.
Brenda Kostelecky, Center for Global Health, National Cancer Institute

Videoconference 4:       The Rwanda HPV Vaccination Experience
January 24, 2014

The Rwanda HPV Vaccination Experience presented by Mr. Maurice Gatera, Director, Vaccine
Preventable Diseases, Rwanda Biomedical Center, Ministry of Health

Cervical Cancer Global Research/Training Priorities and Opportunities at the National Cancer
Institute (NCI/NIH) presented by Dr. Luis Salicrup, Center for Global Health, National Cancer
Institute

Videoconference 5:       Cancer Registration in Uganda
March 4, 2014

Cancer Registration in Uganda presented by Dr. Innocent Mutyaba, Fellow, Hutchinson Center,
Research Institute of Uganda and Senior Officer, Department of Medicine, Makerere College of
Health Sciences

National Cancer Institute Center for Global Health’s Efforts to Build Capacity in Cancer Registration
in LMICs presented by Ms. Kalina Duncan, Center for Global Health, National Cancer Institute




                                                                                                  33
Videoconference 6:      Public-Private Partnerships - the Experience of AMPATH Oncology
June 20, 2014           in Kenya

AMPATH Oncology: Global Collaboration in Cancer presented by Dr. F. Chite Asirwa, Director of
AMPATH Oncology and Assistant Professor of Medicine and Field Director for Cancer Programs
in Kenya at Indiana University

An Innovative Model for Partnerships: Government Encouraged, Investigator Initiated, Private
Sector Participatory Partnerships presented by Dr. Linda Kupfer, Fogarty International Center at
the US National Institutes of Health

Videoconference 7:      Palliative Care - Programs to Manage Pain and Other Symptoms
July 24, 2014

Implementation Challenges in Palliative Care Service Delivery in Botswana presented by Dr. Babe
Eunice Gaolebale, Implementation Specialist

Challenges Related to Mobilizing Support and Resources (Public/Private) for Palliative Care
presented by Dr. Zipporah Ali, Executive Director of Kenya Hospices and Palliative Care
Association

NCI Support for Research in Palliative Care presented by Dr. Ann O’Mara, Head of Palliative
Research in the Division of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute

Integrating Palliative Care in to National Health Programs and Policies presented by Dr. Emmanuel
Luyirika, Executive Director, African Palliative Care Association, Uganda

Videoconference 8:      Key Policy Issues and Challenges in Designing and Managing
September 16, 2014      Palliative Care Programs

The Palliative Care Experience in Rwanda presented by Dr. Marie Aimee Muhimpundu, MD, MSc
of the NCI Division of the Rwanda Ministry of Health

Key Policy Issues and Challenges in Designing and Managing Palliative Care Programs presented
by Dr. Jim Cleary, Associate Professor of Medical Oncology at the University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Director, Pain and Policy Studies Group WHO Collaborating Center for Pain Policy
and Palliative Care

Videoconference 9:      Financing of Cancer Care and Control Programs
October 27, 2014

Financing Cancer Care and Control in Africa presented by Miriam Schneidman, Lead Health
Specialist, World Bank

Breast Cancer Financing – A Case Study of Ghana presented by Karima Saleh, Senior Health
Economist, World Bank

Costing Cervical Cancer Programmes - an Application of the Comprehensive Cervical Cancer
Costing and Planning Tool presented by Winthrop Morgan and Ann Levin, Independent Health
Finance Consultants




                                                                                              34
                Presentations at the Taking a Regional Approach Workshop
                                      Lusaka, Zambia
                                   February 10 - 12, 2015

Strengthening Regional Collaboration to Improve Cancer Care and Control
Miriam Schneidman, Lead Health Specialist, World Bank

Uganda Cancer Institute: Progress on the East Africa Oncology Institute
Dr. Jackson Orem, Director, Uganda Cancer Institute

Strengthening Regional Cancer Initiatives Research - the Experience of Zambia’s African Center
of Excellence for Women’s Cancer Control at the Center for Infectious Disease of Zambia
(CIDRZ)

Prof G Parham, Co-Director Cervical Cancer Screening Programme of Zambia

Cancer Care and Control Financing: Prioritizing Non-communicable Disease (NCD) Control on
the Path Toward Universal Health Coverage (UHC)
Karima Saleh, Senior Health Economist, World Bank

The Rwanda Experience in Financing Cancer Programs and Mobilizing Resources
Jean Paul Balinda, Cancer Diseases Senior Officer, NCDs Division, Rwanda
Biomedical Center

Financing Cancer Control in Low and Middle-Income Countries
Professor Prabhat Jha, Centre for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s Hospital

Building Capacity of Community Health Workers and Strategies for Task Shifting – Rwanda
Experience
Jean Paul Balinda- Cancer Diseases Senior Officer, Ministry of Health Rwanda

Training of Pathologists
Dr. Angela Amayo, Pathologist, University of Nairobi

Cancer Care and Control Programs Public Private Partnerships
Josephine Mugai, Investment Officer, IFC




                                                                                            35
36
Worldwide, deaths from cancer exceed those caused by HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined. Seventy
percent of deaths due to cancer occur in low-and middle-income countries, which are often poorly prepared to deal
with the growing burden of chronic disease. In Africa, cancer rates are projected to double by 2020, due in large part
to changing lifestyles, increasing urbanization, and aging populations. Countries throughout Africa face similar
challenges, and can learn from regional successes and experiences in trying to identify cost effective ways to
organize, deliver and finance critical cancer care and control interventions. Over a period of 18 months, the Cancer
Care and Control South-South Knowledge Exchange brought together a group of stakeholders from five countries
in Africa -- Botswana, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia-- to share experiences, lessons and good practices
through a set of video conferences and a site visit to Zambia. All five countries have demonstrated commitment,
initiated various cancer control and cancer screening programs, and expressed interest in sharing their experiences.
The Knowledge Exchange on cancer care and control aimed to raise awareness, increase knowledge of effective
strategies, and strengthen regional collaboration in cancer control planning and expanding equitable access to cancer
treatment.

This paper presents highlights of the country experiences shared, common challenges discussed, and innovative
solutions explored during the Knowledge Exchange. Topics addressed include population-based surveillance and
data collection to better document the burden of cancer; strategies for designing and implementing successful national
cancer care and control programs; innovative approaches for strengthening cancer prevention efforts such as HPV
vaccination programs; task sharing and other strategies to build capacity and increase access to services; analytical
tools for understanding the costs of programs; financing models, including public private partnerships, to increase
cancer prevention and care; policy reforms needed to improve access to palliative care; and opportunities for regional
collaboration.



ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                           1818 H Street, NW
                                                                           Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                           Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                           Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                           Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                           E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
