                                          100949 v2
Trends in
Maternal Mortality:
1990 to 2015
Estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group
and the United Nations Population Division
Trends in maternal mortality:
1990 to 2015
Estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group
and the United Nations Population Division
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
Trends in maternal mortality: 1990 to 2015: estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group and the United
Nations Population Division.
1.Maternal Mortality - trends. 2.Maternal Welfare. 3.Data Collection - methods. 4.Models, Statistical. I.World Health
Organization. II.World Bank. III.UNICEF. IV.United Nations Population Fund.
ISBN 978 92 4 156514 1		                 (NLM classification: WQ 16)


PRE-PUBLICATION VERSION


© World Health Organization 2015


All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO website (www.who.int)
or can be purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland
(tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: bookorders@who.int).
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications –whether for sale or for non-commercial
distribution– should be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website (www.who.int/about/licensing/
copyright_form/en/index.html).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country,
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and
dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or
recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.
Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained
in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either
expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no
event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.
Contents	

	
Acknowledgments	........................................................................................................................	iv	
Acronyms	and	abbreviations	....................................................................................................	vi	
Executive	summary	....................................................................................................................	viii	
1	 Introduction	..............................................................................................................................	1	
2	 Methodology	for	the	1990–2015	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	........................	3	
2.1	 Methodological	refinements	        ........................................................................................................	3	
2.2	 Model	input	variables	..................................................................................................................	4	
2.3	 Country	data	on	maternal	mortality	used	for	the	1990–2015	estimates	....................................	5	
2.4	 Statistical	modelling	to	estimate	1990–2015	maternal	mortality	.............................................	11	
2.5	 Maternal	mortality	indicators	estimated	by	the	model	.............................................................	13	
2.6	 Uncertainty	assessment	.............................................................................................................	13	
2.7	 Model	validation	........................................................................................................................	14	
3	 Analysis	and	interpretation	of	the	2015	estimates	...................................................	16	
3.1	 Maternal	mortality	estimates	for	2015	......................................................................................	16	
3.3	 Comparison	with	previous	maternal	mortality	estimates	.........................................................	26	

4	 Assessing	progress	and	setting	a	trajectory	towards	ending	preventable	
maternal	mortality	......................................................................................................................	27	
4.1	 Millennium	Development	Goal	(MDG)	5	outcomes	...................................................................	27	
4.2	 Looking	towards	the	future	          ........................................................................................................	28	
4.3	 A	call	to	action	............................................................................................................................	33	
References	......................................................................................................................................	34	
Annexes	...........................................................................................................................................	38	
	
List of tables

Table	1.	Availability	of	maternal	mortality	data	records	by	source	type	and	country	for	use	in	
generating	maternal	mortality	ratio	estimates	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	for	
2015	
Table	2.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk,	by	United	Nations	Millennium	Development	Goal	
(MDG)	region,	2015	
Table	3.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths	and	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths,	by	United	Nations	
Millennium	Development	Goal	(MDG)	region,	2015	
Table	4.	Comparison	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	and	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	by	United	Nations	Millennium	Development	Goal	(MDG)	region,	1990	
and	2015	

                                                                                                                                                    ii
	
List of annexes
Annex	1.	Summary	of	the	country	consultations	2015	
Annex	2.	Measuring	maternal	mortality	
Annex	3.	Methods	used	to	derive	a	complete	series	of	annual	estimates	for	each	covariate,	1985–
2015	
Annex	4.	Adjustment	factor	to	account	for	misclassification	of	maternal	deaths	in	civil	registration,	
literature	review	of	reports	and	articles	
Annex	5.	Usability	assessment	of	civil	registration	data	for	selected	years	(1990,	1995,	2000,	2005,	
2010	and	latest	available	year)	
Annex	6.	Estimation	of	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	 	
Annex	7.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	lifetime	risk	and	percentage	of	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths,	
2015	
Annex	8.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk	by	WHO	region,	2015	
Annex	9.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	WHO	region,	1990–2015	
Annex	10.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk	by	UNICEF	region,	2015	
Annex	11.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	UNICEF	region,	1990–2015	
Annex	12.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk	by	UNFPA	region,	2015	
Annex	13.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	UNFPA	region,	1990–2015	
Annex	14.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk	by	World	Bank	Group	region	and	income	group,	2015	
Annex	15.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	World	Bank	Group	region	and	income	group,	1990–2015	
Annex	16.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	
number	of	maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk	by	UNPD	region,	2015	
Annex	17.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	UNPD	region,	1990–2015	
Annex	18.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	United	Nations	Millennium	Development	Goal	region	(indicated	in	bold)	and	other	
grouping,	1990–2015	
Annex	19.	Trends	in	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births),	by	country,	1990–2015	

	                                	
                                                                                                         iii
Acknowledgments	
The	Maternal	Mortality	Estimation	Inter-Agency	Group	(MMEIG),	together	with	Leontine	Alkema	of	
the	National	University	of	Singapore,	Singapore,	and	the	University	of	Massachusetts	Amherst,	
United	States	of	America	(USA),	Sanqian	Zhang	of	the	National	University	of	Singapore,	Singapore,	
and	Alison	Gemmill	of	the	University	of	California	at	Berkeley,	USA,	collaborated	in	developing	
these	maternal	mortality	estimates.	
The	MMEIG	consists	of	the	following	individuals,	listed	in	alphabetical	order:	Mohamed	Ali	of	the	
World	Health	Organization	(WHO);	Agbessi	Amouzou	of	the	United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	
(UNICEF);	Ties	Boerma	of	WHO;	Liliana	Caravajal	of	UNICEF;	Doris	Chou	of	WHO;	Patrick	Gerland	
of	the	United	Nations	Population	Division	(UNPD);	Daniel	Hogan	of	WHO;	Victor	Gaigbe-Togbe	of	
the	UNPD;	Edilberto	Loaiza	of	the	United	Nations	Population	Fund	(UNFPA);	Matthews	Mathai	of	
WHO;	Colin	Mathers	of	WHO;	Samuel	Mills	of	the	World	Bank	Group;	Holly	Newby	of	UNICEF;	Lale	
Say	of	WHO;	Emi	Suzuki	of	the	World	Bank	Group;	and	Marleen	Temmerman	of	WHO.	Leontine	
Alkema	is	the	lead	adviser	to	the	MMEIG.	
Flavia	Bustreo	of	WHO	oversaw	the	overall	work	and	process	of	developing	the	estimates.	
An	external	technical	advisory	group	(TAG)	provided	independent	technical	advice.	The	members	of	
the	TAG	are:	Saifuddin	Ahmed	of	Johns	Hopkins	University,	USA;	David	Braunholz,	independent	
consultant,	United	Kingdom	of	Great	Britain	and	Northern	Ireland;	Peter	Byass	of	Umeå	University,	
Sweden;	Namuunda	Mutombo	of	the	African	Population	and	Health	Research	Centre,	Kenya;	and	
Thomas	Pullum	of	ICF	Macro,	USA.	
We	are	also	grateful	to	Jeffrey	Eaton	of	Imperial	College	London,	United	Kingdom,	Bilal	Barakat	of	
the	Vienna	Institute	of	Demography/International	Institute	for	Applied	Systems	Analysis	(IIASA),	
Austria,	and	Emily	Peterson	of	the	University	of	Massachusetts	Amherst,	USA,	for	discussion	of	the	
analyses.	 	
	
The	Department	of	Governing	Bodies	and	External	Relations	of	WHO,	WHO	country	offices,	UNFPA	
country	offices	and	UNICEF	country	offices	are	all	gratefully	acknowledged	for	facilitating	the	
country	consultations.	 	
Thanks	are	also	due	to	the	following	WHO	regional	office	staff:	 	

Regional	Office	for	Africa:	Phanuel	Habimana,	Derege	Kebede,	Tigest	Ketsela	Mengestu,	Peter	
Mbondji,	Gisele	Carole	Wabo	Nitcheu,	Triphonie	Nkurunziza,	Leopold	Ouedraogo	

Regional	Office	for	the	Americas:	Gerardo	de	Cosio,	Patricia	Lorena	Ruiz	Luna,	Cuauhtemoc	Ruiz	
Matus,	Bremen	De	Mucio,	Antonio	Sanhueza,	Suzanne	Serruya	

Regional	Office	for	South	East	Asia:	Mark	Landry,	Neena	Raina,	Sunil	Senanayake,	Arun	Thapa	

Regional	Office	for	Europe:	Gauden	Galea,	Gunta	Lazdane,	Ivo	Rakovac,	Claudia	Elisabeth	Stein	 	
Regional	Office	for	the	Eastern	Mediterranean:	Mohamed	Mahmoud	Ali,	Haifa	Madi,	Ramez	
Khairi	Mahaini	 	
Regional	Office	for	the	Western	Pacific:	Jun	Gao,	Susan	P.	Mercado,	Mari	Nagai,	Teret	Reginaldo,	
Howard	Sobel.	


                                                                                                iv
In	addition,	Maria	Barreix,	Dmitri	Botcheliouk,	Lauri	Jalanti	and	Karin	Stein	of	WHO	provided	
translation	during	the	country	consultations.	Thanks	to	all	focal	points	of	governments	who	
reviewed	the	preliminary	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratios	and	provided	valuable	feedback.	
Financial	support	was	provided	by	WHO,	through	the	Department	of	Reproductive	Health	and	
Research	and	HRP	(the	UNDP/UNFPA/UNICEF/WHO/World	Bank	Special	Programme	of	Research,	
Development	and	Research	Training	in	Human	Reproduction),	the	United	States	Agency	for	
International	Development	(USAID)	and	the	National	University	of	Singapore.	
This	report	was	prepared	by	Leontine	Alkema,	Elena	Broaddus,	Doris	Chou,	Daniel	Hogan,	Colin	
Mathers,	Ann-Beth	Moller,	Lale	Say	and	Sanqian	Zhang.	Many	thanks	to	Maria	Barreix,	Sara	Cottler	
and	Karin	Stein	for	extensive	work	during	the	final	preparation	of	the	report.	
Contact	persons:	Doris	Chou	(e-mail:	choud@who.int)	and	Lale	Say	(e-mail:	sayl@who.int),	
Department	of	Reproductive	Health	and	Research,	WHO.	
Editing:	Green	Ink	(www.greenink.co.uk)	
	
	                              	




                                                                                                   v
Acronyms	and	abbreviations	
	
    AIHW	                       Australian	Institute	of	Health	and	Welfare	

    ARR	                        annual	rate	of	reduction	(of	MMR)	

    BMat	                       Bayesian	maternal	mortality	estimation	model	

    CEMD	                       Confidential	Enquiry	into	Maternal	Deaths	

    CMACE	                      Centre	for	Maternal	and	Child	Enquiries	

    COIA	                       Commission	on	Information	and	Accountability	

    CRVS	                       civil	registration	and	vital	statistics	

    DHS	                        Demographic	and	Health	Survey	

    EPMM	                       ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	

    GDP	                        gross	domestic	product	per	capita	based	on	PPP	conversion1	

    GFR	                        general	fertility	rate	

    ICD-10	                     International	statistical	classification	of	diseases	and	related	health	problems,	
                                10th	edition	

    ICD-MM	                     Application	of	ICD-10	to	deaths	during	pregnancy,	childbirth	and	the	
                                puerperium:	ICD	maternal	mortality	

    MDG	                        Millennium	Development	Goal	

    MDG	5	                      Improve	maternal	health	

    MDG	5A	                     Reduce	by	three	quarters,	between	1990	and	2015,	the	maternal	mortality	
                                ratio	

    MICS	                       Multiple	Indicator	Cluster	Survey	

    MMEIG	                      Maternal	Mortality	Estimation	Inter-Agency	Group	

    MMR	                        maternal	mortality	ratio	(maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	

    MMRate	                     maternal	mortality	rate	(the	number	of	maternal	deaths	divided	by	
                                person-years	lived	by	women	of	reproductive	age)	

    PM	                         proportion	of	deaths	among	women	of	reproductive	age	that	are	due	to	
                                maternal	causes	

																																																																				
1
    as used in this report.


                                                                                                                     vi
    PMMRC	     Perinatal	and	Maternal	Mortality	Review	Committee	(New	Zealand)	

    PPP	       purchasing	power	parity	

    RAMOS	     reproductive-age	mortality	study	

    SAB	       skilled	attendant(s)	at	birth	

    SDG	       Sustainable	Development	Goal	

    SDG	3.1	   By	2030,	reduce	the	global	maternal	mortality	ratio	to	less	than	70	per	
               100	000	live	births	

    TAG	       technical	advisory	group	

    UI	        uncertainty	interval	


    UN	        United	Nations	

    UNAIDS	    Joint	United	Nations	Programme	on	HIV/AIDS	

    UNFPA	     United	Nations	Population	Fund	

    UNICEF	    United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	

    UNPD	      United	Nations	Population	Division	(in	the	Department	of	Economic	and	
               Social	Affairs)	

    USA	       United	States	of	America	

    VR	        vital	registration	(VR	data	come	from	CRVS	systems)	

    WHO	       World	Health	Organization	

	




                                                                                          vii
Executive	summary	
	
In	2000,	the	United	Nations	(UN)	Member	States	pledged	to	work	towards	a	series	of	Millennium	
Development	Goals	(MDGs),	including	the	target	of	a	three-quarters	reduction	in	the	1990	maternal	
mortality	ratio	(MMR;	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	to	be	achieved	by	2015.	This	target	
(MDG	5A)	and	that	of	achieving	universal	access	to	reproductive	health	(MDG	5B)	together	formed	
the	two	targets	for	MDG	5:	Improve	maternal	health.	In	the	five	years	counting	down	to	the	
conclusion	of	the	MDGs,	a	number	of	initiatives	were	established	to	galvanize	efforts	towards	
reducing	maternal	mortality.	These	included	the	UN	Secretary-General’s	Global	Strategy	for	
Women’s	and	Children’s	Health,	which	mobilized	efforts	towards	achieving	MDG	4	(Improve	child	
health)	as	well	as	MDG	5,	and	the	high-level	Commission	on	Information	and	Accountability	(COIA),	
which	promoted	“global	reporting,	oversight,	and	accountability	on	women’s	and	children’s	health”.	
Now,	building	on	the	momentum	generated	by	MDG	5,	the	Sustainable	Development	Goals	(SDGs)	
establish	a	transformative	new	agenda	for	maternal	health	towards	ending	preventable	maternal	
mortality;	target	3.1	of	SDG	3	is	to	reduce	the	global	MMR	to	less	than	70	per	100	000	live	births	by	
2030.	
Planning	and	accountability	for	improving	maternal	health,	and	assessment	of	MDG	5	and	SDG	
targets,	require	accurate	and	internationally	comparable	measures	of	maternal	mortality.	Countries	
have	made	notable	progress	in	collecting	data	through	civil	registration	systems,	surveys,	censuses	
and	specialized	studies	over	the	past	decade.	Yet,	many	still	lack	comprehensive	systems	for	
capturing	vital	events	data,	and	underreporting	continues	to	pose	a	major	challenge	to	data	
accuracy.	 	
Given	the	challenges	of	obtaining	accurate	and	standardized	direct	measures	of	maternal	mortality,	
the	Maternal	Mortality	Estimation	Inter-Agency	Group	(MMEIG)	–	comprising	the	World	Health	
Organization	(WHO),	the	United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	(UNICEF),	the	United	Nations	Population	
Fund	(UNFPA),	World	Bank	Group	and	the	United	Nations	Population	Division	(UNPD)	–	partnered	
with	a	team	at	the	University	of	Massachusetts	Amherst,	United	States	of	America	(USA),	the	
National	University	of	Singapore,	Singapore,	and	the	University	of	California	at	Berkeley,	USA,	to	
generate	internationally	comparable	MMR	estimates	with	independent	advice	from	a	technical	
advisory	group	that	includes	scientists	and	academics	with	experience	in	measuring	maternal	
mortality.	 	
The	estimates	for	1990	to	2015	presented	in	this	report	are	the	eighth	in	a	series	of	analyses	by	the	
MMEIG	to	examine	global,	regional	and	country	progress	in	reducing	maternal	mortality.	To	
provide	increasingly	accurate	maternal	mortality	estimates,	the	previous	estimation	methods	have	
been	refined	to	optimize	use	of	country-level	data	and	estimation	of	uncertainty	around	the	
estimates.	The	methodology	used	in	this	round	by	the	MMEIG	builds	directly	upon	previous	
methods,	but	now	provides	estimates	that	are	more	informed	by	national	data.	It	also	supports	
more	realistic	assessments	of	uncertainty	about	those	estimates,	based	on	the	quality	of	data	used	
to	produce	them.	The	statistical	code	and	full	database	used	to	produce	the	current	estimates	are	
publicly	available	online.2	

																																																																				
2
    	 Available	at:	http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/maternal-mortality-2015/en/	 	



                                                                                                                   viii
Globally,	the	MMR	fell	by	nearly	44%	over	the	past	25	years,	to	an	estimated	216	(80%	
uncertainty	interval	[UI]3	 207	to	249)	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births	in	2015,	from	an	
MMR	of	385	(UI	359	to	427)	in	1990.	The	annual	number	of	maternal	deaths	decreased	by	43%	from	
approximately	532	000	(UI	496	000	to	590	000)	in	1990	to	an	estimated	303	000	(UI	291	000	to	349	
000)	in	2015.	The	approximate	global	lifetime	risk	of	a	maternal	death	fell	considerably	from	1	in	73	
to	1	in	180.	
Developing	regions	account	for	approximately	99%	(302	000)	of	the	global	maternal	deaths	in	2015,	
with	sub-Saharan	Africa	alone	accounting	for	roughly	66%	(201	000),	followed	by	Southern	Asia	
(66	000).	Estimated	MMR	declined	across	all	MDG	regions4	 between	1990	and	2015,	although	the	
magnitude	of	the	reduction	differed	substantially	between	regions.	The	greatest	decline	over	that	
period	was	observed	in	Eastern	Asia	(72%).	As	of	2015,	the	two	regions	with	highest	MMR	are	
sub-Saharan	Africa	(546;	UI	511	to	652)	and	Oceania	(187;	UI	95	to	381).	 	
At	the	country	level,	Nigeria	and	India	are	estimated	to	account	for	over	one	third	of	all	maternal	
deaths	worldwide	in	2015,	with	an	approximate	58	000	maternal	deaths	(19%)	and	45	000	maternal	
deaths	(15%),	respectively.	Sierra	Leone	is	estimated	to	have	the	highest	MMR	at	1360	(UI	999	to	
1980).	Eighteen	other	countries,	all	in	sub-Saharan	Africa,	are	estimated	to	have	very	high	MMR	in	
2015,	with	estimates	ranging	from	999	down	to	500	deaths	per	100	000	live	births:	Central	African	
Republic	(881;	UI	508	to	1500),	Chad	(856;	UI	560	to	1350),	Nigeria	(814;	UI	596	to	1180),	South	
Sudan	(789;	UI	523	to	1150),	Somalia	(732;	UI	361	to	1390),	Liberia	(725;	UI	527	to	1030),	Burundi	(712;	
UI	471	to	1050),	Gambia	(706;	UI	484	to	1030),	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo	(693;	UI	509	to	
1010),	Guinea	(679;	UI	504	to	927),	Côte	d’Ivoire	(645;	UI	458	to	909),	Malawi	(634;	UI	422	to	1080),	
Mauritania	(602;	UI	399	to	984),	Cameroon	(596;	UI	440	to	881),	Mali	(587;	UI	448	to	823),	Niger	
(553;	UI	411	to	752),	Guinea-Bissau	(549;	UI	273	to	1090)	and	Kenya	(510;	UI	344	to	754).	The	two	
countries	with	the	highest	estimated	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	are	Sierra	Leone	with	an	
approximate	risk	of	1	in	17,	and	Chad	with	an	approximate	risk	of	1	in	18.	The	estimated	lifetime	risk	
of	maternal	mortality	in	high-income	countries	is	1	in	3300	in	comparison	with	1	in	41	in	low-income	
countries.	 	
Emergent	humanitarian	settings	and	situations	of	conflict,	post-conflict	and	disaster	significantly	
hinder	the	progress	of	maternal	mortality	reduction.	In	such	situations,	the	breakdown	of	health	
systems	can	cause	a	dramatic	rise	in	deaths	due	to	complications	that	would	be	easily	treatable	
under	stable	conditions.	In	countries	designated	as	fragile	states,	the	estimated	lifetime	risk	of	
maternal	mortality	is	1	in	54.	
Globally,	approximately	1.6%	(4700)	of	all	maternal	deaths	are	estimated	to	be	AIDS-related	
indirect	maternal	deaths.	In	sub-Saharan	Africa,	2.0%	of	all	maternal	deaths	are	estimated	to	be	
AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths,	yielding	an	AIDS-related	indirect	MMR	of	11	maternal	
deaths	per	100	000	live	births.	In	2015	there	are	five	countries	where	10%	or	more	of	maternal	
deaths	are	estimated	to	be	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths:	South	Africa	(32%),	Swaziland	
(19%),	Botswana	(18%),	Lesotho	(13%)	and	Mozambique	(11%).	


3
 	 The	uncertainty	intervals	(UI)	computed	for	all	the	estimates	refer	to	the	80%	uncertainty	intervals	(10th	and	90th	
percentiles	of	the	posterior	distributions).	This	was	chosen	as	opposed	to	the	more	standard	95%	intervals	because	of	the	
substantial	uncertainty	inherent	in	maternal	mortality	outcomes.	
4
 	 An	explanation	of	the	MDG	regions	is	available	at:	
http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Host.aspx?Content=Data/RegionalGroupings.htm	(a	list	of	the	MDG	regions	is	also	
provided	in	the	full	report).	



                                                                                                                        ix
Nine	countries	that	had	MMR	of	more	than	100	in	1990	are	now	categorized	as	having	“achieved	
MDG	5A”	based	on	MMR	reduction	point-estimates	indicating	a	reduction	of	at	least	75%	between	
1990	and	2015:	Bhutan,	Cambodia,	Cabo	Verde,	the	Islamic	Republic	of	Iran,	the	Lao	People’s	
Democratic	Republic,	Maldives,	Mongolia,	Rwanda	and	Timor-Leste.	Based	on	MMR	reduction	
point-estimates	and	uncertainty	intervals	for	the	same	period,	an	additional	39	countries	are	
categorized	as	“making	progress”,	21	are	categorized	as	having	made	“insufficient	progress”,	and	
26	are	categorized	as	having	made	“no	progress”.	
Achieving	the	SDG	target	of	a	global	MMR	below	70	will	require	reducing	global	MMR	by	an	average	
of	7.5%	each	year	between	2016	and	2030.	This	will	require	more	than	three	times	the	2.3%	annual	
rate	of	reduction	observed	globally	between	1990	and	2015.	
Accurate	measurement	of	maternal	mortality	levels	remains	an	immense	challenge,	but	the	overall	
message	is	clear:	hundreds	of	thousands	of	women	are	still	dying	due	to	complications	of	pregnancy	
and/or	childbirth	each	year.	Many	of	these	deaths	go	uncounted.	Working	towards	SDG	3.1	and	
ultimately	towards	ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	requires	amplifying	the	efforts	and	
progress	catalysed	by	MDG	5.	Among	countries	where	maternal	deaths	remain	high,	efforts	to	save	
lives	must	be	accelerated	and	must	also	be	paired	with	country-driven	efforts	to	accurately	register	
births	and	deaths,	including	cause	of	death	certification.	Strengthening	civil	registration	and	vital	
statistics	will	support	measurement	efforts	and	help	track	progress	towards	reaching	SDG	3.1.	
Among	those	countries	with	low	overall	maternal	mortality,	the	next	challenge	is	measuring	and	
amending	inequities	among	subpopulations.	The	new	Global	Strategy	for	Women’s,	Children’s	and	
Adolescents’	Health	will	spearhead	an	enhanced	global	collaborative	response	aimed	at	ending	all	
preventable	maternal	deaths.	
	
	




                                                                                                    x
1	      Introduction	
When	the	global	commitment	was	first	made	in	2000	to	achieve	the	Millennium	Development	Goals	
(MDGs),	United	Nations	(UN)	Member	States	pledged	to	work	towards	a	three-quarters	reduction	
in	the	1990	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR;	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	by	2015.	This	
objective	(MDG	5A),	along	with	achieving	universal	access	to	reproductive	health	(MDG	5B),	formed	
the	two	targets	for	MDG	5:	Improve	maternal	health.	In	the	years	counting	down	to	the	conclusion	
of	the	MDGs,	a	number	of	initiatives	were	established	to	galvanize	efforts	towards	reducing	
maternal	mortality.	These	included	the	UN	Secretary-General’s	Global	Strategy	for	Women’s	and	
Children’s	Health,	which	mobilized	efforts	towards	achieving	MDG	4	(Improve	child	health)	as	well	
as	MDG	5,	and	the	high-level	Commission	on	Information	and	Accountability	(COIA),	which	
promoted	“global	reporting,	oversight,	and	accountability	on	women’s	and	children’s	health”	(1,	2).	
To	build	upon	the	momentum	generated	by	MDG	5,	a	transformative	new	agenda	for	maternal	
health	has	been	laid	out	as	part	of	the	Sustainable	Development	Goals	(SDGs):	to	reduce	the	global	
MMR	to	less	than	70	per	100	000	live	births	by	2030	(SDG	3.1)	(3).	The	recent	World	Health	
Organization	(WHO)	publication,	Strategies	toward	ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	(EPMM),	
establishes	a	supplementary	national	target	that	no	country	should	have	an	MMR	greater	than	140	
per	100	000	live	births,	and	outlines	a	strategic	framework	for	achieving	these	ambitious	targets	by	
2030	(4).	
Planning	and	accountability	for	improving	maternal	health,	and	assessment	of	MDG	5	and	SDG	
targets,	require	accurate	and	internationally	comparable	measures	of	maternal	mortality.	Many	
countries	have	made	notable	progress	in	collecting	data	through	civil	registration	systems,	surveys,	
censuses	and	specialized	studies	over	the	past	decade.	This	laudable	increase	in	efforts	to	
document	maternal	deaths	provides	valuable	new	data,	but	the	diversity	of	methods	used	to	assess	
maternal	mortality	in	the	absence	of	civil	registration	systems	prevents	direct	comparisons	among	
indicators	generated.	The	2011	COIA	recommendations	emphasized	the	need	for	countries	to	
establish	civil	registration	systems	for	recording	births,	deaths	and	causes	of	death	(2).	Insufficient	
progress	has	been	made,	as	many	countries	still	lack	civil	registration	systems	and	where	such	
systems	do	exist,	underreporting	continues	to	pose	a	major	challenge	to	data	accuracy	(5).	Looking	
ahead,	one	cross-cutting	action	towards	EPMM	is	to	“improve	metrics,	measurement	systems	and	
data	quality	to	ensure	that	all	maternal	and	newborn	deaths	are	counted”	(4).	 	
Given	the	challenges	of	obtaining	accurate	and	standardized	direct	measures	of	maternal	mortality,	
the	Maternal	Mortality	Estimation	Inter-Agency	Group	(MMEIG)	–	comprising	WHO,	the	United	
Nations	Children’s	Fund	(UNICEF),	the	United	Nations	Population	Fund	(UNFPA),	the	World	Bank	
Group,	and	the	UN	Population	Division	(UNPD)	of	the	Department	of	Economic	and	Social	Affairs	–	
has	been	working	together	with	a	team	at	the	University	of	Massachusetts	Amherst,	United	States	
of	America	(USA),	the	National	University	of	Singapore,	Singapore,	and	the	University	of	California	
at	Berkeley,	USA,	to	generate	internationally	comparable	MMR	estimates.	An	independent	
technical	advisory	group	(TAG),	composed	of	demographers,	epidemiologists	and	statisticians,	
provides	technical	advice.	The	estimates	for	1990–2015	presented	in	this	report	are	the	eighth	in	a	
series	of	analyses	by	the	MMEIG	to	examine	the	global,	regional	and	country	progress	of	maternal	
mortality	(6–11).	To	provide	increasingly	accurate	estimates	of	MMR,	the	previous	estimation	
methods	have	been	refined	to	optimize	use	of	country-level	data.	 	
Consultations	with	countries	were	carried	out	following	the	development	of	preliminary	MMR	
estimates	for	the	1990–2015	period.	Consultations	aimed	to:	give	countries	the	opportunity	to	

                                                                                                      1
review	the	country	estimates,	data	sources	and	methods;	obtain	additional	primary	data	sources	
that	may	not	have	been	previously	reported	or	used	in	the	analyses;	and	build	mutual	
understanding	of	the	strengths	and	weaknesses	of	available	data	and	ensure	broad	ownership	of	
the	results.	These	consultations	generated	substantial	additional	data	for	inclusion	in	the	estimation	
model,	demonstrating	widespread	expansion	of	in-country	efforts	to	monitor	maternal	mortality.	
Annex	1	presents	a	summary	of	the	process	and	results	of	the	2015	country	consultations.	
This	report	presents	global,	regional	and	country-level	estimates	of	trends	in	maternal	mortality	
between	1990	and	2015.	Chapter	2	describes	in	detail	the	methodology	employed	to	generate	the	
estimates.	Chapter	3	provides	the	estimates	and	interpretation	of	the	findings.	Chapter	4	assesses	
performance	in	terms	of	MDG	5,	discusses	implications	of	the	estimates	for	future	efforts	towards	
achieving	SDG	3.1,	and	closes	by	underlining	the	importance	of	improved	data	quality	for	
estimating	maternal	mortality.	The	annexes	to	this	report	present	an	overview	of	the	definitions	
and	common	approaches	for	measuring	maternal	mortality,	the	sources	of	data	for	the	country	
estimates,	and	MMR	estimates	for	the	different	regional	groupings	for	WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA,	the	
World	Bank	Group	and	the	UNPD.	 	
	                                	




                                                                                                     2
2	  Methodology	for	the	1990–2015	estimates	of	maternal	
mortality	
The	methodology	employed	by	the	Maternal	Mortality	Estimation	Inter-Agency	Group	(MMEIG)	in	
this	round	followed	an	improved	approach	that	built	directly	on	methods	used	to	produce	the	1990–
2008,	1990–2010	and	1990–2013	maternal	mortality	estimates	(9–13).	Estimates	for	this	round	were	
generated	using	a	Bayesian	approach,	referred	to	as	the	Bayesian	maternal	mortality	estimation	
model,	or	BMat	model	(14,	15).	This	enhanced	methodology	uses	the	same	core	estimation	method	
as	in	those	previous	rounds,	but	adds	refinements	to	optimize	the	use	of	country-specific	data	
sources.	It	provides	estimates	that	are	directly	informed	by	country-specific	data	points,	and	
uncertainty	assessments	that	account	for	the	varying	levels	of	uncertainty	associated	with	the	
different	data	points.	There	were	two	key	methodological	changes,	described	in	section	2.1.	 	

Combined	with	the	updated	global	maternal	mortality	database,	the	BMat	model	provides	the	most	
up-to-date	maternal	mortality	estimates	yet	for	the	entire	1990–2015	timespan.	These	results	
supersede	all	previously	published	estimates	for	years	within	that	time	period,	and	differences	with	
previously	published	estimates	should	not	be	interpreted	as	representing	time	trends.	The	full	
database,	country	profiles	and	all	model	specification	code	used	are	available	online.5	

	

2.1	 Methodological	refinements	
First,	the	improved	model	estimates	data-driven	trends	for	all	countries	with	national	data,	better	
utilizing	the	substantial	amount	of	data	now	available	from	recently	established	or	strengthened	
civil	registration	systems,	population-based	surveys,	specialized	studies,	surveillance	studies	and	
censuses.	Given	the	historical	scarcity	of	data,	the	previous	iteration	of	the	MMEIG	model	
generated	estimates	for	countries	without	well	established	civil	registration	and	vital	statistics	
(CRVS)	systems	from	country-level	covariate	information	(i.e.	gross	domestic	product	per	capita	
based	on	purchasing	power	parity	conversion	[GDP],	general	fertility	rate	[GFR],	and	coverage	of	
skilled	attendants	at	birth	[SAB]).	The	new	model	still	incorporates	these	covariates,	but	the	
regression	model	has	been	modified	to	prioritize	country-level	data	on	maternal	mortality,	
whenever	available,	to	determine	national	trends	in	maternal	mortality.	 	

Second,	the	improved	methodology	gives	data	from	higher	quality	sources	more	weight	in	the	
model	so	that	they	influence	the	final	estimates	more	than	data	that	are	less	precise	or	accurate.	
Final	estimates	convey	information	about	the	overall	quality	of	all	of	the	data	contributing	to	them	
through	the	size	of	their	uncertainty	interval	–	those	informed	by	higher	quality	data	are	more	
certain,	and	those	informed	by	lower	quality	data	are	less	certain.	

Many	of	the	key	components	of	the	estimation	process,	including	data	adjustments,	covariates	for	
informing	estimates	in	settings	with	sparse	data,	and	how	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	
are	estimated,	remain	very	similar	in	the	BMat	model.	In	the	future,	as	data	quality	and	modelling	


																																																																				
5
    	 Available	at:	http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/maternal-mortality-2015/en/	



                                                                                                                 3
methods	improve,	refinement	of	the	methodology	will	continue.	The	following	sections	give	an	
overview	of	all	variables,	data	sources	and	statistical	models	involved	in	the	estimations,	and	
highlight	the	updated	components.	

	

2.2	 Model	input	variables	
Maternal	mortality	measures	
Maternal	mortality	measures	were	obtained	from	country-specific	data	sources.	Several	data	inputs	
on	maternal	mortality	were	included	in	the	analysis:	the	absolute	number	of	maternal	deaths;	the	
number	of	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births	(i.e.	the	maternal	mortality	ratio	or	MMR);	and	
the	proportion	of	maternal	deaths	out	of	all	deaths	among	women	aged	15–49	years	(PM).6	 	
The	PM	was	the	primary	input	of	analysis,	because	it	is	less	affected	by	underreporting	of	all-cause	
deaths.	In	cases	where	only	the	MMR	was	reported,	this	was	converted	to	a	PM	using	the	UN	
Population	Division’s	estimates	of	live	births	for	2015	(16)	and	all-cause	mortality	among	women	of	
reproductive	age	from	WHO	life	tables	(17).	In	some	cases	a	reported	PM	also	includes	
pregnancy-related	deaths	(i.e.	accidental	or	incidental	deaths	not	caused	by	the	pregnancy)	in	the	
ratio,	which	requires	adjustment.	The	absolute	number	of	maternal	deaths	reported	was	used	as	the	
model	input	for	a	small	subset	of	specialized	studies	that	assessed	the	completeness	of	deaths	
recorded	(including	confidential	enquiries	and	those	studies	which	reported	maternal	deaths	only).	
Details	on	the	types	of	country-level	maternal	mortality	data	sources,	the	type	of	variable	extracted	
from	each,	and	the	limitations	of	each	type	and	consequent	adjustments	made	are	described	in	Box	
1	and	section	2.3.	Types	of	data	sources,	variables	extracted,	and	adjustments	were	similar	to	those	
made	during	the	previous	estimation	round.	
Covariates	
To	inform	projection	of	trends	across	periods	where	data	were	sparse,	or	for	countries	with	little	or	
no	data,	the	model	included	factors	known	to	be	associated	with	maternal	mortality	as	predictor	
covariates.	These	predictor	covariates	were	originally	chosen	by	the	MMEIG	in	2010	from	a	broader	
list	of	potential	predictor	variables	that	fell	into	three	groups:	indicators	of	social	and	economic	
development	(such	as	GDP,	human	development	index	and	life	expectancy),	process	variables	
(SAB,	antenatal	care,	proportion	of	institutional	births,	etc.)	and	risk	exposure	(fertility	level).	The	
specific	variables	selected	were:	GDP,	GFR	and	the	proportion	of	births	with	SAB.	Data	for	each	of	
these	variables	were	obtained	respectively	from:	the	World	Bank	Group	(18),	the	UNPD	(16)	and	
UNICEF	(19).	Methods	used	to	derive	a	complete	series	of	annual	estimates	(1990–2015)	for	each	
covariate	are	described	in	detail	in	Annex	3.	The	most	recent	data	from	each	source	were	used	to	
update	covariates;	otherwise	little	changed	from	the	previous	estimation	round.	
Other	model	inputs	
Estimating	the	MMR	and	other	maternal	mortality	indicators	required	that	country-year	estimates	
for	live	births,	and	both	all-cause	deaths	and	deaths	due	to	HIV/AIDS	among	women	aged	15–49	
years	be	included	in	the	model.	Sources	for	these	data	were	the	same	as	in	the	last	round,	but	live	

																																																																				
6
    	 More	information	on	these	measures	and	precise	definitions	for	terms	used	are	provided	in	Annex	2.	



                                                                                                            4
births	were	updated	following	the	release	of	UNPD’s	World	population	prospects:	2015	revision	in	
July	2015	(16).	WHO	life	tables	provided	all-cause	mortality	estimates	(17),	and	UNAIDS	provided	
AIDS-related	mortality	estimates	(20).	Details	on	the	methodology	used	to	produce	these	estimates	
are	provided	in	the	references	cited	after	each	(see	Annex	4).	
	
Box	1	
Data	source	types,	measures	extracted	from	each,	and	sources	of	error

     Data	source	type	                       Information	used	to	       Sources	of	systematic	error	    Sources	of	random	error	accounted	
                                             construct	maternal	         accounted	for	in	analysis	                for	in	analysis	
                                             mortality	estimates	
                                                                       • Underreporting	of	maternal	 • Stochastic	errors	due	to	the	
CRVS	                                     PM	                            deaths	                       general	rarity	of	maternal	deaths	

                                          Number	of	maternal	                                           • Stochastic	errors	due	to	the	
                                                                       • None	
Specialized	studies	                                                                                      general	rarity	of	maternal	deaths	
                                          deaths,	PM	or	MMR	
                                                                       • Underreporting	of	
Other	data	sources	                                                      pregnancy-related	deaths	
reporting	on	                                                          • Over-reporting	of	maternal	    • Sampling	error	
pregnancy-related	                        PM	or	MMR	                     deaths	due	to	the	inclusion	   • Error	during	data	collection	and	
                                                                         of	deaths	which	are	             data	processing	
mortality	(including	                                                    accidental	or	incidental	to	
surveys)	                                                                pregnancy	
                                                                                        • Error	during	data	collection	and	
                                                                       • Underreporting	of	maternal	
                                                                                           data	processing	
Other	data	sources	                       Pregnancy-related	PM	
                                                                         deaths	
                                                                                        • Stochastic	errors	due	to	the	
reporting	on	             or	pregnancy-related	
                                                                                           general	rarity	of	maternal	deaths	
maternal	mortality	       MMR	                        	
                                                                                        • Additional	random	error	
CRVS:	civil	registration	and	vital	statistics;	MMR:	maternal	mortality	ratio,	i.e.	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births;	PM:	
the	proportion	of	maternal	deaths	out	of	all	deaths	among	women	aged	15–49	years.	

	

2.3	 Country	data	on	maternal	mortality	used	for	the	1990–2015	estimates	
This	section	addresses	the	different	sources	of	maternal	mortality	data	obtained	from	countries,	
describing	for	each	source:	the	types	of	measures	extracted,	the	adjustments	made	to	each	and	the	
sources	of	error.	Detailed	descriptions	of	each	type	of	data	source	are	provided	in	Annex	2.	Box	1	
summarizes	the	measures	extracted	from	each	data	source	and	the	sources	of	error,	and	Table	1	
provides	an	overview	of	data	availability	by	type	and	by	country.	Availability	varies	greatly;	among	
the	183	countries	covered	in	this	analysis	(i.e.	all	countries	with	a	population	higher	than	100	000),	
12	countries	had	no	data	available.	Overall,	2608	records	providing	36347	 country-years	of	data	on	
maternal	mortality	were	included	in	this	analysis.	
	
	                                                                 	




																																																																				
7
    	 The	sum	of	country-years	of	data	has	been	rounded.	



                                                                                                                                               5
Table	1.	Availability	of	maternal	mortality	data	records	by	source	type	and	country	for	use	in	generating	
maternal	mortality	ratio	estimates	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	for	2015	

Source	type	                                                        #	records	          #	country-years	

A. CRVS	
                                                            2025	years	of	reporting	                2025	

B. Specialized	studies	
                                                                   224	studies	                      364	

C. Other	sources	–	reporting	on	maternal	mortality	
                                                              178	reports/studies	                   206	

D. Other	sources	–	reporting	on	pregnancy-related	
                                                              181	reports/studies	                  1038	
   mortality	

All	                                                              2608	records	                    3634a	
CRVS:	civil	registration	and	vital	statistics.	
a
 	The	sum	of	country-years	of	data	has	been	rounded.	

	
CRVS	systems	are	the	primary	(and	generally	preferred)	source	of	data	on	maternal	mortality.	
However,	many	countries	lack	such	a	system,	or	have	one	that	is	not	nationally	representative.	In	
such	situations,	other	data	sources	can	provide	valuable	information.	These	alternate	data	sources	
include	specialized	studies	on	maternal	mortality,	population-based	surveys	and	miscellaneous	
studies.	
All	data	on	maternal	mortality	include	a	degree	of	uncertainty	associated	with	the	error	in	a	
particular	data	source.	Some	data	are	always	(systematically)	lower	or	higher	than	the	true	value	of	
the	variable	being	measured.	For	example,	the	numbers	of	deaths	reported	in	CRVS	records	will	be	
systematically	lower	than	the	true	number,	because	there	will	always	be	deaths	that	go	unreported.	
This	is	referred	to	as	systematic	error.	Estimates	of	the	amount	of	systematic	error	for	a	given	data	
source	were	calculated	based	on	past	analyses	that	assessed	the	extent	to	which	data	from	that	
source	differed	from	the	truth	(as	determined	by	rigorous	specialized	studies	which	looked	to	
determine	underreporting	of	maternal	mortality,	see	Annex	4).	Based	on	these	assessments,	
adjustments	were	then	applied	to	the	data	to	account	for	systematic	error	and	bring	it	closer	to	the	
“truth”	using	methods	similar	to	the	previous	estimation	round.	These	adjustments	contribute	
uncertainty	to	the	final	estimates	of	maternal	mortality,	since	no	adjustment	is	based	on	perfect	
information.	Data	may	also	differ	from	the	truth	in	a	direction	that	is	unpredictable.	For	example,	
human	error	when	recording	information	and	entering	it	into	a	database	may	cause	data	to	deviate	
from	the	truth	in	either	direction	(higher	or	lower).	This	is	referred	to	as	random	error,	and	it	cannot	
be	adjusted	for	but	also	adds	uncertainty	to	the	final	maternal	mortality	estimates.	
Uncertainty	due	to	random	error	and	uncertainty	due	to	adjustments	is	communicated	in	the	data’s	
error	variance.	Generally	speaking,	inputs	(usually	PMs)	from	data	sources	with	less	random	error	
and	less	uncertainty	in	systematic	error	(and	corresponding	adjustments)	had	smaller	variances	
than	inputs	from	data	sources	with	more	error.	In	turn,	inputs	with	smaller	variances	carried	greater	
weight	in	determining	the	final	maternal	mortality	estimates.	In	this	way,	all	data	sources	could	be	
included,	with	higher	quality	data	(containing	less	uncertainty)	having	a	greater	influence	on	
estimated	country-specific	trends	as	compared	to	lower	quality	data.	 	
Box	2	discusses	the	implications	for	the	trend	estimates	of	countries	that	have	been	improving	the	

                                                                                                           6
quality	of	their	data	over	time.	For	more	details	on	the	data	models	and	variance	estimation,	please	
see	the	paper	by	Alkema	et	al.	(15).	The	subsections	below	include	discussion	of	sources	of	both	
systematic	and	random	error	for	each	type	of	data	source,	and	how	the	model	accounted	for	them.	
	
    Box 2
    Estimating trends for countries with improving data quality


     The	MMR	trend	lines	for	Cuba,	a	country	with	consistently	high-quality	civil	registration	and	vital	statistics	(CRVS)	data,	
     and	Peru,	a	country	with	improving	data,	illustrate	how	data	quality	influences	the	estimates	generated	by	the	updated	
     model:	 	




                                                                                                    	




     Cuba	has	had	a	complete	CRVS	system	established	since	before	1985	that	consistently	provides	high-quality	data	for	
     estimation	of	maternal	mortality.	As	shown	in	the	figure	above,	the	estimated	MMR	trend	line	closely	tracks	the	CRVS	
     data	points	throughout	the	1990–2015	time	period.	The	shaded	region	around	the	trend	line,	which	represents	the	80%	
     uncertainty	interval	(UI),	remains	roughly	the	same	width	throughout.	




                                                                                                	




     In	contrast,	Peru	had	little	data	of	adequate	quality	available	prior	to	2000,	but	since	2000	has	established	a	more	



                                                                                                                               7
    Box 2
    Estimating trends for countries with improving data quality


     robust	CRVS	system,	and	has	conducted	numerous	additional	studies.	The	estimated	trend	line	is	therefore	influenced	
     by	covariate	information	prior	to	2000,	but	tracks	the	data	points	from	the	high-quality	data	sources	closely	after	2000.	
     Four	DHS	studies	were	conducted	in	Peru	during	the	1990–2015	period,	and	data	points	from	these	studies	also	
     influence	the	trend	line.	However,	given	the	lower	reliability	of	the	data	from	these	studies,	they	exert	less	influence	
     (the	line	does	not	track	them	as	closely)	compared	to	the	CRVS	data	points.	Finally,	the	shaded	region	around	the	trend	
     line	narrows	dramatically	as	time	progresses.	This	represents	the	narrowing	of	the	80%	UI	as	data	quality	improves	and	
     allows	estimates	to	become	more	precise.	
     Like	Peru,	many	countries	have	recently	established	CRVS	systems,	or	have	substantially	improved	the	quality	of	data	
     collected	by	their	CRVS	systems.	The	new	model	takes	advantage	of	these	new	data,	allowing	these	countries’	trend	
     lines	to	be	more	influenced	by	the	data	during	the	period	after	the	system	was	established,	and	increasingly	so	as	the	
     quality	improves.	


	
Civil	registration	and	vital	statistics	data	
National	CRVS	systems	are	meant	to	record	all	births,	deaths	and	causes	of	death	within	a	country.	
The	data	retrieved	from	CRVS	systems	are	referred	to	as	vital	registration	(VR)	data.	For	VR	data,	
the	observed	proportion	of	maternal	deaths	among	all	deaths	to	women	aged	15–49	was	included	
as	the	data	input.	For	VR	country-years	based	on	ICD-9,	deaths	coded	to	630-676	were	used	and	for	
those	based	upon	ICD-10,	deaths	coded	to	codes	O00-O95,	O98-O99	and	A34	were	used	(which	
include	only	those	maternal	deaths	for	which	the	timing	corresponds	to	the	definition	of	a	maternal	
death)8.	
Under	ideal	circumstances,	CRVS	systems	provide	perfect	data	on	the	number	of	maternal	deaths	
within	a	country.	In	reality,	however,	deaths	often	go	unrecorded	(resulting	in	incompleteness)	or	
the	causes	of	death	are	incorrectly	recorded	(resulting	in	misclassification)	both	of	which	contribute	
to	underreporting	of	maternal	deaths.	The	extent	of	underreporting	determines	a	civil	registration	
record’s	usability	in	the	analysis.	Usability	is	defined	as	the	percentage	of	all	deaths	among	women	
of	reproductive	age	in	the	country-year	for	which	a	cause	of	death	has	been	recorded.	It	is	
calculated	by	multiplying	the	system’s	completeness	(proportion	of	all-cause	deaths	that	were	
registered	in	the	system)	by	the	proportion	of	deaths	registered	in	the	system	that	were	assigned	a	
specific	ICD	cause	(see	Annex	5	for	details	on	calculating	usability).	Additionally,	the	number	of	
data-years	available	from	a	CRVS	system	in	a	given	time	period	was	used	as	a	proxy	for	the	data’s	
reliability,	with	regular	data	reporting	across	years	indicating	a	high-functioning	system.	Given	
these	factors,	each	country-year	of	VR	data	was	placed	into	one	of	three	categories	(type	I,	II	or	III)	
depending	on	its	usability	and	the	number	of	available	years	with	data.	Box	3	summarizes	the	
criteria	for	each	category.	The	category	determined	whether	or	not	the	record	for	that	country-year	
of	data	was	included	in	analysis,	and	if	included,	how	it	was	adjusted	to	account	for	
misclassification.	

																																																																				
8
 	 A	maternal	death	is	defined	as	the	death	of	a	woman	while	pregnant	or	within	42	days	of	termination	of	pregnancy,	
irrespective	of	the	duration	and	site	of	the	pregnancy,	from	any	cause	related	to	or	aggravated	by	the	pregnancy	or	its	
management	(from	direct	or	indirect	obstetric	death),	but	not	from	accidental	or	incidental	causes.	



                                                                                                                                 8
This	method	of	categorizing	each	year	of	a	country’s	VR	data,	rather	than	placing	all	of	a	country’s	
data	into	the	same	category	(as	in	the	previous	estimation	round),	takes	into	account	changes	in	
data	quality	over	time.	For	example,	if	a	country	strengthens	its	CRVS	system,	data	from	years	after	
the	system	improvement	can	be	categorized	as	type	I,	even	if	data	from	earlier	years	were	classified	
as	type	II.	Annex	5	includes	a	table	listing	the	calculated	data	usability	for	selected	years	of	VR	data,	
by	country.	
	
Box 3
Categorization of VR data retrieved from CRVS systems (country-year records) based
on usability and availability

Category	     Criteria	

Type	I	       • Usability	>	80%	 	
                AND	 	
              • Part	of	a	continuous	string	of	three	or	more	country-year	records	with	>	60%	usability	and	no	
                more	than	one	year	gap	in	between	records	 	

Type	II	      • Usability	>	60%	 	
                AND	 	
              • Part	of	a	continuous	string	of	three	or	more	country-year	records	with	>	60%	usability	and	no	
                more	than	one	year	gap	in	between	records	

Type	III	     • Other	 data	 from	 registration	 and	 mortality	 reporting	 systems.	 For	 these	 data	 points,	 data	
                quality	 cannot	 be	 assessed	 as	 the	 countries	 have	 not	 submitted	 data	 to	 the	 relevant	 WHO	
                office.	

Excluded	     • Usability	<	60%	 	
                OR	 	
              • Not	 part	 of	 a	 continuous	 string	 of	 three	 or	 more	 country-year	 records	 with	 >	60%	 usability	
                and	no	more	than	one	year	gap	in	between	records	

	
Initial	adjustment	factors	for	all	VR	data	(types	I,	II	and	III)	were	determined	using	procedures	similar	
to	those	used	in	previous	estimation	rounds.	For	countries	with	type	I	data	that	have	not	conducted	
specialized	studies	(to	assess	the	extent	of	systematic	error	in	VR	data;	see	next	subsection	for	
further	information),	the	number	of	maternal	deaths	was	multiplied	by	an	adjustment	factor	of	1.5,	
as	determined	by	a	review	of	findings	from	49	specialized	studies,	which	was	conducted	in	2014	(the	
findings	are	summarized	in	Annex	4).	However,	for	countries	with	type	I	data	that	have	conducted	
at	least	one	specialized	study,	the	findings	from	the	specialized	study	informed	the	adjustment	
factor	applied	to	that	country’s	VR	data.	Calculation	of	adjustment	factors	was	based	on	the	
approach	used	in	the	last	estimation	round,	and	the	methods	are	described	in	the	paper	by	Alkema	
et	al.	(15).	Any	civil	registration	records	covering	the	same	periods	for	which	specialized	study	data	
were	available	were	excluded	to	avoid	double	counting	of	the	same	information.	
For	countries	with	type	II	data,	a	similar	procedure	was	used	as	described	for	countries	with	type	I	
data	to	obtain	initial	estimates	of	adjustments	factors	for	civil	registration	records	(either	1.5	or	
values	indicated	by	specialized	studies).	However,	for	type	II	and	III	data,	the	model	set-up	included	
the	possibility	of	higher	adjustment	factors	depending	on	data	quality,	with	the	possibility	of	
estimating	a	larger	adjustment	factor	decreasing	as	usability	increases	(15).	In	addition	to	the	
systematic	errors	described	above,	and	the	uncertainty	associated	with	those	adjustments,	the	
observed	PMs	obtained	from	civil	registration	records	are	subject	to	stochastic	error,	attributed	to	

                                                                                                                      9
maternal	mortality	being	a	generally	rare	event.	
Specialized	studies	on	maternal	mortality	
A	number	of	countries	reporting	maternal	deaths	via	CRVS	systems	also	conducted	specialized	
studies	to	determine	if	maternal	deaths	were	underreported.	While	the	methodology	for	these	
studies	varies,	any	nationally	representative	study	that	documented	corrections	to	data	previously	
submitted	to	the	WHO	mortality	database	was	considered	a	specialized	study.	These	studies	were	
used	to	inform	maternal	mortality	estimates	as	well	as	VR	data	misclassification	adjustment	factors.	
Examples	include	those	conducted	in	Guatemala	and	the	United	Kingdom,	which	reviewed	a	
representative	sample	of	the	population	using	methods	such	as	verbal	autopsy	to	identify	and	
correctly	categorize	causes	of	death;	or	studies	such	as	those	conducted	in	Australia,	Mexico	and	
the	United	Kingdom,	which	used	the	Confidential	Enquiry	system	to	review	the	classification	and	
completeness	of	death	reporting	for	deaths	among	women	of	reproductive	age	in	a	vital	events	
database.	
Information	from	specialized	studies	was	summarized	into	an	observed	PM.	The	PM	or	MMR	
reported	in	the	study	was	generally	used,	except	for	Confidential	Enquiries	or	other	specialized	
studies	reporting	on	maternal	deaths	only,	which	addressed	both	potential	underreporting	of	
maternal	deaths	as	well	as	the	total	deaths	among	women	of	reproductive	age	during	the	study	
time	period;	for	those	studies,	the	absolute	number	of	maternal	deaths	observed	was	used	directly	
as	a	model	input.	All	data	inputs	from	specialized	studies	were	used	to	inform	the	modelled	
maternal	mortality	estimates,	without	further	adjustments.	The	only	studies	excluded	from	analysis	
were	those	that	did	not	report	the	total	number	of	all-cause	deaths	among	women	of	reproductive	
age	or	associated	births	within	the	study	period,	and	for	which	that	information	was	not	available	
from	the	CRVS	system.	
Model	inputs	from	specialized	studies	were	assumed	to	have	no	systematic	error.	Sources	of	
random	error	are	the	same	as	those	for	VR	data.	
Population-based	surveys	and	other	data	sources	
Examples	of	population-based	surveys	include	the	Demographic	and	Health	Surveys	(DHS),	
Multiple	Indicator	Cluster	Surveys	–	Round	4	(MICS4),	and	Reproductive	Health	Surveys.	Other	data	
sources	include	censuses	and	surveillance	systems.	
Many	surveys	include	questions	inquiring	whether	deceased	women	of	reproductive	age	died	during	
pregnancy	or	shortly	after.	For	example,	DHS	and	MICS	both	use	the	direct	“sisterhood”	method	in	
which	they	ask	respondents	about	the	survival	of	all	of	their	siblings.	Such	surveys	therefore	collect	
data	on	pregnancy-related	deaths,	which	are	used	to	compute	the	pregnancy-related	PM.	Other	
studies	obtain	and	report	the	PM,	and	some	may	report	a	pregnancy-related	MMR	rather	than	PM	if	
information	on	births	is	collected	and	information	on	all	causes	of	deaths	among	women	of	
reproductive	age	is	not	collected.	
Specialized	studies	indicate	that	there	is	some	underreporting	of	maternal	or	pregnancy-related	
deaths	in	PMs	derived	from	sources	such	as	population-based	surveys,	censuses	and	surveillance	
studies,	particularly	since	respondents	may	be	unaware	of	the	pregnancy	status	of	their	sisters	or	
other	women	in	the	household.	If	no	specific	adjustments	were	reported,	estimates	for	these	data	
sources	were	revised	to	increase	the	number	of	maternal	or	pregnancy-related	deaths	by	10%	to	
correct	for	underreporting.	When	pregnancy-related	deaths	were	reported,	the	number	was	
adjusted	downward	by	10%	for	sub-Saharan	African	countries	and	15%	in	other	low-	and	middle-	

                                                                                                   10
income	countries	to	correct	for	inclusion	of	incidental	and	accidental	deaths	(21).	As	in	previous	
estimation	rounds,	for	studies	that	excluded	deaths	due	to	accidents	when	calculating	
pregnancy-related	PMs,	the	calculated	PMs	were	taken	and	used	as	model	inputs	without	any	
further	adjustment.	
In	addition	to	the	sources	of	systematic	error	discussed	above,	sources	of	random	error	for	model	
inputs	derived	from	surveys,	censuses	and	other	types	of	studies	include	sampling	error	and	errors	
occurring	during	the	data	collection	and	data	administration	processes.	
	

2.4	 Statistical	modelling	to	estimate	1990–2015	maternal	mortality	 	
Summary	of	methods	
Limited	data	availability	for	many	countries,	and	the	limitations	of	the	data	that	are	available,	mean	
that	statistical	models	are	needed	for	generating	comparable	estimates	of	maternal	mortality	
across	countries.	The	BMat	model	is	flexible	enough	to	account	for	differences	in	data	availability	
and	quality.	Therefore,	the	same	statistical	model	can	now	be	used	to	generate	estimates	for	all	
countries.	 	
As	in	previous	MMEIG	estimation	rounds,	the	MMR	for	each	country-year	is	modelled	as	the	sum	of	
the	AIDS-related	indirect	MMR	and	the	non-AIDS-related	MMR:	
        MMR	=	non-AIDS-related	MMR	+	AIDS-related	indirect	MMR,	
where	non-AIDS-related	maternal	deaths	refer	to	maternal	deaths	due	to	direct	obstetric	causes	or	
to	indirect	causes	other	than	HIV,	while	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	are	those	
AIDS-related	deaths	for	which	pregnancy	was	a	substantial	aggravating	factor.	
The	estimation	of	the	AIDS-related	indirect	MMR	follows	the	same	procedure	as	used	in	previous	
publications	(9–11)	and	is	described	in	detail	in	Annex	6.	
The	expected	non-AIDS-related	MMR	for	the	year	1990,	and	expected	changes	in	the	
non-AIDS-related	MMR	from	1990	to	2015,	are	obtained	through	the	multilevel	regression	model	
that	was	used	in	previous	estimation	rounds	(explained	in	more	detail	below	in	this	subsection).	
However,	this	existing	model	was	extended	to	enable	it	to	capture	country-specific	data-driven	
trends.	To	do	this,	it	now	includes	information	from	the	data	via	a	country-year-specific	multiplier.	
The	result	of	this	approach	is	that	in	country-year	periods	where	high-quality	data	exist,	the	data	
dominate	(i.e.	the	estimates	produced	are	closer	to	the	data),	and	in	cases	where	there	are	no	data,	
the	regression	determines	the	level	and	trend	of	estimates.	In	between,	both	sources	of	information	
inform	the	estimate	of	a	country’s	level	and	trend.	For	countries	with	high-quality	VR	data,	the	
model	tracks	the	data	very	closely,	while	providing	some	smoothing	of	the	curve	over	time	to	
remove	stochastic	fluctuations	in	the	data.	 	
In	the	new	model,	the	non-AIDS-related	MMR	is	estimated	for	all	countries	as	follows:	
        Non-AIDS-related	MMR(t)	=	expected	non-AIDS-related	MMR(t)	x	data-driven	multiplier(t),	
where	“expected	non-AIDS-related	MMR(t)”	is	estimated	from	the	multilevel	regression	model,	and	
the	“data-driven	multiplier(t)”	allows	for	differences	in	the	rate	of	change	in	MMR	implied	by	the	
“expected	non-AIDS-related	MMR”	and	country-year-specific	data	points.	For	example,	if	data	
suggested	that	the	non-AIDS-related	MMR	decreased	much	faster	in	year	t	than	expected	based	on	
covariates,	the	data-driven	multiplier	for	that	year	is	estimated	to	be	greater	than	1,	allowing	the	
                                                                                                      11
model	to	produce	estimates	that	closely	track	country	data.	This	data-driven	multiplier	is	modelled	
with	a	flexible	time	series	model,	which	fluctuates	around	1,	such	that	the	covariates	determine	the	
estimated	change	when	data	are	absent	(for	further	details	on	the	multiplier	please	see	the	
technical	paper	[15]).	
The	extension	of	the	non-AIDS-related	MMR	to	allow	for	country-specific	data	trends	was	the	main	
revision	in	the	MMEIG	model,	as	compared	to	the	previous	estimation	approach.	The	second	
significant	change	to	the	model	was	the	use	of	integrated	data	models	to	allow	for	uncertainty	
around	data	inputs	to	be	incorporated	into	the	estimates.	For	example,	the	PM	from	a	DHS	with	a	
small	sample	size	is	assumed	to	be	less	precise	than	a	PM	from	a	DHS	with	a	large	sample	size.	As	
explained	in	section	2.3,	this	uncertainty	is	taken	into	account	by	the	model	when	generating	PM	
and	thus	MMR	estimates;	observations	with	smaller	error	variances	are	more	informative	of	the	true	
PM	and	thus	will	carry	a	greater	weight	in	determining	the	estimates	as	compared	to	observations	
with	larger	error	variances.	
All	analyses	were	conducted	using	JAGS	3·3·0	and	R;	both	are	open-source	statistical	software	
packages	(22,	23).	Statistical	code	can	be	accessed	online.9	
	
Multilevel	regression	model	
A	multilevel	regression	model	was	used	to	obtain	the	expected	number	of	non-AIDS-related	
maternal	deaths	for	each	country-year.	The	model	predicts	maternal	mortality	using	three	predictor	
variables	described	in	section	2.2.	The	model	can	be	described	as	follows:	
                log(PMina)	=	αi	–	β1	log(GDPi)	+	β2	log(GFRi)	–	β3	SABi	
with	random	country	intercepts	modelled	hierarchically	within	regions:	
     	          αi ~ N(αregion, σ2country), αr ~ N(αworld, σ2region)
                                                                                              2
meaning	country	intercepts	(αi)	are	distributed	normally	with	a	country-specific	variance	(σ country)	
around	random	region	intercepts	(αregion),	and	random	region	intercepts	(αregion)	are	distributed	
                                            2
normally	with	a	region-specific	variance	(σ region)	around	a	world	intercept	(αworld);	
and:	
                GDPi	=	gross	domestic	product	per	capita	(in	2011	PPP	dollars)	
                GFRi	=	general	fertility	rate	(live	births	per	woman	aged	15–49	years)	
                SABi	=	skilled	attendant	at	birth	(as	a	proportion	of	total	births).	
	
For	countries	with	data	available	on	maternal	mortality,	the	expected	proportion	of	
non-AIDS-related	maternal	deaths	was	based	on	country	and	regional	random	effects,	whereas	for	
countries	with	no	data	available,	predictions	were	derived	using	regional	random	effects	only.	
	



																																																																				
9
    	 Available	at:	http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/maternal-mortality-2015/en	



                                                                                                                12
2.5	 Maternal	mortality	indicators	estimated	by	the	model	 	
The	immediate	outputs	of	the	BMat	model	were	estimates	in	the	form	of	PMs.	These	values	were	
then	converted	to	estimates	of	the	MMR	as	follows:	
        MMR	=	PM(D/B),	
where	D	is	the	number	of	deaths	in	women	aged	15–49	years	and	B	is	the	number	of	live	births	for	
the	country-year	corresponding	to	the	estimate.	
Based	on	MMR	estimates,	the	annual	rate	of	MMR	reduction	(ARR)	and	the	maternal	mortality	rate	
(MMRate;	the	number	of	maternal	deaths	divided	by	person-years	lived	by	women	of	reproductive	
age	[13])	were	calculated.	The	ARR	was	calculated	as	follows:	 	
        ARR	=	log(MMRt2/MMRt1)/(t1–t2),	 	
where	t1	and	t2	refer	to	different	years	with	t1	<	t2.	 	
The	MMRate	was	calculated	by	using	the	number	of	maternal	deaths	divided	by	the	number	of	
women	aged	15–49	in	the	population,	as	estimated	by	UNPD	in	World	population	prospects:	2015	
revision	(16).	The	MMRate	was	used	to	calculate	the	adult	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	(i.e.	the	
probability	that	a	15-year-old	woman	will	die	eventually	from	a	maternal	cause).	In	countries	where	
there	is	a	high	risk	of	maternal	death,	there	is	also	an	elevated	likelihood	of	girls	dying	before	
reaching	reproductive	age.	For	this	reason,	it	makes	sense	to	consider	the	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	
mortality	conditional	on	a	girl’s	survival	to	adulthood.	The	formula	used	yields	an	estimate	of	the	
lifetime	risk	that	takes	into	account	competing	causes	of	death:	
        Lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	=	(T15-T50)/	ℓ15	x	MMRate,	 	
where	ℓ15	equals	the	probability	of	survival	from	birth	until	age	15	years,	and	(T15	–	T50)/ℓ15	equals	
the	average	number	of	years	lived	between	ages	15	and	50	years	(up	to	a	maximum	of	35	years)	
among	survivors	to	age	15	years.	The	values	for	ℓ15,	T15	and	T50	are	life-table	quantities	for	the	
female	population	during	the	period	in	question.	
Regional	maternal	mortality	estimates	(according	to	the	MDG,	UNFPA,	UNICEF,	UNPD,	WHO	and	
the	World	Bank	Group	regional	groupings)	were	also	computed.	The	MMR	in	a	given	region	was	
computed	as	the	estimated	total	number	of	maternal	deaths	divided	by	the	number	of	live	births	for	
that	region.	Additionally,	the	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	was	based	on	the	weighted	average	
of	(T15	–	T50)/ℓ15	for	a	given	region,	multiplied	by	the	MMRate	of	that	region.	
	

2.6	 Uncertainty	assessment	
Accurately	estimating	maternal	mortality	proves	challenging	due	to	many	countries’	limited	data	
availability,	and	due	to	quality	issues	affecting	the	data	that	are	available.	The	improved	model	
provides	a	more	realistic	assessment	of	uncertainty	around	the	estimates	based	on	the	amount	and	
quality	of	input	data.	It	allows	for	greater	precision	when	more	and	better	data	are	available	and	
indicates	the	extent	of	estimate	uncertainty	in	cases	where	there	the	amount	of	data	is	insufficient	
or	the	data	are	from	sources	more	susceptible	to	error.	It	should	be	noted,	however,	that	the	
uncertainty	assessment	does	not	include	the	uncertainty	in	covariates	or	other	model	input	
variables	other	than	maternal	mortality	data.	
Model	input	data	quality	decreases	with	increasing	systematic	error	and	random	error	(discussed	for	

                                                                                                      13
each	data	type	in	section	2.3),	introducing	uncertainty.	This	uncertainty	is	then	carried	through	to	
the	final	estimates.	Bayesian	models	allow	for	accurate	assessment	of	the	extent	of	uncertainty	for	
a	given	estimated	indicator	by	generating	a	posterior	distribution	of	that	indicator’s	potential	
values.	A	Markov	Chain	Monte	Carlo	(MCMC)	algorithm	was	used	to	generate	samples	of	the	
posterior	distributions	of	all	model	parameters	(24).	The	sampling	algorithm	produced	a	set	of	
trajectories	of	the	MMR	for	each	country,	from	which	other	indicators	and	aggregate	outcomes	
were	derived.	This	distribution	is	then	used	to	compute	a	point-estimate	and	uncertainty	interval	
(UI)	for	the	indicator.	In	this	case	80%	UIs	were	calculated	(rather	than	the	standard	95%)	because	
of	the	substantial	uncertainty	inherent	in	maternal	mortality	outcomes.	 	
The	extent	of	uncertainty	about	a	particular	estimate,	indicated	by	the	size	of	the	80%	UI,	is	
determined	by	the	amount	and	quality	of	data	used	to	produce	that	estimate.	For	a	country	with	
very	accurate	sources	of	maternal	mortality	data,	the	MMR	can	be	estimated	with	greater	precision,	
and	the	80%	UI	will	be	smaller	than	for	a	country	with	little	data,	or	with	data	from	less	reliable	
sources.	
	

2.7	 Model	validation	
The	BMat	model’s	predictive	validity	was	assessed	by	cross-validation.	This	procedure	involves	
removing	a	subset	of	records	from	the	data	set,	re-fitting	the	model	to	that	smaller	data	set,	and	
then	seeing	how	well	the	model’s	new	estimates	match	the	records	that	were	removed	(taking	into	
account	systematic	errors).	If	the	model’s	new	estimates	are	similar	to	the	dropped	data,	it	provides	
evidence	that	the	model	can	accurately	predict	the	values	of	missing	data,	which	is	important	
because	data	on	maternal	mortality	is	very	limited	for	many	countries.	Another	variation	was	also	
run	in	which	data	from	the	most	recent	time	period	were	dropped	and	then	estimates	were	
produced	using	the	remaining	data.	Results	from	this	validation	process	indicate	that	the	model	is	
robust	and	adequately	calibrated	to	generate	the	estimates	for	global	maternal	mortality	
indicators.	 	
	

    Box 4
    Accurately interpreting point-estimates and uncertainty intervals


     All maternal mortality indicators derived from the 2015 estimation round include a point-estimate and
     an 80% uncertainty interval (UI). For those indicators where only point-estimates are reported in the
                                                                                         10
     text or tables, UIs can be obtained from supplementary material online.                  Both point-estimates and
     80% UIs should be taken into account when assessing estimates.
     For example:
                                             The estimated 2015 global MMR is 216 (UI 207 to 249)
     This means:
            •       The point-estimate is 216 and the 80% uncertainty interval ranges 207 to 249.
            •       There is a 50% chance that the true 2015 global MMR lies above 216, and a 50% chance that


																																																																				
10
     	 Available	at:	http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/maternal-mortality-2015/en	



                                                                                                                         14
    Box 4
    Accurately interpreting point-estimates and uncertainty intervals


              the true value lies below 216.
         •    There is an 80% chance that the true 2015 global MMR lies between 207 and 249.
         •    There is still a 10% chance that the true 2015 global MMR lies above 249, and a 10% chance
              that the true value lies below 207.
     Other accurate interpretations include:
         •    We are 90% certain that the true 2015 global MMR is at least 207.
         •    We are 90% certain that the true 2015 global MMR is 249 or less.

     The amount of data available for estimating an indicator and the quality of that data determine the width
     of an indicator’s UI. As data availability and quality improve, the certainty increases that an indicator’s
     true value lies close to the point-estimate.

	




                                                                                                                   15
3	              Analysis	and	interpretation	of	the	2015	estimates	
Globally,	the	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR;	number	of	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	fell	
by	approximately	44%	over	the	past	25	years;	this	falls	short	of	the	Millennium	Development	Goal	
(MDG)	target	MDG	5A	which	called	for	a	reduction	of	at	least	75%	in	MMR.	All	MDG	regions11	 of	the	
world	have	experienced	considerable	reductions	in	maternal	mortality.	This	section	describes	
estimated	MMRs,	global	maternal	deaths,	and	adult	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	(i.e.	the	
probability	that	a	15-year-old	woman	will	die	eventually	from	a	maternal	cause).	It	then	examines	
trends	in	these	indicators	since	1990.	
The	numbers	provided	are	the	most	accurate	point-estimates	possible	given	the	available	data.	
However,	these	calculations	still	contain	a	level	of	uncertainty	that	varies	depending	on	the	amount	
and	quality	of	available	data	used	to	produce	them.	The	range	that	an	estimated	indicator’s	true	
value	most	likely	falls	within	is	captured	by	its	80%	uncertainty	interval	(see	Box	4,	Chapter	2).	
Uncertainty	intervals	(UI)	are	therefore	given	after	all	MMR	point-estimates	and	MMR	reduction	
point-estimates	below.	
	




3.1	 Maternal	mortality	estimates	for	2015	
An	estimated	303	000	maternal	deaths	will	occur	globally	in	2015,	yielding	an	overall	MMR	of	216	(UI	
207	to	249)	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births	for	the	183	countries	and	territories	covered	in	
this	analysis	(i.e.	all	those	with	a	population	higher	than	100	000)	(see	Table	2).	The	global	lifetime	
risk	of	maternal	mortality	is	approximately	1	in	180	for	2015.	Table	2	provides	point-estimates	of	
global	and	regional	maternal	mortality	indicators,	and	the	range	of	uncertainty	for	each	MMR	
point-estimate.	For	the	purpose	of	categorization,	MMR	is	considered	to	be	high	if	it	is	300–499,	
very	high	if	it	is	500–999	and	extremely	high	if	it	is	≥	1000	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births.	
	
	                                                                 	




																																																																				
11
   An	explanation	of	the	MDG	regions	is	available	at:	
http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Host.aspx?Content=Data/REgionalGroupings.htm	(a	list	of	the	MDG	regions	is	also	
provided	in	the	full	report).



                                                                                                               16
Table	2.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	number	of	
maternal	deaths,	and	lifetime	risk,	by	United	Nations	Millennium	Development	Goal	(MDG)	region,	2015	
           MDG	region	               MMRa	           Range	of	MMR	                  Number	of	      Lifetime	risk	of	
                                                   uncertainty	(80%	UI)	             maternal	      maternal	death,	 	
                                                                                     deathsb	              1	in:c	
                                                    Lower	         Upper	
                                                   estimate	      estimate	

World	                                      216	           207	            249	        303	000	                  180	

Developed	regionsd	                          12	            11	               14	         1	700	               4	900	

Developing	regions	                         239	           229	            275	        302	000	                  150	

   Northern	Africae	                         70	            56	               92	         3	100	                 450	

   Sub-Saharan	Africaf	                    546	            511	            652	        201	000	                      36	

   Eastern	Asiag	                            27	            23	               33	        4	800	                2	300	

     Eastern	Asia	excluding	
     China	                                  43	            24	               86	           378	               1	500	

   Southern	Asiah	                          176	           153	            216	         66	000	                  210	

     Southern	Asia	excluding	
     India	                                 180	           147	            249	         21	000	                  190	

   South-eastern	Asiai	                     110	            95	            142	         13	000	                  380	

   Western	Asiaj	                            91	            73	            125	           4	700	                 360	

   Caucasus	and	Central	Asiak	               33	            27	               45	          610	                1	100	

   Latin	America	and	the	
   Caribbean	                                67	            64	               77	         7	300	                 670	

     Latin	Americal	                         60	            57	               66	        6	600	                  760	

     Caribbeanm	                            175	           130	            265	           1	300	                 250	

   Oceanian	                                187	            95	            381	            500	                  150	

UI:	uncertainty	interval.	
a.	MMR	estimates	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–999	rounded	to	
nearest	1;	and	≥	1000	rounded	to	nearest	10.	
b.	Numbers	of	maternal	deaths	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–
999	rounded	to	nearest	10;	1000–9999	rounded	to	nearest	100;	and	≥	10	000	rounded	to	nearest	1000.	




                                                                                                                     17
c.	Lifetime	risk	numbers	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–999	
rounded	to	nearest	10;	and	≥	1000	rounded	to	nearest	100.	
d.	Albania,	Australia,	Austria,	Belarus,	Belgium,	Bosnia	and	Herzegovina,	Bulgaria,	Canada,	Croatia,	Cyprus,	Czech	
Republic,	Denmark,	Estonia,	Finland,	France,	Germany,	Greece,	Hungary,	Iceland,	Ireland,	Israel,	Italy,	Japan,	Latvia,	
Lithuania,	Luxembourg,	Malta,	Montenegro,	Netherlands,	New	Zealand,	Norway,	Poland,	Portugal,	Republic	of	Moldova,	
Romania,	Russian	Federation,	Serbia,	Slovakia,	Slovenia,	Spain,	Sweden,	Switzerland,	The	former	Yugoslav	Republic	of	
Macedonia,	Ukraine,	United	Kingdom,	United	States	of	America.	
e.	Algeria,	Egypt,	Libya,	Morocco,	Tunisia.	
f.	Angola,	Benin,	Botswana,	Burkina	Faso,	Burundi,	Cameroon,	Cabo	Verde,	Central	African	Republic,	Chad,	Comoros,	
Congo,	Côte	d’Ivoire,	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo,	Djibouti,	Equatorial	Guinea,	Eritrea,	Ethiopia,	Gabon,	Gambia,	
Ghana,	Guinea,	Guinea-Bissau,	Kenya,	Lesotho,	Liberia,	Madagascar,	Malawi,	Mali,	Mauritania,	Mauritius,	Mozambique,	
Namibia,	Niger,	Nigeria,	Rwanda,	Sao	Tome	and	Principe,	Senegal,	Sierra	Leone,	Somalia,	South	Africa,	South	Sudan,	
Sudan,	Swaziland,	Togo,	Uganda,	United	Republic	of	Tanzania,	Zambia,	Zimbabwe.	
g.	China,	Democratic	People’s	Republic	of	Korea,	Mongolia,	Republic	of	Korea.	
h.	Afghanistan,	Bangladesh,	Bhutan,	India,	Iran	(Islamic	Republic	of),	Maldives,	Nepal,	Pakistan,	Sri	Lanka.	
i.	Brunei	Darussalam,	Cambodia,	Indonesia,	Lao	People’s	Democratic	Republic,	Malaysia,	Myanmar,	Philippines,	
Singapore,	Thailand,	Timor-Leste,	Viet	Nam.	
j.	Bahrain,	Iraq,	Jordan,	Kuwait,	Lebanon,	Occupied	Palestinian	Territory,	Oman,	Qatar,	Saudi	Arabia,	Syrian	Arab	
Republic,	Turkey,	United	Arab	Emirates,	Yemen.	
k.	Armenia,	Azerbaijan,	Georgia,	Kazakhstan,	Kyrgyzstan,	Tajikistan,	Turkmenistan,	Uzbekistan.	
l.	Argentina,	Belize,	Bolivia	(Plurinational	State	of),	Brazil,	Chile,	Colombia,	Costa	Rica,	Ecuador,	El	Salvador,	Guatemala,	
Guyana,	Honduras,	Mexico,	Nicaragua,	Panama,	Paraguay,	Peru,	Suriname,	Uruguay,	Venezuela	(Bolivarian	Republic	of).	
m.	Bahamas,	Barbados,	Cuba,	Dominican	Republic,	Grenada,	Haiti,	Jamaica,	Puerto	Rico,	Saint	Lucia,	Saint	Vincent	and	
the	Grenadines,	Trinidad	and	Tobago.	
n.	Fiji,	Kiribati,	Micronesia	(Federated	States	of),	Papua	New	Guinea,	Samoa,	Solomon	Islands,	Tonga,	Vanuatu.	

	
Regional	estimates	
The	overall	MMR	in	developing	regions	is	239	(UI	229	to	275),	which	is	roughly	20	times	higher	than	
that	of	developed	regions,	where	it	is	just	12	(UI	11	to	14)	(see	Table	2).	Sub-Saharan	Africa	has	a	
very	high	MMR12	 with	a	point-estimate	of	546	(UI	511	to	652).	Three	regions	–	Oceania	(187;	UI	95	
to	381),	Southern	Asia	(176;	UI	153	to	216)	and	South-eastern	Asia	(110;	UI	95	to	142)	–	have	
moderate	MMR.	The	remaining	five	regions	have	low	MMR.	
Developing	regions	account	for	approximately	99%	(302	000)	of	the	estimated	global	maternal	
deaths	in	2015,	with	sub-Saharan	Africa	alone	accounting	for	roughly	66%	(201	000),	followed	by	
Southern	Asia	(66	000).	Among	the	developing	regions,	the	fewest	maternal	deaths	(an	estimated	
500)	occurred	in	Oceania.	
The	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	is	estimated	at	1	in	36	in	sub-Saharan	Africa,	contrasting	
sharply	with	approximately	1	in	4900	in	developed	countries.	Developing	regions	with	the	lowest	
lifetime	risk	are	Eastern	Asia	(1	in	2300)	and	Caucasus	and	Central	Asia	(1	in	1100).	
Table	3	shows	the	number	of	maternal	deaths,	MMR	and	percentage	of	AIDS-related	indirect	
maternal	deaths	by	MDG	region	in	2015.	Annex	7	provides	the	percentage	of	AIDS-related	indirect	
maternal	deaths	by	country,	for	countries	with	an	HIV	prevalence	of	5%	or	more	among	adults	aged	

																																																																				
12
 	 Extremely	high	MMR	(maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births)	is	considered	to	be	≥	1000,	very	high	MMR	is	500–999,	
high	MMR	is	300–499,	moderate	MMR	is	100–299,	and	low	MMR	is	<	100.	



                                                                                                                           18
15–49	years	between	1990	and	2015.	Sub-Saharan	Africa	accounts	for	the	largest	proportion	(85%)	
of	the	nearly	4700	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	globally	in	2015.	The	proportion	of	
AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	in	sub-Saharan	Africa	is	2.0%,	yielding	an	AIDS-related	
indirect	MMR	for	sub-Saharan	Africa	of	11	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births.	Without	HIV,	the	
MMR	for	sub-Saharan	Africa	in	2015	would	be	535	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births.	Two	
other	regions	are	estimated	to	have	had	more	than	100	maternal	deaths	attributed	to	HIV	in	2015:	
Southern	Asia	(310)	and	South-eastern	Asia	(150).	
	
Table	3.	Estimates	of	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	number	of	
maternal	deaths	and	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths,	by	United	Nations	Millennium	Development	
Goal	(MDG)	region,	2015	
                                                a
    MDG	region	                             MMR 	     Number	of	      AIDS-related	    Number	of	 Percentage	of	
                                                                                  c
                                                       maternal	     indirect	MMR 	   AIDS-related	 AIDS-related	
                                                             b
                                                       deaths 	                         indirect	     indirect	
                                                                                       maternal	          maternal	
                                                                                        deaths	 	          deaths	

    World                                      216	       303	000	             3	             4	700	            1.6	

                                d
    Developed regions                           12	         1	700	             1	                   87	         5.1	


    Developing regions                         239	       302	000	             4	             4	600	            1.5	

                            e
     Northern Africa                            70	         3	100	             0	                   10	         0.3	

                                        f
     Sub-Saharan Africa                        546	       201	000	            11	             4	000	            2.0	

                    g
     Eastern Asia                               27	         4	800	             0	                   43	         0.9	


       Eastern Asia
                                                              378	             0	                    0	
       excluding China                          43	                                                             0.0	

                        h
     Southern Asia                             176	        66	000	             1	               310	            0.5	

       Southern Asia
                                                           21	000	             0	                   25	
       excluding India                         180	                                                             0.1	

                                    i
     South-eastern Asia                        110	        13	000	             1	               150	            1.2	

                    j
     Western Asia                               91	         4	700	             0	                    5	         0.1	


     Caucasus and Central
            k
                                                              610	             0	                    8	
     Asia                                       33	                                                             1.3	




                                                                                                                 19
                                           a
    MDG	region	                    MMR 	         Number	of	         AIDS-related	      Number	of	 Percentage	of	
                                                                                c
                                                  maternal	        indirect	MMR 	     AIDS-related	 AIDS-related	
                                                        b
                                                  deaths 	                              indirect	     indirect	
                                                                                        maternal	     maternal	
                                                                                         deaths	 	     deaths	

     Latin America and the
                                                          7	300	              1	                    71	
     Caribbean                             67	                                                                     0.9	

                        l
       Latin Americai                      60	            6	000	              1	                    51	            0.9	

                   m
       Caribbean                          175	            1	300	              3	                    20	            1.5	

               n
     Oceania                              187	              500	              1	                     3	            0.6	

a.	MMR	estimates	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–999	rounded	to	
nearest	1;	and	≥	1000	rounded	to	nearest	10.	
b.	Numbers	of	maternal	deaths	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–
999	rounded	to	nearest	10;	1000–9999	rounded	to	nearest	100;	and	≥	10	000	rounded	to	nearest	1000.	
c.	According	to	the	Joint	United	Nations	Programme	on	HIV/AIDS	(UNAIDS),	AIDS-related	deaths	(including	AIDS-related	
indirect	maternal	deaths)	include	the	estimated	number	of	deaths	related	to	HIV	infection,	including	deaths	that	occur	
before	reaching	the	clinical	stage	classified	as	AIDS.	
d–n	see	footnotes	for	Table	2.	

	
Annexes	8,	9,	10,	11,	12,	13,	14,	15,	16	and	17	present	the	MMR	point-estimates,	range	of	
uncertainty,	numbers	of	maternal	deaths	and	lifetime	risk	for	WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA,	World	Bank	
Group	and	UNPD	regions,	respectively.	
	
Country-level	estimates	
Annex	7	provides	each	country’s	2015	maternal	mortality	indicator	point-estimates,	and	MMR	
uncertainty	intervals.	Figure	1	displays	a	map	with	all	countries	shaded	according	to	MMR	levels.	
	
	                                     	




                                                                                                                    20
Figure	1.	Maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR,	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births),	2015	




                                                                                                        	




	
Sierra	Leone	is	estimated	to	have	the	highest	MMR	at	1360	(UI	999	to	1980)	deaths	per	100	000	live	
births	in	2015.	Eighteen	other	countries,	all	in	sub-Saharan	Africa,	are	estimated	to	have	very	high	
MMR	in	2015,	with	estimates	ranging	from	999	down	to	500:	Central	African	Republic	(882;	UI	508	
to	1500),	Chad	(856;	UI	560	to	1350),	Nigeria	(814;	UI	596	to	1180),	South	Sudan	(789;	UI	523	to	
1150),	Somalia	(732;	UI	361	to	1390),	Liberia	(725;	UI	527	to	1030),	Burundi	(712;	UI	471	to	1050),	
Gambia	(706;	UI	484	to	1030),	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo	(693;	UI	509	to	1010),	Guinea	(679;	
UI	504	to	927),	Côte	d’Ivoire	(645;	UI	458	to	909),	Malawi	(634;	UI	422	to	1080),	Mauritania	(602;	
UI	399	to	984),	Cameroon	(596;	UI	440	to	881),	Mali	(587;	UI	448	to	823),	Niger	(553;	UI	411	to	752),	
Guinea-Bissau	(549;	UI	273	to	1090)	and	Kenya	(510;	UI	344	to	754).	Only	two	countries	in	
sub-Saharan	Africa	–	Mauritius	(53;	UI	38	to	77)	and	Cabo	Verde	(42;	UI	20	to	95)	–	have	low	MMR.	
Three	countries	outside	the	sub-Saharan	African	region	have	high	MMR:	Afghanistan	(396;	UI	253	to	
620),	Yemen	(385;	UI	274	to	582)	and	Haiti	(359;	UI	236	to	601).	 	
Nigeria	and	India	account	for	over	one	third	of	all	global	maternal	deaths	in	2015,	with	an	
approximate	58	000	(UI	42	000	to	84	000)	maternal	deaths	(19%)	and	45	000	(UI	36	000	to	56	000)	
maternal	deaths	(15%),	respectively.	Ten	countries	account	for	nearly	59%	of	global	maternal	
deaths.	In	addition	to	Nigeria	and	India,	they	are	(in	descending	order	of	numbers	of	maternal	
deaths):	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo	(22	000;	UI	16	000	to	33	000),	Ethiopia	(11	000;	UI	7900	
to	18	000),	Pakistan	(9700;	UI	6100	to	15	000),	United	Republic	of	Tanzania	(8200;	UI	5800	to	
12	000),	Kenya	(8000;	UI	5400	to	12	000),	Indonesia	(6400;	UI	4700	to	9000),	Uganda	(5700;	UI	4100	
to	8200)	and	Bangladesh	(5500;	UI	3900	to	8800).	
Regarding	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality,	the	two	countries	with	the	highest	estimates	are	

                                                                                                   21
Sierra	Leone	with	an	approximate	lifetime	risk	of	1	in	17,	and	Chad	with	an	approximate	lifetime	risk	
of	1	in	18.	The	estimated	risk	in	high-income	countries	is	1	in	3300	in	comparison	with	1	in	41	in	
low-income	countries.	 	
Annex	7	presents	the	percentage	of	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	by	country	for	countries	
with	an	HIV	prevalence	of	at	least	5.0%	among	adults	aged	15–49	years,	between	1990	and	2015.	
Although	at	a	regional	level	the	overall	proportions	of	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	are	
relatively	small,	for	countries	with	high	HIV	prevalence	they	are	substantial.	In	2015,	there	are	five	
countries	where	10%	or	more	of	maternal	deaths	are	estimated	to	be	AIDS-related	indirect	
maternal	deaths:	South	Africa	(32%),	Swaziland	(19%),	Botswana	(18%),	Lesotho	(13%)	and	
Mozambique	(11%).	



3.2	 Trends	in	MMR	from	1990	to	2015	
An	estimated	global	total	of	13.6	million	women	have	died	in	the	25	years	between	1990	and	2015	due	
to	maternal	causes.	Over	the	course	of	that	time,	however,	the	world	has	made	steady	progress	in	
reducing	maternal	mortality.	The	global	MMR	has	fallen	by	44%	(UI	33.1%	to	47.5%),	from	the	1990	
level	of	385	(UI	359	to	427)	to	the	2015	level	of	216	(UI	207	to	249).	This	translates	to	a	decrease	of	over	
43%	in	the	estimated	annual	number	of	maternal	deaths,	from	532	000	(UI	496	000	to	590	000)	in	1990	
to	303	000	(UI	291	000	to	349000)	in	2015,	and	a	more	than	halving	of	the	approximate	global	lifetime	
risk	of	a	maternal	death	from	1	in	73	to	1	in	180.	Worldwide,	MMR	declined	by	an	average	of	3.0%	(UI	
2.1%	to	3.4%)	per	year	between	2005	and	2015,	more	than	doubling	the	estimated	average	annual	
decline	of	1.2%	(UI	0.5%	to	2.0%)	between	1990	and	2000.	Table	4	compares	estimates	of	MMR	and	
numbers	of	maternal	deaths	at	the	global	and	regional	levels	for	1990	and	2015.	




                                                                                                         22
Table	 4.	 Comparison	 of	 maternal	 mortality	 ratio	 (MMR,	 maternal	 deaths	 per	 100	000	 live	 births)	 and	
number	 of	 maternal	 deaths,	 by	 United	 Nations	 Millennium	 Development	 Goal	 (MDG)	 region,	 1990	 and	
2015	
MDG	region	                           1990	                    2015	              %	change	 Average	 Average	 Average	
                                                                             in	MMR	 annual	%	 annual	%	 annual	%	
                                                                            between	 change	in	 change	in	 change	in	
                                 MMRa	     Maternal	    MMR	      Maternal	
                                           deathsb	                deaths	
                                                                            1990	and	   MMR	      MMR	       MMR	
                                                                                  c
                                                                              2015 	  between	 between	 between	
                                                                                      1990	and	 1990	and	 2000	and	
                                                                                        2015	     2000	      2015	

World                               385	     532	000	     216	         303	000	          44	      2.3	     1.2	        3.0	

Developed
             d
regions                              23	       3	500	      12	           1	700	          48	      2.6	     3.3	        2.2	

Developing
regions                             430	     529	000	     239	         302	000	          44	      2.4	     1.3	        3.1	

                             e
  Northern Africa                   171	       6	400	      70	           3	100	          59	      3.6	     4.1	        3.2	

  Sub-Saharan
             f
  Africa                            987	     223	000	     546	         201	000	          45	      2.4	     1.5	        2.9	

                 g
  Eastern Asia                       95	      26	000	      27	           4	800	          72	      5.0	     4.8	        5.0	

    Eastern Asia
    excluding
    China                            51	         590	      43	             380	          16	      0.7	    –3.0	        3.1	

                         h
  Southern Asia                     538	     210	000	     176	          66	000	          67	      4.5	     3.6	        5.1	

    Southern Asia
    excluding
    India                           495	      57	800	     180	          21	000	          64	      4.1	     2.5	        5.1	

  South-eastern
         i
  Asia                              320	      39	000	     110	          13	000	          66	      4.3	     4.7	        4.0	

                     j
  Western Asia                      160	       6	700	      91	           4	700	          43	      2.2	     2.7	        1.9	

  Caucasus and
                 k
  Central Asia                       69	       1	300	      33	             610	          52	      3.0	     3.1	        2.9	

  Latin America
  and the                           135	      16	000	      67	           7	300	          50	      2.8	     3.1	        2.6	



                                                                                                                  23
    MDG	region	                   1990	                    2015	        %	change	       Average	         Average	      Average	
                                                                         in	MMR	       annual	%	        annual	%	     annual	%	
                                                                        between	       change	in	       change	in	    change	in	
                           MMRa	       Maternal	    MMR	      Maternal	
                                       deathsb	                deaths	
                                                                        1990	and	        MMR	             MMR	          MMR	
                                                                          2015c	       between	         between	      between	
                                                                                       1990	and	        1990	and	     2000	and	
                                                                                         2015	            2000	         2015	

     Caribbean

                       l
       Latin America            124	      14	000	      60	         6	000	        52	             2.9	          3.1	          2.8	

                   m
       Caribbean                276	       2	300	     175	         1	300	        37	             1.8	          2.5	          1.4	

               n
     Oceania                    391	         780	     187	          500	         52	             3.0	          2.9	          3.0	

a.	MMR	estimates	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–999	rounded	to	
nearest	1;	and	≥	1000	rounded	to	nearest	10.	
b.	Numbers	of	maternal	deaths	have	been	rounded	according	to	the	following	scheme:	<	100	rounded	to	nearest	1;	100–
999	rounded	to	nearest	10;	1000–9999	rounded	to	nearest	100;	and	≥	10	000	rounded	to	nearest	1000.	
c.	Overall	change.	
d–n	see	footnote	in	Table	2.	
	

Regional	estimates	
Estimated	MMR	declined	across	all	MDG	regions	between	1990	and	2015,	although	the	magnitude	of	
the	reduction	differed	substantially	between	regions	(Annex	18).	When	interpreting	change	in	MMR,	
one	should	take	into	consideration	that	it	is	easier	to	reduce	MMR	when	levels	are	high	than	when	
they	are	low.	The	highest	decline	between	1990	and	2015	was	observed	in	Eastern	Asia	(72%),	
followed	by	Southern	Asia	(67%),	South-eastern	Asia	(66%),	Northern	Africa	(59%),	Caucasus	and	
Central	Asia	(52%),	Oceania	(52%),	Latin	America	and	the	Caribbean	(50%),	sub-Saharan	Africa	(45%)	
and	Western	Asia	(43%).	The	decline	in	developed	regions	was	48%.	 	
In	the	developing	regions,	the	annual	rate	of	MMR	reduction	was	1.3%	(UI	0.6%	to	2.0%)	between	
1990	and	2000,	and	progress	accelerated	to	an	annual	rate	of	3.1%	(UI	2.2%	to	3.5%)	between	2000	
and	2015.	Overall,	this	translates	to	an	estimated	2.4%	(UI	1.7%	to	2.7%)	average	yearly	reduction	over	
the	past	25	years.	Eastern	Asia	experienced	the	highest	estimated	annual	rate	of	decline	with	an	
average	yearly	MMR	decrease	of	5.0%	(UI	4.0%	to	6.0%)	between	1990	and	2015.	The	lowest	
estimated	annual	rate	of	decline	occurred	in	Western	Asia,	where	MMR	decreased	by	2.2%	(UI	0.8%	to	
3.4%)	per	year	during	the	same	period.	
In	1990	there	were	approximately	1500	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	in	sub-Saharan	
Africa.	Following	the	trend	of	the	epidemic,	these	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths	increased	
in	number	until	2005	when	there	were	an	estimated	12	370	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	deaths,	
before	decline	to	an	estimated	4700	in	2015.	
Annexes	8,	10,	12,	14	and	16	present	the	MMR	trends,	reduction	in	MMR	between	1990	and	2015,	
range	of	uncertainty	for	reduction	estimates,	and	average	annual	change	in	MMR	between	1990	
and	2015	for	WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA,	World	Bank	Group	and	UNPD	regions,	respectively.	 	

                                                                                                                        24
	   	




        25
Country	estimates	
Annex	19	provides	information	on	MMR	trends	from	1990	to	2015	for	each	country.	Assessments	of	
national-level	progress	towards	achieving	MDG	5A13	 (see	categories	explained	in	Box	5)	were	
conducted	for	those	95	countries	that	started	the	evaluation	period	in	1990	with	the	highest	MMR	
(100	or	greater).	This	cut-off	was	chosen	in	order	to	focus	the	assessment	of	progress	on	those	
countries	with	the	greatest	maternal	mortality	burden,	and	due	to	the	difficulty	of	reducing	MMR	
further	in	countries	where	levels	were	already	relatively	low	in	1990.	Of	these	95	countries,	results	
strongly14	 indicate	that	58	experienced	a	decline	in	MMR	between	1990	and	2015.	For	the	remaining	
26	countries,	it	cannot	be	confidently	concluded	whether	MMR	increased	or	decreased,	however	
point-estimates	suggest	that	22	of	them	likely	experienced	a	decrease	and	4	likely	experienced	an	
increase. 	

Point-estimates	indicate	that	nine	countries	achieved	at	least	a	75%	reduction	in	MMR	over	the	
25-year	period,	meaning	that	they	achieved	MDG	5A.	These	countries	are:	Maldives	(90%	reduction	
in	MMR),	Bhutan	(84%),	Cambodia	(84%),	Cabo	Verde	(84%),	the	Islamic	Republic	of	Iran	(80%),	
Timor-Leste	(80%),	the	Lao	People’s	Democratic	Republic	(78%),	Rwanda	(78%)	and	Mongolia	
(76%).	
	

3.3	 Comparison	with	previous	maternal	mortality	estimates	
The	results	described	in	this	report	are	the	most	accurate	maternal	mortality	estimates	yet	for	all	
years	in	the	1990–2015	period.	Therefore,	these	2015	estimates	should	be	used	for	the	
interpretation	of	trends	in	MMR	from	1990	to	2015,	rather	than	extrapolating	estimates	from	
previously	published	estimates.	As	explained	in	Chapter	2,	these	estimates	were	generated	using	an	
improved	approach	that	built	directly	upon	the	methods	used	to	produce	previously	published	
estimates.	In	addition	to	the	refined	model,	updated	data	and	a	larger	overall	global	database	
informed	the	2015	estimates,	as	compared	to	those	previously	published.	Notably,	the	publication	
of	new	population-based	studies	from	the	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo,	Nigeria	and,	to	a	
lesser	extent,	Sierra	Leone	all	indicated	much	higher	MMR	than	was	previously	estimated	for	those	
counties.	Given	the	large	populations	in	the	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo	and	Nigeria,	this	has	
impacted	the	global-level	estimates.	The	updated	methodology	adds	refinements	that	allow	
country-level	data	to	drive	estimates	as	much	as	possible	(rather	than	the	covariates	GDP,	fertility	
rate	and	skilled	attendants	at	birth	coverage),	and	ensure	that	higher	quality	data	influences	
estimates	more	than	lower	quality	data.	




																																																																				
13
      Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
14
     	 With	a	confidence	level	of	≥	90%.	



                                                                                                   26
4	   Assessing	progress	and	setting	a	trajectory	towards	ending	
preventable	maternal	mortality	

4.1	 Millennium	Development	Goal	(MDG)	5	outcomes	
With	the	aim	of	improving	maternal	health,	MDG	5	established	a	target	of	reducing	the	1990	global	
maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR)	by	75%	by	2015	(MDG	5A).	Assessing	country-level	progress	
towards	this	target	requires	examining	estimated	reductions,	while	also	taking	into	consideration	
the	range	of	uncertainty	around	those	estimates.	For	example,	Nigeria’s	estimated	MMR	reduction	
between	1990	and	2015	is	39.6%,	but	the	80%	uncertainty	interval	(UI)	for	that	point-estimate	spans	
zero	(–5%	to	56.3%),	which	implies	that	there	is	a	greater	than	10%	chance	that	no	reduction	in	
Nigeria’s	MMR	has	occurred.	There	is,	therefore,	not	enough	reliable	information	on	maternal	
mortality	in	Nigeria	to	conclude	with	confidence	that	the	country	has	made	any	progress	towards	
the	MDG	5A	target.	Due	to	this	need	to	consider	estimation	uncertainty	when	evaluating	progress,	
the	95	countries	with	an	MMR	above	10015	 in	1990	have	been	categorized	based	on	both	MMR	
reduction	point-estimates	and	80%	UI.	Box	5	lists	the	categories	and	describes	the	criteria	used	to	
assign	countries	to	categories.	Countries	were	placed	into	the	highest	category	for	which	they	met	
the	criteria.	
	
Box 5
Categorization of countries based on evidence for progress in
reducing the MMR between 1990 and 2015

        Category	                                                      Criteria	

     Achieved	MDG	5A	                                 • MMR	reduction	point-estimate	of	≥	75%	

                                                   • MMR	reduction	point-estimate	of	≥	50%	
     Making	progress	                                                 AND	
                                               • ≥	90%	probability	of	an	MMR	reduction	of	≥	25%	
                                                   • MMR	reduction	point-estimate	of	≥	25%	
    Insufficient	progress	                                            AND	
                                                • ≥	90%	probability	of	an	MMR	reduction	of	≥	0%	
                                                 • MMR	reduction	point-estimate	of	<	25%	
                                                                     OR	
        No	progress	                       • a	90%	probability	that	there	has	been	no	reduction	in	
                                                 MMR,	or	there	has	been	an	increase	in	MMR	

	
Among	those	95	countries,	the	9	countries	with	an	estimated	MMR	reduction	between	1990	and	
2015	of	75%	or	more	have	achieved	MDG	5A	–	they	have	been	placed	in	the	first	category.	The	
second	category,	those	countries	that	are	making	progress,	includes	39	countries	with	an	estimated	
MMR	reduction	of	50%	or	more,	and	at	least	a	90%	chance	that	the	true	reduction	was	above	25%.	
The	third	category,	countries	making	insufficient	progress,	comprises	21	countries	with	an	


																																																																				
15
  	 The	MMR	cut-off	of	100	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births	was	chosen	in	order	to	focus	the	assessment	of	
progress	on	countries	that	started	with	a	relatively	high	level	of	maternal	mortality	in	1990,	and	due	to	the	difficulty	of	
reducing	MMR	further	in	countries	where	levels	were	already	relatively	low	(<	100)	in	1990.	



                                                                                                                               27
estimated	MMR	reduction	of	25%	or	more,	and	at	least	a	90%	chance	that	the	true	reduction	was	
above	zero.	The	fourth	and	final	category	includes	26	countries	that	have	made	no	progress;	they	
have	an	estimated	MMR	reduction	of	less	than	25%,	or	a	greater	than	10%	chance	that	no	reduction	
has	occurred	at	all.	Given	the	variability	of	maternal	mortality	reporting	methods	and	data	quality,	
these	categories	provide	the	best	possible	assessment	of	likely	performance	on	the	MDG	5A	target.	
Annex	18	displays	category	labels	for	all	95	countries.	
The	nine	countries	which	are	considered	to	have	achieved	MDG	5A	based	on	point-estimates	are:	
Bhutan,	Cambodia,	Cabo	Verde,	the	Islamic	Republic	of	Iran,	the	Lao	People’s	Democratic	Republic,	
Maldives,	Mongolia,	Rwanda	and	Timor-Leste.	Yet,	among	these	countries	there	is	substantial	
variation	in	the	level	of	certainty	of	this	achievement.	As	indicated	by	uncertainty	intervals	(only	
Cambodia	and	Maldives	have	a	greater	than	90%	likelihood	of	having	a	true	MMR	reduction	of	75%	
or	more.	For	the	other	seven,	a	10%	or	greater	chance	of	not	having	achieved	the	target	persists.	
The	consideration	of	uncertainty	regarding	rates	of	reduction	is	intended	to	demonstrate	the	need	
for	more	rigorous	data	collection.	Differences	in	the	sizes	of	UIs	are	due	to	differences	in	the	quality	
of	data	used	to	inform	estimates.	For	example,	the	Islamic	Republic	of	Iran	and	Maldives	had	
substantial	maternal	mortality	data	from	civil	registration	and	vital	statistics	(CRVS)	systems	and	
surveillance	studies	available	for	inclusion	in	the	estimation	model,	while	others,	such	as	Cabo	
Verde,	Lao	People’s	Democratic	Republic	and	Timor-Leste,	had	little	to	no	country-level	data.	
While	no	MDG	region	achieved	the	target	of	reducing	maternal	mortality	by	75%	(see	Table	4),	all	
demonstrated	substantial	progress,	particularly	after	announcement	of	the	MDGs	in	2000	–	the	
estimated	global	2000–2015	annual	reduction	rate	of	3%	was	significantly	increased	in	comparison	
to	the	1990–2000	rate	of	1.2%.	This	acceleration	of	progress	reflects	a	widespread	escalation	of	
efforts	to	reduce	maternal	mortality,	stimulated	by	MDG	5.	Maternal	mortality	has	proved	to	be	a	
valuable	indicator	both	for	tracking	development	progress	and	for	spurring	action	to	improve	
maternal	health.	
	

4.2	 Looking	towards	the	future	
The	Sustainable	Development	Goals	(SDGs)	now	call	for	an	acceleration	of	current	progress	in	order	
to	achieve	a	global	MMR	of	70	maternal	deaths	per	100	000	live	births,	or	less,	by	2030,	working	
towards	a	vision	of	ending	all	preventable	maternal	mortality.	Achieving	this	global	goal	will	require	
countries	to	reduce	their	MMR	by	at	least	7.5%	each	year	between	2016	and	2030.	Based	on	their	
point-estimates	for	average	annual	reduction,	three	countries	with	an	MMR	greater	than	100	nearly	
reached	or	exceeded	this	reduction	rate	between	2000	and	2015:	Cambodia	(7.4%;	UI	5.4%	to	
9.5%),	Rwanda	(8.4%;	UI	6.5%	to	10.6%)	and	Timor-Leste	(7.8%;	UI	5.7%	to	10.2	%).	The	recent	
success	of	these	countries	in	rapidly	reducing	maternal	mortality	demonstrates	that	this	goal	is	
achievable.	 	
	
    Global	targets	for	ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	(EPMM):	By	2030,	every	country	
    should	reduce	its	maternal	mortality	ratio	(MMR)	by	at	least	two	thirds	from	the	2010	
    baseline,	and	no	country	should	have	an	MMR	higher	than	140	deaths	per	100 000	live	births	
    (twice	the	global	target)	(4).



                                                                                                      28
	
While	differing	contexts	make	issuing	prescribed	reduction	strategies	impossible,	examining	the	
strategies	employed	by	successful	countries	can	illuminate	routes	that	other	countries	may	find	
useful.	However,	the	30	countries	with	the	highest	MMRs	in	2015	will	have	to	achieve	substantially	
higher	annual	rates	of	reduction	to	attain	MMRs	below	140	in	2030.	
Projections	indicate	that	accomplishing	this	target	will	result	in	over	60%	fewer	deaths	in	2030	than	
the	estimated	number	in	2015,	and	will	save	a	cumulative	2.5	million	women’s	lives	between	2016	
and	2030,	as	compared	to	a	situation	in	which	current	reduction	trajectories	remain	unchanged	(14).	 	
	

Strategies	for	success	and	challenges	to	address	
Drivers	of	success	in	reducing	maternal	mortality	range	from	making	improvements	at	the	provider	
and	health	system	level	to	implementing	interventions	aimed	at	reducing	social	and	structural	
barriers.	Box	6	describes	several	key	strategies	used	by	countries	that	have	demonstrated	success	in	
improving	maternal	survival.	These	strategies	are	situated	within	a	recently	developed	strategic	
framework	for	policy	and	programme	planning	that	is	informed	by	the	guiding	principles	of:	
(1)	empowering	women,	girls	and	communities,	(2)	protecting	and	supporting	the	mother–baby	
dyad,	(3)	ensuring	country	ownership,	leadership	and	supportive	legal,	technical	and	financial	
frameworks,	and	(4)	applying	a	human	rights	framework	to	ensure	that	high-quality	reproductive,	
maternal	and	newborn	health	care	is	available,	accessible	and	acceptable	to	all	who	need	it	(4).	
	                                	




                                                                                                  29
	
    Box 6
    Strategies driving success in reducing maternal mortality


     WHO’s	recently	published	Strategies	towards	ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	
     (EPMM)	establishes	a	strategic	framework	that	specifies	five	objectives	(4).	Below,	for	each	
     of	these	objectives,	examples	are	presented	of	strategies	implemented	by	countries	that	
     have	made	significant	reductions	in	maternal	mortality:	
     1.	Addressing	inequities	in	access	to	and	quality	of	sexual,	reproductive,	maternal	and	
     newborn	health	care	
     • Ethiopia	trained	women’s	association	members	in	strategies	for	addressing	social	and	
       structural	barriers	to	sexual,	reproductive,	maternal	and	newborn	health,	and	also	
       trained	health	managers	on	gender	mainstreaming	in	their	areas	of	work	(25).	
     • Viet	Nam	developed	sexual	and	reproductive	health	services	specifically	for	adolescents	
       and	youths	(25).	
     2.	Ensuring	universal	health	coverage	for	comprehensive	sexual,	reproductive,	maternal	
     and	newborn	health	care	
     • Rwanda	used	a	community-based	health	insurance	scheme	to	ensure	vulnerable	
       populations’	access	to	maternal	and	child	health	services	(26).	
     • Bangladesh	expanded	access	to	maternity	services	in	new,	private-sector	health-care	
       facilities	(27).	
     3.	Addressing	all	causes	of	maternal	mortality,	reproductive	and	maternal	morbidities,	
     and	related	disabilities	
     • Nepal	expanded	access	to	modern	family	planning	methods,	and	increased	school	
       attendance	and	literacy	rates	among	women	and	girls	(28).	
     • The	Maldives	strengthened	emergency	obstetric	care,	including	basic	care	and	
       comprehensive	emergency	obstetric	care	throughout	the	country’s	health	system	(29).	
     4.	Strengthening	heath	systems	to	respond	to	the	needs	and	priorities	of	women	and	
     girls	
     • Indonesia	invested	in	the	training	of	midwives	and	the	creation	of	dedicated,	village-level	
       delivery	points	for	maternal	health	services	(30).	
     • Cambodia	invested	in	transport	infrastructure	and	construction	of	health-care	facilities	
       staffed	with	an	expanded	cadre	of	trained	midwives	throughout	the	country,	including	
       maternity	waiting	houses	and	extended	delivery	rooms	(31).	
     5.	Ensuring	accountability	to	improve	quality	of	care	and	equity	
     • Mongolia	introduced	procedures	at	the	facility,	provincial	and	ministerial	levels	to	ensure	
       maternal	deaths	were	reported	within	a	24-hour	period	and	transmitted	to	the	Ministry	
       of	Health	for	review	(32).	
     • India	developed	guidelines	for	maternal	death	audits	and	near-miss	analyses	(25).


	
Examining	countries	that	experienced	little	to	no	reduction	in	maternal	mortality	since	1990	reveals	
several	prevalent	factors	that	impede	progress.	Among	the	27	countries	categorized	as	likely	having	
made	“no	progress”,	23	are	particularly	impacted	by	the	HIV	epidemic.	Despite	the	recent	positive	
influence	of	antiretroviral	medications	on	AIDS-related	indirect	maternal	mortality,	overall	the	
epidemic	poses	immense	challenges	to	maternal	mortality	reduction	due	to	the	strain	it	places	on	


                                                                                                      30
health	systems	and	infrastructure,	in	addition	to	its	direct	health	impacts.	Emergent	humanitarian	
settings	and	situations	of	conflict,	post-conflict	and	disaster	also	significantly	hinder	progress.	
Indeed,	76%	of	high	maternal	mortality	countries	(those	with	MMR	≥	300)	are	defined	as	fragile	
states	(33).	In	such	situations,	the	breakdown	of	health	systems	can	cause	a	dramatic	rise	in	deaths	
due	to	complications	that	would	be	easily	treatable	under	stable	conditions.	At	the	peak	of	the	
2014–2015	Ebola	virus	disease	outbreak	in	Liberia,	for	example,	maternal	health	service	utilization	
dropped	precipitously	and	common	obstetric	complications	went	untreated	out	of	fear	of	disease	
transmission	(34).	Compounding	the	tragedy	of	lives	lost	in	crisis	settings,	many	of	these	deaths	go	
unrecorded.	Settings	where	the	needs	are	greatest	are	also	those	with	the	least	evidence	and	
analysis.	In	countries	designated	as	fragile	states,	the	estimated	lifetime	risk	of	maternal	mortality	
is	1	in	54.	
Many	of	the	most	vulnerable	populations	are	not	represented	in	the	current	global	data.	Moreover,	
even	within	countries	with	good	overall	progress	indicators,	the	optimistic	numbers	often	mask	
extreme	disparities.	Australia,	for	example,	determined	through	a	specialized	study	that	the	MMR	
among	Aboriginal	and	Torres	Strait	Islander	women	was	over	twice	that	of	non-indigenous	women.	
Marginalized	subpopulations	often	lack	representation	in	the	data,	and	disparities	may	not	be	
evident	without	disaggregating	data.	This	lack	of	accurate	information	makes	it	nearly	impossible	
to	determine	how	to	best	address	the	maternal	health	needs	among	the	most	vulnerable.	
An	emerging	challenge	is	increasing	late	maternal	mortality,	a	phenomenon	referred	to	as	part	of	
the	“obstetric	transition”	(35).	Late	maternal	mortality	refers	to	maternal	deaths	that	occur	more	
than	42	days	but	less	than	one	year	after	termination	of	pregnancy.	As	health	systems	improve	and	
are	better	able	to	manage	immediate	childbirth	complications,	deaths	within	the	first	48	hours	of	
delivery	may	be	averted,	but	the	proportion	of	morbidity	and	mortality	caused	by	late	maternal	
sequelae	or	late	maternal	complications	can	also	increase.	This	trend	has	been	observed	in	several	
countries,	such	as	Mexico	where	late	maternal	deaths	account	for	up	to	15%	of	overall	maternal	
mortality	(36).	Further	analyses	of	this	subset	of	deaths	is	warranted.	Monitoring	all	maternal	
deaths	thus	proves	increasingly	important	for	ensuring	accurate	documentation	to	detect	shifting	
dynamics	in	maternal	health.	

Need	for	improved	measurement	and	data	
Impressive	efforts	to	establish	and	improve	CRVS	systems	or	implement	alternative	methods	of	
rigorously	recording	maternal	deaths	have	been	made	in	recent	years.	Box	7	provides	examples	of	
several	methods	countries	are	using	to	dramatically	improve	data	collection.	The	high-quality	data	
generated	even	prompted	the	use	for	this	report	of	a	refined	estimation	methodology,	one	that	
fully	utilizes	country-level	data	to	produce	a	more	accurate	and	realistic	picture	of	global	maternal	
mortality	trends	than	ever	before.	
	                                  	




                                                                                                     31
	
Box 7
Tools for improving data collection
Confidential	Enquiry	into	Maternal	Deaths	(CEMD)	
Within	established	civil	registration	and	vital	statistics	(CRVS)	systems,	CEMD	facilitates	investigation	
of	and	correction	for	underreporting	of	maternal	deaths	due	to	misclassification.	Developed	in	
England	and	Wales	and	conducted	continuously	there	since	1952	(37),	CEMD	involves	having	
multiple	experts	review	all	potential	maternal	mortality	cases	in	detail,	assessing	the	accuracy	of	
classifications	applied	as	well	as	examining	the	circumstances	of	the	death.	It	thus	also	helps	to	
identify	areas	for	action	to	prevent	future	deaths.	Kazakhstan	and	South	Africa	both	recently	
conducted	CEMD	studies,	identifying	29%	and	40%	more	maternal	deaths,	respectively,	than	were	
initially	recorded	in	the	CRVS	system.	
Maternal	Death	Surveillance	and	Response	(MDSR)	
At	the	health-care	facility	level,	MDSR	systems	promote	a	continuous	action	cycle	for	monitoring	of	
maternal	deaths,	identifying	trends	in	and	causes	of	maternal	mortality,	and	acting	to	prevent	future	
deaths	(38).	Information	generated	by	MDSR	can	be	communicated	upwards	from	facilities,	to	be	
aggregated	at	the	regional	and	national	levels.	Where	national	CRVS	systems	have	not	yet	been	
established,	MDSR	serves	as	a	building	block	for	a	comprehensive,	national-level	data	collection	
system.	Countries	that	have	recently	established,	strengthened	or	expanded	MDSR	systems	include	
Cameroon,	the	Democratic	Republic	of	the	Congo,	India,	Morocco,	Nigeria	and	Togo	(25).	
Digital	innovations	
Given	the	high	percentage	of	births	and	maternal	deaths	that	occur	outside	of	health-care	facilities,	
there	is	a	critical	need	to	obtain	and	communicate	vital	events	data	from	the	community	level.	Digital	
solutions	delivered	via	mobile	devices	(mHealth	tools)	that	connect	frontline	health	workers	to	
national	health	systems	can	simultaneously	improve	health-care	service	delivery,	strengthen	
accountability,	and	generate	real-time	data	(39).	A	growing	proportion	of	these	digital	tools	focus	on	
registration	of	pregnancies	and	notification	of	births	and	deaths,	linking	information	directly	to	
facility-,	district-	and	national-level	health	management	and	vital	events	statistical	systems	(40).	One	
example	is	the	Open	Smart	Register	Platform,	or	OpenSRP	(41).	Pilot	tests	of	OpenSRP	and	similar	
digital	tools	are	under	way	in	Bangladesh,	India,	Indonesia,	Pakistan	and	South	Africa.	

	
Yet,	while	the	estimates	presented	in	this	report	provide	valuable	policy	and	programme	planning	
guidance,	they	cannot	change	the	fact	that	many	women	who	die	from	maternal	causes	still	go	
uncounted.	Taking	effective	action	to	prevent	future	maternal	deaths	requires	knowing	who	has	
died	and	why	they	died.	Respect	for	human	rights	and	human	life	necessitates	improved	
record-keeping	so	that	all	births,	deaths	and	causes	of	death	are	officially	accounted	for.	For	these	
reasons,	improving	metrics,	measurement	systems	and	data	quality	is	a	crucial	cross-cutting	action	
for	all	strategies	aimed	at	ensuring	maternal	survival	(4).	
The	broad	uncertainty	intervals	associated	with	the	estimates	presented	throughout	this	report	
directly	reflect	the	critical	need	for	better	data	on	maternal	mortality.	Governments	are	called	upon	
to	establish	well	functioning	CRVS	systems	with	accurate	attribution	of	cause	of	death.	
Improvements	in	measurement	must	be	driven	by	action	at	the	country	level,	with	governments	
creating	systems	to	capture	data	specific	to	their	information	needs;	systems	that	must	also	meet	
the	standards	required	for	international	comparability.	Globally,	standardized	methods	for	

                                                                                                       32
preventing	underreporting	should	be	established	to	enhance	international	comparability.	 	
Finally,	data	that	can	be	disaggregated	to	examine	trends	and	measure	the	mortality	burden	within	
the	most	vulnerable	and	most	frequently	overlooked	populations	are	critical	for	implementing	
strategies	to	address	inequities	and	accelerate	progress	towards	maternal	mortality	reduction.	
Populations	requiring	particular	attention	include	refugees	and	groups	that	face	discrimination	or	
stigma.	Better	data	on	the	maternal	mortality	burden	among	adolescent	girls	is	also	needed;	
maternal	causes	rank	second	among	causes	of	death	for	girls	aged	15–19	(42).	Several	countries,	
particularly	those	in	Latin	America	and	the	Caribbean,	and	in	South-East	Asia,	have	already	begun	
reporting	data	for	women	and	girls	outside	the	standard	15–49	year	age	interval,	documenting	the	
disturbing	fact	that	maternal	deaths	are	occurring	among	girls	even	younger	than	15.	
	

4.3	 A	call	to	action	
The	announcement	of	MDG	5	in	2000	attracted	intense	scrutiny	of	the	shamefully	high	numbers	of	
women	dying	from	maternal	causes.	It	initiated	an	unprecedented	and	ongoing	global	conversation	
about	how	maternal	mortality	should	be	measured,	what	strategies	could	be	employed	to	save	
lives,	and	how	the	progress	of	these	reduction	efforts	would	be	assessed.	Accurate	measurement	of	
maternal	mortality	levels	remains	an	immense	challenge,	but	the	overall	message	is	clear:	hundreds	
of	thousands	of	women	are	still	dying	during	childbirth	or	from	pregnancy-related	causes	each	year.	
The	goal	of	ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	is	a	call	to	action	across	all	regions	of	the	globe,	
developed	and	developing,	including	areas	where	substantial	progress	has	already	been	made.	
Among	countries	where	maternal	death	counts	remain	high,	the	challenge	is	clear.	Efforts	to	save	
lives	must	be	accelerated	and	must	also	be	paired	with	country-driven	efforts	to	accurately	count	
lives	and	record	deaths.	Among	those	countries	with	low	overall	maternal	mortality	indicators,	the	
next	challenge	is	measuring	and	amending	inequities	among	subpopulations.	Across	varying	
settings,	strategies	must	be	both	context-specific	and	thoroughly	grounded	in	a	human	rights	
approach.	With	rapid	acceleration	of	the	efforts	and	progress	catalysed	by	MDG	5,	ending	
preventable	maternal	mortality	on	a	global	level	can	be	achieved	by	2030.	 	
	




                                                                                                     33
References	
1.	    Ki-Moon	B.	Global	strategy	for	women’s	and	children’s	health.	New	York	(NY):	United	
Nations;	2010.	
2.	   Keeping	promises,	measuring	results:	commission	on	information	and	accountability	for	
women’s	and	children’s	health.	Geneva:	World	Health	Organization;	2011.	
3.	     Transforming	our	world:	the	2030	Agenda	for	Sustainable	Development	2015.	Resolution	
adopted	by	the	General	Assembly	on	25	September	2015.	United	Nations	General	Assembly,	
Seventieth	session;	2015	(A/RES/70/1;	
http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1,	accessed	5	November	2015).	
4.	    Strategies	towards	ending	preventable	maternal	mortality	(EPMM).	Geneva:	World	Health	
Organization;	2015	(http://www.everywomaneverychild.org/images/EPMM_final_report_2015.pdf,	
accessed	5	November	2015).	
5.	     Every	woman,	every	child:	from	commitments	to	action:	the	first	report	of	the	independent	
Expert	Review	Group	(iERG)	on	Information	and	Accountability	for	Women's	and	Children's	Health.	
Geneva:	World	Health	Organization;	2012	
(www.who.int/woman_child_accountability/ierg/reports/2012/IERG_report_low_resolution.pdf,	
accessed	5	November	2015).	
6.	      World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	(UNICEF).	Revised	1990	
estimates	of	maternal	mortality:	a	new	approach	by	WHO	and	UNICEF.	Geneva:	WHO;	1996	
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/63597/1/WHO_FRH_MSM_96.11.pdf,	accessed	5	
November	2015).	
7.	   AbouZahr	C,	Wardlaw	T,	Hill	K.	Maternal	mortality	in	1995:	estimates	developed	by	WHO	
UNICEF	UNFPA.	Geneva:	World	Health	Organization;	2001.	
8.	      AbouZahr	C,	Wardlaw	TM,	Hill	K,	Choi	Y.	Maternal	mortality	in	2000:	estimates	developed	
by	WHO,	UNICEF	and	UNFPA.	Geneva:	World	Health	Organization;	2004	
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/68382/1/a81531.pdf,	accessed	5	November	2015).	
9.	      World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	(UNICEF),	United	
Nations	Population	Fund	(UNFPA)	and	The	World	Bank.	Trends	in	maternal	mortality:	1990	to	2008.	
Estimates	developed	by	WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA	and	The	World	Bank.	Geneva:	WHO;	2010	
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44423/1/9789241500265_eng.pdf,	accessed	5	November	
2015).	
10.	     World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	(UNICEF),	United	
Nations	Population	Fund	(UNFPA),	The	World	Bank.	Trends	in	maternal	mortality:	1990	to	2010:	
WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA	and	The	World	Bank	estimates.	Geneva:	WHO;	2012	
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/44874/1/9789241503631_eng.pdf,	accessed	5	November	
2015).	
11.	     World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	United	Nations	Children’s	Fund	(UNICEF),	United	
Nations	Population	Fund	(UNFPA),	The	World	Bank,	United	Nations	Population	Division.	Trends	in	
maternal	mortality:	1990	to	2013.	Estimates	by	WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA,	The	World	Bank	and	the	
United	Nations	Population	Division.	Geneva:	WHO;	2014	
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/112682/2/9789241507226_eng.pdf,	accessed	5	November	

                                                                                                34
2015).	
12.	     Wilmoth	J,	Mizoguchi	N,	Oestergaard	M,	Say	L,	Mathers	C,	Zureick-Brown	S,	et	al.	Levels	
and	trends	of	maternal	mortality	in	the	world:	the	development	of	new	estimates	by	the	United	
Nations.	Technical	report	(submitted	to	the	WHO,	UNICEF,	UNFPA,	and	The	World	Bank).	2010	
(http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/MMR_technical_report.pdf,	
accessed	12	November	2015).	
13.	     Wilmoth	J,	Mizoguchi	N,	Oestergaard	M,	Say	L,	Mathers	C,	Zureick-Brown	S,	et	al.	A	new	
method	for	deriving	global	estimates	of	maternal	mortality:	supplemental	report.	Stat	Politics	
Policy.	2012;3(2):1-38.	 	
14.	     Alkema	L,	Chou	D,	Hogan	D,	Zhang	S,	Moller	A,	Gemmill	A,	et	al.	National,	regional,	and	
global	levels	and	trends	in	maternal	mortality	between	1990	and	2015	with	scenario-based	
projections	to	2030:	a	systematic	analysis	by	the	United	Nations	Maternal	Mortality	Estimation	
Inter-Agency	Group.	Lancet.	2015	(in	press).	
15.	     Alkema	L,	Zhang	S,	Chou	D,	Gemmill	A,	Moller	A,	Ma	Fat	D,	et	al.	A	Beyesian	approach	to	
the	global	estimation	of	maternal	mortality.	2015	(submitted	for	peer	review;	
http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.03330).	 	
16.	   World	population	prospects:	the	2015	revision.	New	York	(NY):	United	Nations,	Department	
of	Economic	and	Social	Affairs,	Population	Division;	2015	(http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/,	accessed	9	
November	2015).	
17.	      Life	tables	for	WHO	Member	States	1990–2012.	Geneva:	World	Health	Organization;	2014.	
18.	      Data	Catalog.	Washington	(DC):	The	World	Bank;	2013.	
19.	   UNICEF	Data:	Monitoring	the	Situation	of	Children	and	Women	[website].	New	York	(NY):	
United	Nations	Children’s	Fund;	2015	(http://data.unicef.org/,	accessed	5	November	2015).	
20.	   Global	report:	UNAIDS	report	on	the	global	AIDS	epidemic	2013.	Geneva:	Joint	United	
Nations	Programme	on	HIV/AIDS;	2013.	
21.	   Mortality	and	burden	of	disease	estimates	for	WHO	Member	States	in	2008.	Geneva:	World	
Health	Organization;	2011.	
22.	    Plummer	M,	editor.	JAGS:	a	program	for	analysis	of	Bayesian	graphical	models	using	Gibbs	
sampling.	In:	Proceedings	of	the	3rd	international	workshop	on	distributed	statistical	computing.	
Vienna:	Technische	Universität	Wien;	2003.	
23.	    R	Core	Team.	R:	A	language	and	environment	for	statistical	computing.	Vienna:	R	
Foundation	for	Statistical	Computing;	2013	(http://www.R-project.org,	accessed	15	September	
2015).	
24.	  Gelman	A,	Hill	J.	Data	analysis	using	regression	and	multilevel/hierarchical	models.	
Cambridge	University	Press;	2006.	
25.	    H4+	Partnership.	The	H4+	partnership:	joint	country	support	to	improve	women’s	and	
children’s	health:	progress	report.	Geneva:	World	Health	Organization;	2015.	
26.	     Worley	H.	Rwanda's	success	in	improving	maternal	health	2015.	In:	Population	Reference	
Bureau	(PRB)	Publications	[website].	Washington	(DC):	PRB;	2015	
(http://www.prb.org/Publications/Articles/2015/rwanda-maternal-health.aspx,	accessed	5	

                                                                                                    35
November	2015).	
27.	   El	Arifeen	S,	Hill	K,	Ahsan	KZ,	Jamil	K,	Nahar	Q,	Streatfield	PK.	Maternal	mortality	in	
Bangladesh:	a	Countdown	to	2015	country	case	study.	Lancet.	2014;384(9951):1366-74.	
28.	     Nepal	Ministry	of	Health	and	Population	Nepal,	Partnership	for	Maternal,	Newborn	&	Child	
Health,	World	Health	Organization	(WHO),	World	Bank	and	Alliance	for	Health	Policy	and	Systems	
Research.	Success	factors	for	women's	and	children's	health:	Nepal.	Geneva:	WHO;	2015	
(http://www.who.int/pmnch/knowledge/publications/nepal_country_report.pdf,	accessed	5	
November	2015).	
29.	   Maternal	and	Perinatal	Morbidity	and	Mortality	Review	Committee.	Maternal	deaths	in	the	
Maldives:	2009-2011.	The	Maldives	Government;	2011.	
30.	   Van	Lerberghe	W,	Matthews	Z,	Achadi	E,	Ancona	C,	Campbell	J,	Channon	A,	et	al.	Country	
experience	with	strengthening	of	health	systems	and	deployment	of	midwives	in	countries	with	
high	maternal	mortality.	Lancet.	2014;384(9949):1215-25.	
31.	     Cambodia	reduces	maternal	mortality.	In:	WHO	in	the	Western	Pacific	[website].	Manila:	
World	Health	Organization	Western	Pacific	Regional	Office;	2015	
(http://www.wpro.who.int/about/administration_structure/dhs/story_cambodia_reduces_maternal
_mortality/en/,	accessed	5	November	2015).	
32.	   Yadamsuren	B,	Merialdi	M,	Davaadorj	I,	Requejo	JH,	Betrán	AP,	Ahmad	A,	et	al.	Tracking	
maternal	mortality	declines	in	Mongolia	between	1992	and	2007:	the	importance	of	collaboration.	
Bull	World	Health	Organ.	2010;88(3):192-8.	
33.	   Organisation	for	Economic	Co-operation	and	Development	(OECD).	States	of	fragility	2015:	
Meeting	post-2015	ambitions.	Paris:	OECD	Publishing;	2015.	
34.	   Iyengar	P,	Kerber	K,	Howe	CJ,	Dahn	B.	Services	for	mothers	and	newborns	during	the	Ebola	
outbreak	in	Liberia:	the	need	for	improvement	in	emergencies.	PLoS	currents.	2014;7.	
35.	    Souza	J,	Tunçalp	Ö,	Vogel	J,	Bohren	M,	Widmer	M,	Oladapo	O,	et	al.	Obstetric	transition:	
the	pathway	towards	ending	preventable	maternal	deaths.	BJOG.	2014;121(s1):1-4.	
36.	   Búsqueda	Intencionada	de	Muertes	Maternas	en	México.	Informe	2011.	Mexico;	Secretaría	
de	Salud	México;	2013.	
37.	     Knight	M,	Kenyon	S,	Brocklehurst	P,	Neilson	J,	Shakespeare	J,	Kurinczuk	J,	editors,	on	
behalf	of	MBRRACE-UK.	Saving	lives,	improving	mothers’	care:	lessons	learned	to	inform	future	
maternity	care	from	the	UK	and	Ireland	Confidential	Enquiries	into	Maternal	Deaths	and	Morbidity	
2009-2012.	Oxford:	National	Perinatal	Epidemiology	Unit,	University	of	Oxford;	2014	
(https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/downloads/files/mbrrace-uk/reports/Saving%20Lives%20Improving%2
0Mothers%20Care%20report%202014%20Full.pdf,	accessed	5	November	2015).	
38.	     MDSR	Working	Group	(Canadian	Network	for	Maternal,	Newborn	&	Child	Health,	
International	Federation	of	Gynecology	and	Obstetrics,	International	Stillbirth	Alliance,	Department	
for	International	Development	UK,	United	Nations	Population	Fund,	United	States	Centers	for	
Disease	Control	and	Prevention	and	the	World	Health	Organization.	Maternal	death	surveillance	
and	response:	technical	guidance	information	for	action	to	prevent	maternal	death.	Geneva:	World	
Health	Organization;	2013	
(https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/pub-pdf/Maternal_Death_Surveillance_and_Response_0.

                                                                                                    36
pdf,	accessed	5	November	2015).	
39.	   Mehl	G,	Labrique	A.	Prioritizing	integrated	mHealth	strategies	for	universal	health	
coverage.	Science.	2014;345(6202):1284-7.	
40.	   Labrique	AB,	Pereira	S,	Christian	P,	Murthy	N,	Bartlett	L,	Mehl	G.	Pregnancy	registration	
systems	can	enhance	health	systems,	increase	accountability	and	reduce	mortality.	Reprod	Health	
Matters.	2012;20(39):113-7.	
41.	   Open	Smart	Register	Platform	(OpenSRP)	[website].	2015	(www.smartregister.org,	
accessed	5	November	2015).	
42.	   Health	for	the	world's	adolescents:	a	second	chance	in	the	second	decade.	Geneva:	World	
Health	Organization;	2014.	
	
	




                                                                                               37
Annexes	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	




           38
Annex 1. Summary of the country consultations 2015

The	  generation	  of	  global,	  regional	  and	  country-­‐level	  estimates	  and	  trends	  in	  morbidity	  and	  mortality	  
is	  one	  of	  the	  core	  functions	  of	  WHO,	  which	  is	  the	  agency	  within	  the	  UN	  system	  that	  leads	  the	  
production	  of	  updated	  maternal	  mortality	  estimates.	  In	  2001,	  the	  WHO	  Executive	  Board	  endorsed	  a	  
resolution	  (EB.107.R8)	  seeking	  to	  “establish	  a	  technical	  consultation	  process	  bringing	  together	  
personnel	  and	  perspectives	  from	  Member	  States	  in	  different	  WHO	  regions”.	  A	  key	  objective	  of	  this	  
consultation	  process	  is	  “to	  ensure	  that	  each	  Member	  State	  is	  consulted	  on	  the	  best	  data	  to	  be	  used”.	  
Since	  the	  process	  is	  an	  integral	  step	  in	  the	  overall	  estimation	  strategy,	  it	  is	  described	  here	  in	  brief.	  

The	  country	  consultation	  process	  entails	  an	  exchange	  between	  WHO	  and	  technical	  focal	  person(s)	  in	  
each	  country.	  It	  is	  carried	  out	  prior	  to	  the	  publication	  of	  estimates.	  During	  the	  consultation	  period,	  
WHO	  invites	  focal	  person(s)	  to	  review	  input	  data	  sources,	  methods	  for	  estimation	  and	  the	  
preliminary	  estimates.	  Focal	  person(s)	  are	  encouraged	  to	  submit	  additional	  data	  that	  may	  not	  have	  
been	  taken	  into	  account	  in	  the	  preliminary	  estimates.	  

The	  country	  consultation	  process	  for	  the	  2015	  round	  of	  maternal	  mortality	  estimates	  was	  initiated	  
with	  an	  official	  communication	  from	  WHO	  to	  all	  Member	  States	  on	  25	  August	  2014.	  This	  letter	  
informed	  Member	  States	  of	  the	  forthcoming	  exercise	  to	  estimate	  maternal	  mortality	  and	  requested	  
the	  designation	  of	  an	  official	  contact	  (typically	  within	  the	  national	  health	  ministry	  and/or	  the	  central	  
statistics	  office)	  to	  participate	  in	  the	  consultation.	  The	  designated	  officials	  received	  the	  following	  
items	  by	  email:	  (1)	  a	  copy	  of	  the	  official	  communication;	  (2)	  draft	  estimates	  and	  data	  sources;	  and	  
(3)	  a	  summary	  of	  the	  methodology	  used.	  WHO	  regional	  offices	  actively	  collaborated	  in	  identifying	  
focal	  persons	  through	  their	  networks.	  

The	  formal	  consultation	  process	  was	  officially	  completed	  by	  24	  July	  2015.	  Of	  the	  183	  Member	  States	  
included	  in	  the	  analysis,	  WHO	  received	  nominations	  of	  designated	  officials	  from	  125	  –	  Regional	  
Office	  for	  Africa	  (17),	  Regional	  Office	  for	  the	  Americas	  (24),	  Regional	  Office	  for	  South-­‐East	  Asia	  (6),	  
Regional	  Office	  for	  Europe	  (39),	  Regional	  Office	  for	  the	  Eastern	  Mediterranean	  (19),	  Regional	  Office	  
for	  the	  Western	  Pacific	  (20)	  –	  and	  received	  feedback,	  comments	  or	  data	  from	  60	  Member	  States.	  
During	  the	  consultation	  period,	  new	  data	  submitted	  by	  countries	  were	  reviewed	  to	  determine	  
whether	  they	  met	  the	  study’s	  inclusion	  criteria.	  Data	  were	  considered	  acceptable	  to	  use	  as	  new	  
input	  if	  they	  were	  representative	  of	  the	  national	  population	  and	  referred	  to	  a	  specific	  time	  interval	  
within	  the	  period	  from	  1985	  to	  2015.	  

As	  a	  result	  of	  the	  country	  consultation	  and	  updated	  vital	  registration	  data,	  234	  new	  or	  modified	  
entries	  were	  included.	  Thus,	  the	  current	  estimates	  are	  based	  on	  2608	  observations	  corresponding	  to	  
3634	  country-­‐years	  of	  information	  in	  171	  countries.	  

As	  in	  the	  previous	  country	  consultation,	  the	  new	  observations	  were	  from	  civil	  registration	  systems	  
and	  surveys;	  however,	  an	  increase	  in	  number	  of	  other	  new	  observations	  shows	  that	  countries	  
lacking	  functioning	  civil	  registration	  systems	  are	  increasingly	  investing	  in	  monitoring	  maternal	  
mortality	  with	  empirical	  data	  from	  alternative	  sources.	  

	  
Annex 2. Measuring maternal mortality
Concepts and definitions
In the International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, 10th revision
(ICD-10),1 WHO defines maternal death as:
The death of a woman while pregnant, or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy, irrespective of
the duration and the site of the pregnancy, from any cause related to or aggravated by the pregnancy
or its management (from direct or indirect obstetric death), but not from accidental or incidental
causes.
This definition allows identification of maternal deaths, based on their causes, as either direct or
indirect. Direct maternal deaths are those resulting from obstetric complications of the pregnant
state (i.e. pregnancy, delivery and postpartum), interventions, omissions, incorrect treatment, or a
chain of events resulting from any of the above. Deaths due to, for example, obstetric
haemorrhage or hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, or those due to complications of
anaesthesia or caesarean section are classified as direct maternal deaths. Indirect maternal deaths
are those resulting from previously existing diseases, or from diseases that developed during
pregnancy and that were not due to direct obstetric causes but aggravated by physiological
effects of pregnancy. For example, deaths due to aggravation of an existing cardiac or renal
disease are considered indirect maternal deaths.
The concept of death during pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium is included in the ICD-10
and is defined as any death temporal to pregnancy, childbirth or the postpartum period, even if it
is due to accidental or incidental causes (this was formerly referred to as “pregnancy-related
death”, see Box 1). This alternative definition allows measurement of deaths that are related to
pregnancy, even though they do not strictly conform to the standard “maternal death” concept, in
settings where accurate information about causes of death based on medical certificates is
unavailable.
For instance, in population-based surveys, respondents provide information on the pregnancy
status of a reproductive-aged sibling at the time of death, but no further information is elicited on
the cause of death. These surveys – for example, the Demographic and Health Surveys and
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys – therefore, usually provide measures of pregnancy-related
deaths rather than maternal deaths.
Further, complications of pregnancy or childbirth can lead to death beyond the six weeks
postpartum period, and the increased availability of modern life-sustaining procedures and
technologies enables more women to survive adverse outcomes of pregnancy and delivery, and to
delay death beyond 42 days postpartum. Despite being caused by pregnancy-related events,
these deaths do not count as maternal deaths in routine civil registration systems. Specific codes
for “late maternal deaths” are included in the ICD-10 (O96 and O97) to capture delayed maternal
deaths occurring between six weeks and one year postpartum (see Box A2.1). Some countries,
particularly those with more developed civil registration systems, use this definition.


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
 International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, tenth revision. Vol. 2: Instruction manual.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
    Box A2.1
    Definitions related to maternal death in ICD-10


             Maternal death
             The death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of
             pregnancy, irrespective of the duration and site of the pregnancy, from any cause
             related to or aggravated by the pregnancy or its management (from direct or
             indirect obstetric death), but not from accidental or incidental causes.


             Pregnancy-related death
             The death of a woman while pregnant or within 42 days of termination of
             pregnancy, irrespective of the cause of death.


             Late maternal death
             The death of a woman from direct or indirect obstetric causes, more than 42 days,
             but less than one year after termination of pregnancy.


Coding of maternal deaths
Despite the standard definitions noted above, accurate identification of the causes of maternal
deaths is not always possible. It can be a challenge for medical certifiers to correctly attribute
cause of death to direct or indirect maternal causes, or to accidental or incidental events,
particularly in settings where most deliveries occur at home. While several countries apply the ICD-
10 in civil registration systems, the identification and classification of causes of death during
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium remain inconsistent across countries.
With the publication of the ICD-10, WHO recommended adding a checkbox on the death
certificate for recording a woman’s pregnancy status at the time of death.2 This was to help
identify indirect maternal deaths, but it has not been implemented in many countries. For
countries using ICD-10 coding for registered deaths, all deaths coded to the maternal chapter (O
codes) and maternal tetanus (A34) are counted as maternal deaths.
In 2012, WHO published Application of ICD-10 to deaths during pregnancy, childbirth and the
puerperium: ICD maternal mortality (ICD-MM) to guide countries to reduce errors in coding
maternal deaths and to improve the attribution of cause of maternal death.3 The ICD-MM is to be
used together with the three ICD-10 volumes. For example, the ICD-MM clarifies that the coding of
maternal deaths among HIV-positive women may be due to one of the following.

•                            Obstetric causes: Such as haemorrhage or hypertensive disorders in pregnancy – these should
                             be identified as direct maternal deaths.
•                            The interaction between human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and pregnancy: In these cases,
                             there is an aggravating effect of pregnancy on HIV and the interaction between pregnancy
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
  International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems, tenth revision. Vol. 2: Instruction manual.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
3
 Application of ICD-10 to deaths during pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium: ICD maternal mortality (ICD-MM).
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2012.
                             and HIV is the underlying cause of death. These deaths are considered as indirect maternal
                             deaths. In this report, they are referred to as “AIDS-related indirect maternal deaths”, and in the
                             ICD those deaths are coded to O98.7 and categorized in Group 7 (non-obstetric complications)
                             in the ICD-MM.
•                            Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS): In these cases, the woman’s pregnancy status is
                             incidental to the course of her HIV infection and her death is a result of an HIV complication, as
                             described by ICD-10 codes B20–24. These are not considered maternal deaths. Thus, proper
                             reporting of the mutual influence of HIV or AIDS and pregnancy in Part 1 of the death
                             certificate will facilitate the coding and identification of these deaths.

Measures of maternal mortality
The extent of maternal mortality in a population is essentially the combination of two factors:
(i) The risk of death in a single pregnancy or a single live birth.
(ii) The fertility level (i.e. the number of pregnancies or births that are experienced by women of
reproductive age).
The MMR is defined as the number of maternal deaths during a given time period per 100 000 live
births during the same time period. It depicts the risk of maternal death relative to the number of
live births and essentially captures (i) above.
By contrast, the maternal mortality rate (MMRate) is defined as the number of maternal deaths in a
population divided by the number of women aged 15–49 years (or woman-years lived at ages 15–
49 years). The MMRate captures both the risk of maternal death per pregnancy or per total birth
(live birth or stillbirth), and the level of fertility in the population. In addition to the MMR and the
MMRate, it is possible to calculate the adult lifetime risk of maternal mortality for women in the
population (see Box A2). An alternative measure of maternal mortality, the proportion of maternal
deaths among deaths of women of reproductive age (PM), is calculated as the number of maternal
deaths divided by the total deaths among women aged 15–49 years.



    Box A2.2
    Statistical measures of maternal mortality


             Maternal mortality ratio (MMR)

             Number of maternal deaths during a given time period per 100 000 live births during the
             same time period.



             Maternal mortality rate (MMRate)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
             Number of maternal deaths divided by person-years lived by women of reproductive age.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
 Wilmoth J, Mizoguchi N, Oestergaard M, Say L, Mathers C, Zureick-Brown S, et al. A new method for deriving global
estimates of maternal mortality: supplemental report. Stat Politics Policy. 2012;3(2):1–38.
    Box A2.2
    Statistical measures of maternal mortality


             Adult lifetime risk of maternal death
             The probability that a 15-year-old woman will die eventually from a maternal cause.



             The proportion of maternal deaths among deaths of women of reproductive age (PM)

             The number of maternal deaths in a given time period divided by the total deaths among
             women aged 15–49 years.



Approaches for measuring maternal mortality
Ideally, civil registration systems with good attribution of cause of death provide accurate data on
the level of maternal mortality and the causes of maternal deaths. In countries with incomplete
civil registration systems, it is difficult to accurately measure levels of maternal mortality. First, it is
challenging to identify maternal deaths precisely, as the deaths of women of reproductive age
might not be recorded at all. Second, even if such deaths were recorded, the pregnancy status or
cause of death may not have been known and the deaths would therefore not have been reported
as maternal deaths. Third, in most developing-country settings where medical certification of
cause of death does not exist, accurate attribution of a female death as a maternal death is
difficult.
Even in developed countries where routine registration of deaths is in place, maternal deaths may
be underreported due to misclassification of ICD-10 coding, and identification of the true numbers
of maternal deaths may require additional special investigations into the causes of death. A
specific example of such an investigation is the Confidential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths (CEMD),
a system established in England and Wales in 1928.5,6,7 The most recent report of the CEMD (for
2009–2011) identified 79% more maternal deaths than were reported in the routine civil
registration system.8 Other studies on the accuracy of the number of maternal deaths reported in
civil registration systems have shown that the true number of maternal deaths could be twice as
high as indicated by routine reports, or even more.9,10 Annex 6 summarizes the results of a
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5
  Lewis G, editor. Why mothers die 2000–2002: the confidential enquiries into maternal deaths in the United Kingdom.
London: RCOG Press; 2004.
6
 Lewis G, editor. Saving mothers’ lives: reviewing maternal deaths to make motherhood safer 2003–2005. The seventh
report on confidential enquiries into maternal deaths in the United Kingdom. London: Confidential Enquiry into
Maternal and Child Health (CEMAH); 2007.
7
  Centre for Maternal and Child Enquiries (CMACE). Saving mothers’ lives: reviewing maternal deaths to make
motherhood safer: 2006–2008. The eighth report on confidential enquiries into maternal deaths in the United Kingdom.
BJOG. 2011;118(Suppl.1):1–203. doi:10.1111/j.1471-0528.2010.02847.x.
8
  Knight M, Kenyon S, Brocklehurst P, Neilson J, Shakespeare J, Kurinczuk JJ, editors (on behalf of MBRRACE-UK). Saving
lives, improving mothers’ care – lessons learned to inform future maternity care from the UK and Ireland Confidential
Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–12. Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of
Oxford; 2014.
9
  Deneux-Tharaux C et al. Underreporting of pregnancy-related mortality in the United States and Europe. Obstet
Gynecol. 2005;106:684–92.
10
            Atrash HK, Alexander S, Berg CJ. Maternal mortality in developed countries: not just a concern of the past. Obstet
literature review (updated January 2014) for such studies where misclassification on coding in civil
registration could be identified.
These studies are diverse in terms of the definition of maternal mortality used, the sources
considered (death certificates, other vital event certificates, medical records, questionnaires or
autopsy reports) and the way maternal deaths are identified (record linkage or assessment from
experts). In addition, the system of reporting causes of death to a civil registry differs from one
country to another, depending on the death certificate forms, the type of certifiers and the coding
practice. These studies have estimated underreporting of maternal mortality due to
misclassification in death registration data, ranging from 0.85 to 5.0, with a median value of 1.5 (i.e.
a misclassification rate of 50%).
Underreporting of maternal deaths was more common among:
•                            early pregnancy deaths, including those not linked to a reportable birth outcome;
•                            deaths in the later postpartum period (these were less likely to be reported than early
                             postpartum deaths);
•                            deaths at extremes of maternal age (youngest and oldest);
•                            miscoding by the ICD-9 or ICD-10, most often seen in cases of deaths caused by:
                                 o cerebrovascular diseases;
                                 o cardiovascular diseases.
Potential reasons cited for underreporting and/or misclassification include:
•                            inadequate understanding of the ICD rules (either ICD-9 or ICD-10);
•                            death certificates completed without mention of pregnancy status;
•                            desire to avoid litigation;
•                            desire to suppress information (especially as related to abortion deaths).
The definitions of misclassification, incompleteness and underreporting of maternal deaths are
shown in Box A2.3.


    Box A2.3
    Definitions of misclassification, incompleteness and underreporting


             Misclassification
             Refers to incorrect coding in civil registration, due either to error in the medical certification
             of cause of death or error in applying the correct code.



             Incompleteness
             Refers to incomplete death registration. Includes both the identification of individual deaths
             in each country and the national coverage of the register.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Gynecol. 1995;86(4 pt 2):700–5.
    Box A2.3
    Definitions of misclassification, incompleteness and underreporting


             Underreporting
             Is a combination of misclassification and incompleteness.




In the absence of complete and accurate civil registration systems, MMR estimates are based on
data from a variety of sources – including censuses, household surveys, reproductive-age mortality
studies (RAMOS) and verbal autopsies. Each of these methods has limitations in estimating the
true levels of maternal mortality. Brief descriptions of these methods together with their
limitations are shown in Box A2.4.


    Box A2.4
    Approaches to measuring maternal mortality

                                                                                                                                                                                                             8,9,11
             Civil registration system

             This approach involves routine registration of births and deaths. Ideally, maternal mortality
             statistics should be obtained through civil registration data. However, even where coverage is
             complete and the causes of all deaths are identified based on standard medical certificates, in
             the absence of active case finding, maternal deaths may be missed or misclassified; and
             therefore confidential enquiries are used to identify the extent of misclassification and
             underreporting.

                                                                                                                                                                     12,13
             Household surveys

             Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys – Round 4
             (MICS) use the direct “sisterhood” method using household survey data. This method obtains
             information by interviewing a representative sample of respondents about the survival of all their
             siblings (to determine the age of all siblings, how many are alive, how many are dead, age at
             death and year of death of those dead, and among sisters who reached reproductive age, how
             many died during pregnancy, delivery or within two months of pregnancy). This approach has the
             following limitations.
             •                             It identifies pregnancy-related deaths, rather than maternal deaths.
             •                             It produces estimates with wide confidence intervals, thereby diminishing opportunities for
                                           trend analysis.
             •                             It provides a retrospective rather than a current maternal mortality estimate (referring to a

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11
   Knight M, Kenyon S, Brocklehurst P, Neilson J, Shakespeare J, Kurinczuk JJ, editors (on behalf of MBRRACE-UK). Saving
lives, improving mothers’ care – lessons learned to inform future maternity care from the UK and Ireland Confidential
Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–12. Oxford: National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of
Oxford; 2014.
12
   Hill K et al. How should we measure maternal mortality in the developing world? A comparison of household deaths
and sibling history approaches. Bull World Health Organ. 2006;84:173–80.
13
  Stanton C, Abderrahim N, Hill K. DHS maternal mortality indicators: an assessment of data quality and implications for
data use (DHS Analytical Report No. 4). Calverton (MD): Macro International; 1997.
    Box A2.4
    Approaches to measuring maternal mortality


                                           period approximately five years prior to the survey); the analysis is more complicated.

                                                                         14,15
             Census

             A national census, with the addition of a limited number of questions, could produce estimates of
             maternal mortality. This approach eliminates sampling errors (because all women are covered)
             and hence allows a more detailed breakdown of the results, including trend analysis, geographic
             subdivisions and social strata.

             •                             This approach allows identification of deaths in the household in a relatively short reference
                                           period (1–2 years), thereby providing recent maternal mortality estimates, but is conducted at
                                           10-year intervals and therefore limits monitoring of maternal mortality.

             •                             It identifies pregnancy-related deaths (not maternal deaths); however, if combined with
                                           verbal autopsy, maternal deaths could be identified.

             •                             Training of enumerators is crucial, since census activities collect information on a range of
                                           other topics unrelated to maternal deaths.

             •                             Results must be adjusted for characteristics such as completeness of death and birth
                                           statistics and population structures, in order to arrive at reliable estimates.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11,12
             Reproductive-age mortality studies (RAMOS)

             This approach involves identifying and investigating the causes of all deaths of women of
             reproductive age in a defined area or population, by using multiple sources of data (e.g.
             interviews of family members, civil registrations, health-care facility records, burial records,
             traditional birth attendants), and has the following characteristics.

             •                             Multiple and diverse sources of information must be used to identify deaths of women of
                                           reproductive age; no single source identifies all the deaths.

             •                             Interviews with household members and health-care providers and reviews of facility records
                                           are used to classify the deaths as maternal or otherwise.

             •                             If properly conducted, this approach provides a fairly complete estimation of maternal
                                           mortality (in the absence of reliable routine registration systems) and could provide
                                           subnational MMRs. However, inadequate identification of all deaths of reproductive-aged
                                           women results in underestimation of maternal mortality levels.

             •                             This approach can be complicated, time-consuming and expensive to undertake –
                                           particularly on a large scale.

             •                             The number of live births used in the computation may not be accurate, especially in settings
                                           where most women deliver at home.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
14
  Stanton C et al. Every death counts: measurement of maternal mortality via a census. Bull World Health Organ.
2001;79:657–64.
15
            WHO guidance for measuring maternal mortality from a census. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013.
    Box A2.4
    Approaches to measuring maternal mortality

                                                                                                                                   16,17,18
             Verbal autopsy

             This approach is used to assign cause of death through interviews with family or community
             members, where medical certification of cause of death is not available. Verbal autopsies may be
             conducted as part of a demographic surveillance system maintained by research institutions that
             collect records of births and deaths periodically among small populations (typically in a district).
             This approach may also be combined with household surveys or censuses. In special versions,
             and in combination with software that helps to identify the diagnosis, verbal autopsy is suitable
             for routine use as an inexpensive method in populations where no other method of assessing the
             cause of death is in place. The following limitations characterize this approach.

             •                             Misclassification of causes of deaths in women of reproductive age is not uncommon with
                                           this technique.

             •                             It may fail to identify correctly a group of maternal deaths, particularly those occurring early in
                                           pregnancy (e.g. ectopic, abortion-related) and indirect causes of maternal death (e.g.
                                           malaria).

             •                             The accuracy of the estimates depends on the extent of family members’ knowledge of the
                                           events leading to the death, the skill of the interviewers, and the competence of physicians
                                           who do the diagnosis and coding. The latter two factors are largely overcome by the use of
                                           software.

             •                             Detailed verbal autopsy for research purposes that aims to identify the cause of death of an
                                           individual requires physician assessment and long interviews. Such systems are expensive
                                           to maintain, and the findings cannot be extrapolated to obtain national MMRs. This limitation
                                           does not exist where simplified verbal autopsy is aiming to identify causes at a population
                                           level and where software helps to formulate the diagnoses.




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
16
   Chandramohan D et al. The validity of verbal autopsies for assessing the causes of institutional maternal death. Stud
Fam Plann. 1998;29:414–22.
17
   Chandramohan D, Stetal P, Quigley M. Misclassification error in verbal autopsy: can it be adjusted? Int J Epidemiol.
2001;30:509–14.
18
 Leitao J et al. Revising the WHO verbal autopsy instrument to facilitate routine cause-of-death monitoring. Global
Health Action. 2013;6:21518.
Annex 3. Methods used to derive a complete series of annual
   estimates for each covariate, 1985–2015

A	  complete	  series	  of	  annual	  estimates	  for	  each	  of	  the	  three	  covariates	  was	  obtained	  or	  constructed	  
between	  1985	  and	  2015.	  

GDP	  per	  capita	  measured	  in	  purchasing	  power	  parity	  (PPP)	  equivalent	  dollars	  using	  2011	  as	  the	  
baseline	  year	  were	  taken	  from	  World	  Bank	  Group19	  with	  estimates	  from	  other	  sources	  (e.g.	  IMF,	  
OECD,	  WHO	  National	  Health	  Accounts	  and	  the	  Institute	  for	  Health	  Metrics	  and	  Evaluation)	  used	  to	  
inform	  trends	  in	  instances	  with	  missing	  country-­‐years	  in	  the	  World	  Bank	  Group	  data	  set.	  A	  five-­‐year	  
moving	  average	  was	  applied	  to	  this	  GDP	  series	  to	  smooth	  year-­‐to-­‐year	  GDP	  fluctuations.	  

General	  fertility	  rate	  (GFR)	  estimates	  were	  calculated	  using	  annual	  series	  of	  live	  births	  and	  the	  
populations	  of	  women	  aged	  15–49	  years,	  which	  were	  constructed	  using	  estimates	  from	  UNPD.20	  

Skilled	  attendant	  at	  birth	  (SAB)	  coverage	  estimates	  consist	  of	  time	  series	  derived	  using	  data	  from	  
household	  surveys	  and	  other	  sources,	  obtained	  from	  a	  database	  maintained	  by	  UNICEF.21	  Although	  
other	  sources	  of	  SAB	  data	  were	  consulted,	  only	  the	  UNICEF	  data	  were	  used	  because	  they	  adhere	  
strictly	  to	  the	  indicator’s	  definition.22	  For	  countries	  with	  any	  value	  of	  SAB	  less	  than	  95%	  and	  with	  
four	  or	  more	  observations,	  annual	  series	  were	  estimated	  by	  fitting	  a	  regression	  model	  with	  time	  as	  
the	  sole	  predictor	  for	  the	  logit	  (log-­‐odds)	  of	  SAB;	  such	  a	  model	  was	  estimated	  separately	  for	  each	  
country.	  For	  all	  other	  countries,	  including	  those	  with	  no	  available	  SAB	  data,	  the	  SAB	  annual	  series	  
were	  estimated	  using	  a	  multilevel	  model.	  In	  the	  multilevel	  model,	  logit	  (or	  log-­‐odds)	  of	  observed	  SAB	  
proportions	  for	  all	  countries	  were	  regressed	  against	  time.	  The	  model	  included	  region-­‐	  and	  country-­‐
specific	  intercepts	  and	  slopes.	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	  




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19
  GDP per capita measured in purchasing power parity (PPP) equivalent dollars, reported as constant 2011 international
dollars, based on estimates published by World Bank Group. International Comparison Program database. Washington
(DC): World Bank Group; 2014.
20
   World population prospects: the 2015 revision. New York: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division; 2015.
21
   UNICEF Data: Monitoring the Situation of Children and Women [website]. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund;
2015 (http://data.unicef.org/).
22
 Making pregnancy safer: the critical role of the skilled attendant: a joint statement by WHO, ICM and FIGO. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2014.
Annex 4. Adjustment factor to account for misclassification of
   maternal deaths in civil registration, literature review of
   reports and articles
	  


Country          Period/year   Adjustment factor
Australiaa       1994–1996           1.23
Australiab       1997–1999           1.80
Australiac       2000–2002           1.97
Australiad       2003–2005           2.03
Austriae         1980–1998           1.61
Brazilf             2002             1.40
Canadag          1988–1992           1.69
Canadah          1997–2000           1.52
Denmarki         1985–1994           1.94
Denmarkj         2002–2006           1.04
Finlandk         1987–1994           0.94
Francel          Dec 1988 to         2.38
                 March 1989
Francem             1999             1.29
Francen          2001–2006           1.21
Franceo          2007–2009           1.21
Guatemalap          1989             1.84
Guatemalap       1996–1998           1.84
Guatemalaq          2000             1.88
Guatemalar          2007             1.73
Irelands         2009–2011           3.40
Japant              2005             1.35
Mexicou             2008             0.99
Netherlandsv     1983–1992           1.34
Netherlandsx     1993–2005           1.48
New Zealandy        2006             1.11
New Zealandz        2007             0.85
New Zealandaa       2008             1.00
Country                           Period/year                 Adjustment factor
New Zealandbb                          2009                            0.92
New Zealandcc                          2010                            1.00
Portugaldd                         2001–2007                           2.04
Serbiaee                           2007–2010                           1.86
Singaporeff                        1990–1999                           1.79
Sloveniagg                         2003–2005                           5.00
South Africahh                     1999–2001                           0.98
South Africaii                     2002–2004                           1.16
South Africaii                     2005–2007                           0.90
Swedenjj                           1997–2005                           1.33
Swedenkk                           1988–2007                           1.68
United Kingdomll                   1988–1990                           1.39
United Kingdomll                   1991–1993                           1.52
United Kingdomll                   1994–1996                           1.64
United Kingdomll                   1997–1999                           1.77
United Kingdomll                   2000–2002                           1.80
United Kingdomll                   2003–2005                           1.86
United Kingdomll                   2006–2008                           1.60
United Statesmm                    1991–1997                           1.48
United Statesnn                    1995–1997                           1.54
United Statesoo                    1999–2002                           1.59
United Statesoo                    2003–2005                           1.41
Median                                                                 1.5

a
    AIHW, NHMRC. Report on maternal deaths in Australia 1994–96. Cat. no. PER 17. Canberra: AIHW; 2001 ().
b
    Slaytor EK, Sullivan EA, King JF. Maternal deaths in Australia 1997–1999. Cat. No. PER 24. Sydney: AIHW National
Perinatal Statistics Unit; 2004 (Maternal Deaths Series, No. 1).
c
    Sullivan EA, King JF, editors. Maternal deaths in Australia 2000–2002. Cat. no. PER 32. Sydney: AIHW National
Perinatal Statistics Unit; 2006 (Maternal Deaths Series, No. 2).
d
    Sullivan EA, Hall B, King JF. Maternal deaths in Australia 2003–2005. Cat. no. PER 42. Sydney: AIHW National
Perinatal Statistics Unit; 2007 (Maternal Deaths Series, No. 3).
e
    Johnson S, Bonello MR, Li Z, Hilder L, Sullivan EA. Maternal deaths in Australia 2006–2010. Cat. no. PER 61. Canberra:
AIHW; 2014 (Maternal Deaths Series, No. 4).
f
    Brasil Ministério da Saúde, Secretaria de Atenção à Saúde, Departamento de Ações Programáticas Estratégicas. Estudo da
mortalidade de mulheres de 10 a 49 anos, com ênfase na mortalidade materna: relatório final. Brasilia: Ministério da Saúde,
Secretaria de Atenção à Saúde, Departamento de Ações Programáticas Estratégicas, Editora do Ministério da Saúde; 2006.
g
    Turner LA et al. Underreporting of maternal mortality in Canada: a question of definition. Chronic Dis Can. 2002;23:22–
30.
h
    Health Canada. Special report on maternal mortality and severe morbidity in Canada – enhanced surveillance: the path to
prevention. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada; 2004.
i
    Andersen BR et al. Maternal mortality in Denmark 1985–1994. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2009;42:124–8.
j
    Bødker B et al. Maternal deaths in Denmark 2002–2006. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2009;88:556–62.
k
    Gissler M et al. Pregnancy-associated deaths in Finland 1987–1994 definition problems and benefits of record linkage.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 1997;76(7):651–7.
l
    Bouvier-Colle MH et al. Reasons for the underreporting of maternal mortality in France, as indicated by a survey of all
deaths among women of childbearing age. Int J Epidemiol. 1991;20:717–21.
m
    Bouvier-Colle MH et al. Estimation de la mortalité maternelle en France : une nouvelle méthode. J Gynecol Obstet Biol
Reprod. 2004;33(5):421–9.
n
    Rapport du Comité national d’experts sur la mortalité maternelle (CNEMM) 2001–2006. Saint-Maurice: Institut de veille
sanitaire; 2010.
o
    Rapport du comité national d’experts sur la mortalité maternelle (CNEMM). Enquête nationale confidentielle sur les morts
maternelles France, 2007–2009 Inserm, France: Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale; 2013.
p
    Schieber B, Stanton C. Estimación de la mortalidad materna en Guatemala período 1996–1998. Guatemala; 2000.
q
    Línea basal de mortalidad materna para el año 2000. Informe final. Guatemala: Ministerio de Salud Pública y Asistencia
Social; 2003.
r
    Estudio nacional de mortalidad materna. Informe final. Guatemala: Secretaría de Planificación y Programación de la
Presidencia Ministerio de Salud Pública y Asistencia Social; 2011.
s
    Confidential Maternal Death Enquiry in Ireland, report for triennium 2009–2011. Cork: Maternal Death Enquiry; 2012.
t
    Health Sciences Research Grant. Analysis and recommendations of the causes of maternal mortality and infant mortality.
Tomoaki I, principal investigator. Research Report 2006–2008. Osaka: Department of Perinatology, National Cardiovascular
Center; 2009 [in Japanese].
Hidaka A et al. [Causes and ratio of maternal mortality, and its reliability]. Sanfujinkachiryou [Treatment in obstetrics and
gynaecology]. 2009;99(1):85–95 [in Japanese].
u
    Búsqueda intencionada de muertes maternas en México. Informe 2008. Mexico, DF: Dirección General de Información en
Salud, Secretaría de Salud; 2010.
v
    Schuitemaker N et al. Confidential enquiry into maternal deaths in the Netherlands 1983–1992. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol. 1998;79(1):57–62.
x
    Schutte J et al. Rise in maternal mortality in the Netherlands. BJOG. 2010;117(4):399–406.
y
    PMMRC. Perinatal and maternal mortality in New Zealand 2006: second report to the Minister of Health. Wellington:
Ministry of Health; 2009.
z
    PMMRC. Perinatal and maternal mortality in New Zealand 2007: third report to the Minister of Health July 2008 to June
2009. Wellington: Ministry of Health; 2009.
aa
     PMMRC. Perinatal and maternal mortality in New Zealand 2008: fourth report to the Minister of Health July 2009 to June
2010. Wellington: Ministry of Health; 2010.
bb
     PMMRC. Fifth annual report of the Perinatal and Maternal Mortality Review Committee: reporting mortality 2009.
Wellington: Health Quality and Safety Commission; 2011.
cc
     PMMRC. Sixth annual report of the Perinatal and Maternal Mortality Review Committee: reporting mortality 2010.
Wellington: Health Quality and Safety Commission; 2012.
dd
     Gomes MC, Ventura MT, Nunes RS. How many maternal deaths are there in Portugal? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med.
2012;25(10):1975–9.
ee
     Krstic M et al. Maternal deaths – methodology for cases registration and reporting. Belgrade; 2008 [unpublished paper].
ff
     Lau G. Are maternal deaths on the ascent in Singapore? A review of maternal mortality as reflected by coronial casework
from 1990 to 1999. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2002;31(3):261–75.
gg
     Kralj E, Mihevc-Ponikvar B, Premru-Sršenc T, Balažica J. Maternal mortality in Slovenia: case report and the method of
identifying pregnancy-associated deaths. Forensic Sci Int Suppl Ser. 2009;1(1):52–7.
hh
     Moodley J. Saving mothers: 1999–2001. S Afr Med J. 2003;93(5):364–6.
ii
     Saving mothers 2008–2010: fifth report on the confidential enquiries into maternal deaths in South Africa. Comprehensive
report. South Africa: Department of Health, National Committee on Confidential Enquires into Maternal Deaths; 2012.
jj
     Grunewald C et al. Modradodligheten underskattad i Sverige. Lakartidningen. 2008;34(105):2250–3.
kk
     Esscher A et al., Maternal mortality in Sweden 1988–2007: more deaths than officially reported. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand. 2012;92:40–6.
ll
     Centre for Maternal and Child Enquiries (CMACE). Saving mothers’ lives: reviewing maternal deaths to make motherhood
safer: 2006–2008. The eighth report on confidential enquiries into maternal deaths in the United Kingdom. BJOG.
2011;118(Suppl.1):1–203.
mm
      Berg CJ et al. Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 1991–1997. Obstet Gynecol. 2003;101(2):289–96.
nn
     MacKay AP et al. An assessment of pregnancy-related mortality in the United States. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol.
2005;19(3):206–14.
oo
     MacKay AP et al. Changes in pregnancy mortality ascertainment United States, 1999–2005. Obstet Gynecol.
2011;118:104–10.
Annex 5. Usability assessment of civil registration data for
   selected years (1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010 and latest
   available year)

Assessment of civil registration data (VR data) quality – usability
	  
National	  civil	  registration	  and	  vital	  statistics	  (CRVS)	  systems	  are	  meant	  to	  record	  all	  births,	  deaths	  
and	  causes	  of	  death	  within	  a	  country.	  The	  data	  retrieved	  from	  CRVS	  systems	  are	  referred	  to	  as	  vital	  
registration	  (VR)	  data.	  	  
	  
For	  the	  VR	  data,	  the	  usability,	  referred	  to	  as	  (!,! )	  for	  country	  c	  in	  year	  t,	  was	  defined	  as	  the	  
proportion	  of	  all	  deaths	  to	  women	  of	  reproductive	  ages	  in	  the	  country-­‐year	  for	  which	  causes	  have	  
been	  assessed	  in	  the	  VR	  data	  set.	  Essentially,	  (!,! )	  is	  the	  product	  of	  the	  completeness	  of	  the	  VR	  data	  
and	  the	  percentage	  of	  deaths	  with	  a	  well-­‐defined	  cause:	  
	  
                             (!"#$%&'& )                          (!"" )
	            !,!   =	  !,!                  	  ×	  (1 − !,! )	  
	  
               (!"#$%&'& )                                                                              (!"" )
where	  !    ,!               refers	  to	  the	  completeness	  of	  the	  VR,	  and	  !   ,! 	  refers	  to	  the	  proportion	  of	  VR	  
deaths	  with	  ill-­‐defined	  causes	  (as	  reported).	  
	  
The	  completeness	  is	  assessed	  by	  comparing	  the	  total	  number	  of	  deaths	  among	  women	  of	  
reproductive	  age	  recorded	  in	  the	  VR	  database	  (WHO	  Mortality	  Database)23	  to	  the	  WHO	  estimate	  of	  
the	  total	  number	  of	  deaths	  among	  women	  of	  reproductive	  age,24	  i.e.:	  	  
	  
                 (!"#$%&'& )
	            !,!               	  =	  VR	  total	  deaths	  /	  WHO	  total	  deaths	  
	  
          (!"#$%&'& )
with	  !,!                  = 1	  if	  the	  VR	  total	  deaths	  exceeds	  the	  WHO	  estimate	  of	  total	  deaths.	  
	  
Based	  on	  the	  assessment	  of	  data	  quality	  and	  data	  source,	  VR	  data	  are	  grouped	  into	  three	  categories.	  
These	  categories	  affect	  how	  much	  uncertainty	  is	  assumed	  to	  surround	  each	  data	  point	  obtained	  
from	  the	  VR	  system.	  The	  categories	  are	  as	  follows.	  
	  
•                            Type	  I:	  good	  quality	  VR	  data	  with	  usability	  >	  80%.	  
•                            Type	  II:	  VR	  data	  from	  a	  string	  of	  decent	  VR	  data	  with	  usability	  between	  60%	  and	  80%.	  
•                            Type	  III:	  other	  data	  from	  registration	  and	  mortality	  reporting	  systems.	  For	  these	  data	  points,	  
                             data	  quality	  cannot	  be	  assessed	  as	  the	  countries	  have	  not	  submitted	  data	  to	  the	  relevant	  WHO	  
                             office.	  
	  

Please	  refer	  to	  Table	  A5.1	  for	  the	  usability	  assessment	  by	  country	  for	  selected	  years.	  

	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23
            WHO Mortality Database (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/mortality_data/en/).
24
            Life tables for WHO Member States 1990–2012. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014.
Table	  A5.1.	  Usability	  assessment	  of	  civil	  registration	  data	  for	  selected	  years	  (1990,	  1995,	  2000,	  
2005,	  2010	  and	  latest	  available	  year)	  

                                                                                                                                    Latest	  
                                                                                                                                   available	  
                    Country	                          1990	         1995	               2000	      2005	        2010	          year	  	  
                                                                                                                                       42	  
Albania	                                                NA	           	  	  56	          49	        55	                      (2009)	  
                                                                                                                          	           95	  
Argentina	                                               96	          	  	  97	          94	        94	          94	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                                                       82	  
Armenia	                                                 67	          	  	  86	          91	                      84	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                            	                         98	  
Australia	                                               99	          	  	  96	          98	        98	                      (2011)	  
                                                                                                                          	           97	  
Austria	                                                 99	          100	               100	       100	           98	        (2014)	  
                                                                                                                                       87	  
Azerbaijan	                                              60	          	  	  64	          80	            	            	      (2007)	  
                                                                                                                                       99	  
Bahamas	                                                               	  	  99	          84	        92	          82	        (2012)	  
                                                              	                                                                       94	  
Bahrain	                                                     	                    	        98	        94	          93	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                                                      100	  
Barbados	                                                83	          100	                 98	        98	        100	         (2012)	  
                                                                                                                                       98	  
Belarus	                                                 99	          	  	  98	          98	                                  (2011)	  
                                                                                                            	            	           94	  
Belgium	                                                 94	          	  	  96	          98	        97	          95	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                                                      100	  
Belize	                                                  83	          	  	  85	          98	      100	           99	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                                                       21	  
Bolivia	  (Plurinational	  State	  of)	                   	                    	        15	            	            	      (2003)	  	  
                                                                                                                                       91	  
Bosnia	  and	  Herzegovina	                            88	                                                                      (2011)	  
                                                                                  	            	          	            	           92	  
Brazil	                                                  69	          	  	  72	          75	        81	          83	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                                                       97	  
Brunei	  Darussalam	                                                                        88	        97	          83	        (2012)	  
                                                            	                    	                                                   93	  
Bulgaria	                                                97	          	  	  98	          96	        96	          94	        (2014)	  
                                                                                                                                       97	  
Cabo	  Verde	                                                                                                                     (2012)	  
                                                            	                    	            	          	            	           93	  
Canada	                                                  92	          	  	  97	          97	        97	          93	        (2011)	  
                                                                                                                                       98	  
Chile	                                                   97	          	  	  98	          98	        98	          98	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                                                       82	  
Colombia	                                                85	          	  	  82	          84	        83	          81	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                                                       87	  
Costa	  Rica	                                           89	          	  	  90	          91	        91	          90	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                          Latest	  
                                                                                                         available	  
                     Country	     1990	      1995	            2000	        2005	      2010	          year	  	  
                                                                                                             99	  
Croatia	                             95	      	  	  88	        99	          98	        99	        (2014)	  
                                                                                                             98	  
Cuba	                                99	      	  	  99	        99	          99	        98	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             71	  
Cyprus	                                                            37	          65	                    (2012)	  
                                       	                 	                                    	           91	  
Czech	  Republic	                 100	       	  	  99	        99	          98	        97	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             87	  
Denmark	                             96	      	  	  94	        98	          97	        93	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                             65	  
Dominican	  Republic	               44	      	  	  44	        45	          48	        48	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                             72	  
Ecuador	                             72	      	  	  74	        75	          76	        78	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             91	  
Egypt	                                                             80	          82	        91	        (2013)	  
                                        	                	                                                 55	  
El	  Salvador	                      61	      	  	  63	        65	          65	        64	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                             99	  
Estonia	                             99	      	  	  99	        99	          98	        98	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                            100	  
Fiji	                                                                            99	                    (2012)	  
                                        	                	          	                        	           98	  
Finland	                             98	      	  	  99	        99	          97	        96	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             90	  
France	                              93	      	  	  94	        92	          91	        90	        (2011)	  
                                                                                                             73	  
Georgia	                             96	      	  	  89	        78	          87	        49	        (2014)	  
                                                                                                             93	  
Germany	                             93	      	  	  95	        93	          94	        93	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             96	  
Greece	                              96	      	  	  94	        95	          98	        96	        (2012)	  
                                                                                                             96	  
Grenada	                             91	      	  	  87	        92	        100	         98	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             76	  
Guatemala	                           76	      	  	  78	        85	          93	        81	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                             65	  
Guyana	                              81	      	  	  84	                      85	        73	        (2011)	  
                                                                        	                                   15	  
Honduras	                            54	                                                    14	        (2013)	  
                                                   	                 	            	                       97	  
Hungary	                           100	       100	               99	          99	      100	         (2014)	  
                                                                                                             93	  
Iceland	                             93	      	  	  92	        97	          93	        95	        (2012)	  
Ireland	                             98	      	  	  99	        99	          99	        99	  
                                                                                                              	  
                                                                                                            100	  
Israel	                              98	      	  	  96	        98	          93	                    (2009)	  
                                                                                                  	  
                                                                                                           Latest	  
                                                                                                          available	  
                  Country	     1990	        1995	                  2000	      2005	      2010	        year	  	  
                                                                                                             97	  
Italy	                            98	        	  	  98	              98	                    98	      (2012)	  
                                                                                       	                    77	  
Jamaica	                          48	                                  53	        63	        73	      (2011)	  
                                                         	                                                  88	  
Japan	                            99	        	  	  99	              98	        97	        97	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                             49	  
Jordan	                                                                                         50	      (2011)	  
                                     	           	                       	          	                    86	  
Kazakhstan	                       86	        887	                     82	        83	        85	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                             53	  
Kiribati	                                     	  	  61	              56	                              (2001)	  
                                       	                                              	          	        99	  
Kuwait	                                       	  	  85	              99	        98	        99	      (2013)	  
                                     	                                                                      82	  
Kyrgyzstan	                       82	        	  	  80	              85	        89	        89	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                             99	  
Latvia	                           98	        100	                     98	        99	        99	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                             92	  
Lithuania	                      100	         	  	  99	              99	        97	        96	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                             98	  
Luxembourg	                       96	        	  	  90	              94	        89	        94	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                             85	  
Malaysia	                                                               85	        81	                  (2008)	  
                                       	                      	                                  	        77	  
Maldives	                                                               51	        63	        71	      (2011)	  
                                     	                  	                                                  97	  
Malta	                            74	        	  	  87	              89	        91	        79	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                             99	  
Mauritius	                        96	        	  	  96	              97	        99	      100	       (2013)	  
                                                                                                             88	  
Mexico	                           96	        	  	  92	              90	        93	        94	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                             86	  
Montenegro	                                           	  	  	        84	        92	                  (2009)	  
                                       	                                                          	        15	  
Morocco	                                                                                        16	      (2012)	  
                                     	             	                     	          	                    94	  
Netherlands	                      93	           94	                   93	        95	        95	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                             99	  
New	  Zealand	                   99	        100	                   100	         99	      100	       (2011)	  
                                                                                                             66	  
Nicaragua	                        62	                                  63	        63	        64	      (2013)	  
                                                    	                                                       89	  
Norway	                           98	           97	                   97	        97	        95	      (2013)	  
Oman	                                                                                           56	  
                                       	                      	          	          	                     	  
                                                                                                             81	  
Panama	                                                                 79	        83	        75	      (2013)	  
                                       	                      	  
                                                                                                                    Latest	  
                                                                                                                   available	  
                      Country	                    1990	        1995	        2000	      2005	      2010	        year	  	  
                                                                                                                       76	  
Paraguay	                                                          75	          74	        77	        79	      (2013)	  
                                                        	                                                             63	  
Peru	                                                43	          48	          55	        62	        61	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                       88	  
Philippines	                                                       83	          85	                              (2008)	  
                                                        	                                      	          	         88	  
Poland	                                              95	          94	          94	        93	        93	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                       80	  
Portugal	                                            89	          89	          85	                    88	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                	                     89	  
Puerto	  Rico	                                      99	        100	           99	        99	        95	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                       65	  
Qatar	                                                             98	          86	                    71	      (2012)	  
                                                        	                                      	                     96	  
Republic	  of	  Korea	                             85	          95	          96	        97	        96	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                                       99	  
Republic	  of	  Moldova	                         100	         100	           89	        97	      100	       (2013)	  
                                                                                                                       83	  
Romania	                                           100	           97	          99	        95	        93	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                                       96	  
Russian	  Federation	                               98	          97	          95	        95	        96	      (2011)	  
                                                                                                                      100	  
Saint	  Lucia	                                      98	          94	          85	        87	        95	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                                       98	  
Saint	  Vincent	  and	  the	  Grenadines	        97	        100	           83	        79	        93	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                       42	  
Saudi	  Arabia	                                                                                                   (2012)	  
                                                          	            	          	          	          	         66	  
Serbia	                                                                          67	        69	        71	      (2013)	  
                                                        	            	                                               74	  
Singapore	                                           86	          85	          82	        78	        74	      (2014)	  
                                                                                                                       91	  
Slovakia	                                           NA	           99	          98	        96	        95	      (2014)	  
Slovenia	                                           97	           95	          96	        95	        97	  
                                                                                                                       	  
                                                                                                                      67	  
South	  Africa	                                    NA	           70	          88	        87	        83	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                      91	  
Spain	                                               99	          99	          97	        97	        95	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                      79	  
Sri	  Lanka	                                                                    72	                              (2006)	  
                                                        	            	                        	          	        94	  
Suriname	                                            92	          69	          72	        75	        96	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                                      97	  
Sweden	                                              99	          99	          99	        98	        94	      (2013)	  
                                                                                                                      91	  
Switzerland	                                         97	          95	          95	        96	        95	      (2012)	  
                                                                                                                         Latest	  
                                                                                                                        available	  
                  Country	                       1990	        1995	        2000	        2005	        2010	          year	  	  
Syria	                                                                                                     90	  
Tajikistan	                                           	  
                                                     64	            	  
                                                                   64	            	  
                                                                                 65	            	  
                                                                                               67	                         	  
                                                                                                                 	         	  
                                                                                                                           80	  
Thailand	                                           67	          82	          77	          75	                      (2006)	  
The	  former	  Yugoslav	  Republic	  of	                                                                  	  
Macedonia	                                         NA	           88	          91	          89	          90	  
                                                                                                                            	  
                                                                                                                           99	  
Trinidad	  and	  Tobago	                          99	          98	          98	          99	                      (2009)	  
                                                                                                                 	        24	  
Tunisia	                                                                                                                (2013)	  
                                                         	            	            	            	          	          45	  
Turkey	                                                                                                     40	        (2013)	  
                                                       	            	              	            	                      53	  
Turkmenistan	                                       74	          79	                                                  (2013)	  
                                                                                   	            	            	          96	  
Ukraine	                                            99	          98	          97	          98	          98	        (2012)	  
United	  Arab	  Emirates	                                                                   79	          53	  
                                                      	             	              	                                     	  
                                                                                                                           97	  
United	  Kingdom	                                100	           99	                        99	          98	        (2013)	  
                                                                                   	                                      98	  
United	  States	  of	  America	                  95	          96	          96	          97	          96	        (2013)	  
                                                                                                                           94	  
Uruguay	                                            95	          95	          93	          91	          89	        (2013)	  
Uzbekistan	                                         88	          89	          88	          90	  
Venezuela	  (Bolivarian	  Republic	                                                                         	           	  
                                                                                                                           96	  
of)	                                                89	                        89	          89	          94	        (2012)	  
Zimbabwe	                                           36	              	  
	                                                                     	            	            	            	           	  
Annex 6. Estimation of AIDS-related indirect maternal deaths
In this estimation process, the full model has two parts, the first part to separately estimate
maternal deaths not related to AIDS (discussed in section 2.4 of the main report) and the second
part to estimate AIDS-related indirect maternal deaths. AIDS-related indirect maternal deaths refer
to HIV-positive women who have died because of the aggravating effect of pregnancy on HIV;
where the interaction between pregnancy and HIV becomes the underlying cause of death, these
are counted as indirect maternal deaths. It is important to note that direct maternal deaths among
HIV-positive women are not estimated separately but are rather included within the first part of
the model.
Thus, the final PM estimates are the result of adding the results of this two-part model: the
estimated number of non-AIDS-related maternal deaths and the estimated number of AIDS-
related indirect maternal deaths:
                                                           PM = (1 – a)PMna + aPMa                                                                                                                                                                  (A6.1)
where PMna is the proportion of non-AIDS-related maternal deaths among all non-AIDS-related
deaths (women aged 15–49 years); PMa is the proportion of AIDS-related indirect maternal deaths
among all AIDS-related deaths (women aged 15–49 years); and a is the proportion of AIDS-related
deaths among all deaths (women aged 15–49 years).
This appendix describes the second part of the two-part model, that is, the estimation of AIDS-
related indirect maternal deaths, PMa. The sources of data for estimating the fraction of AIDS-
related indirect maternal deaths are the UNAIDS 2013 estimates of AIDS-related deaths25 and the
total number of deaths estimated by WHO from its life tables. The approach used to estimate the
proportion of AIDS-related deaths that qualify as indirect maternal deaths, PMa, is the product of
two quantities:
                                                           PMa = υu                                                                                                                                                                                 (A6.2)
where υ is the proportion of AIDS deaths in women aged 15–49 years that occur during pregnancy
or the childbirth period, computed as follows:
                                                                                              ckGFR
                                                           υ=                                                                                                                                                                                       (A6.3)
                                                                                         1 + c(k − 1)GFR
u is the fraction of AIDS-related deaths among pregnant women that qualify as maternal because
of some causal relationship with the pregnancy, delivery or postpartum period; GFR is the general
fertility rate; c is the average woman-years lived in the maternal risk period per live birth (set equal
to 1 year, including the 9 month gestation, plus 42 days postpartum, and an additional 1.5 months
to account for pregnancies not ending in a live birth); k  is the relative risk of dying from AIDS for a
pregnant versus non-pregnant woman.
In the 2013 estimates, updated values for k and u were used, in light of new data from the network
for Analyzing Longitudinal Population-based HIV/AIDS data on Africa (ALPHA).26 Based on the

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25
   According to the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), AIDS-related deaths (including AIDS-related
indirect maternal deaths) include the estimated number of deaths related to HIV infection, including deaths that occur
before reaching the clinical stage classified as AIDS.
26
   Zaba B et al. Effect of HIV infection on pregnancy-related mortality in sub-Saharan Africa: secondary analyses of pooled
community-based data from the network for Analyzing Longitudinal Population-based HIV/AIDS data on Africa (ALPHA).
Lancet. 2013;381(9879):1763–71. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60803-X.
findings in the paper and further exploration of the data, both k and u were set equal to 0.3. The
uncertainty distributions for both parameters were updated as well, the standard deviation for k
was set to 0.1 and for u, a uniform distribution with outcomes between 0.1 and 0.5 was used.
	  
Annex 7. Estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR, maternal
   deaths per 100 000 live births), number of maternal deaths,
   lifetime risk and percentage of AIDS-related indirect
   maternal deaths, 2015a
                               Range	  of	  MMR	                                              %	  of	  
                                uncertainty	  	                        Lifetime	             AIDS-­‐                         Range	  of	  PM	  
                                  (UI	  80%)	           Number	        risk	  of	         related	                        uncertainty	  
                                                            of	         maternal	            indirect	  
                              Lower	       Upper	       maternal	      death:	  	         maternal	                    Lower	         Upper	  
                         b                                          c               d                        e
Country           MMR 	   estimate	      estimate	     deaths 	        1	  in 	          deaths 	           PM	     estimate	      estimate	  
Afghanistan	      396         253               620         4	  300                  52                      –   17.7         11.3             27.7
Albania	           29          16                46               11           1	  900                       –    1.3          0.7              2.1
Algeria	          140          82               244         1	  300                240                       –    8.0          4.7             14.0
Angola	           477         221               988         5	  400                  32                      –   18.3          8.5             37.8
Argentina	         52          44                63              390                790                       –    3.8          3.2              4.6
Armenia	           25          21                31               10           2	  300	                     –    1.4          1.1              1.7	  
Australia	          6            5                7               19           8	  700                       –    0.6          0.5              0.8
Austria	            4            3                5                 3      18	  200                          –    0.3          0.2              0.4
Azerbaijan	        25          17                35               48           1	  600                       –    2.0          1.3              2.7
Bahamas	           80          53               124                 5               660                       –    3.8          2.5              5.9
Bahrain	           15          12                19                 3          3	  000                       –    1.9          1.5              2.4
Bangladesh	       176         125               280         5	  500                240                       –    8.6          6.1             13.6
Barbados	          27	        19                37                 1          2	  100                       –    1.5          1.0              2.0
Belarus	            4            3                6                 5      13	  800                          –    0.2          0.1              0.2
Belgium	            7            5               10                 9          8	  000                       –    0.5          0.4              0.7
Belize	            28          20                36                 2          1	  300                       –    2.7          2.0              3.5
Benin	            405         279               633         1	  600                  51                      –   14.8         10.2             23.1
Bhutan	           148         101               241               20                310                       –    3.6          2.4              5.8
Bolivia	  
(Pluri-­‐
national	  
State	  of)	     206         140               351            520                 160                      –      7.9           5.4            13.4
Bosnia	  and	  
Herzegovina	       11            7	             17                 4           6	  800                   –       0.7           0.4              1.0
Botswana	         129         102               172                72                270                  18       3.1           2.5              4.2
Brazil	            44          36                54          1	  300           1	  200                   –       2.0           1.6              2.5
Brunei	  
Darussalam	        23          15                 30               2            2	  300                    –      1.7           1.2              2.3
Bulgaria	          11            8                14               7            6	  200                    –      0.4           0.3              0.6
Burkina	  
Faso	             371         257                 509        2	  700                 48                    –     14.2          9.8             19.5
Burundi	          712         471            1	  050        1	  350                 23                    –     27.0         17.9             39.8
Cabo	  Verde	     42          20                  95               5                900                    –      5.0          2.3             11.2
Cambodia	         161         117                 213             590                210                    –      6.4          4.7              8.5
Cameroon	         596         440                 881        5	  100                 35                    –     15.2         11.2             22.5
            f
Canada 	            7            5                  9              27           8	  800                    –      0.5          0.4              0.7
Central	  
African	  
Republic	         882         508            1	  500        1	  400                 27                    –     15.0          8.7             25.6
Chad	             856         560            1	  350        5	  400                 18                    –     28.3         18.5             44.5
Chile	             22          18                  26              52           2	  600                    –      1.8          1.5              2.2
China	             27          22                  32        4	  400           2	  400                    –      1.3          1.1              1.6
                                  Range	  of	  MMR	                                                    %	  of	  
                                   uncertainty	  	                               Lifetime	            AIDS-­‐                                Range	  of	  PM	  
                                     (UI	  80%)	              Number	            risk	  of	        related	                               uncertainty	  
                                                                  of	             maternal	           indirect	  
                                 Lower	       Upper	          maternal	          death:	  	        maternal	                           Lower	         Upper	  
                            b                                             c                   d                       e
Country              MMR 	   estimate	      estimate	        deaths 	            1	  in 	         deaths 	                PM	       estimate	      estimate	  
Colombia	             64          56                81             480                        800                      –	       3.8             3.3             4.7
Comoros	             335         207               536                  88                      66                     –        13.4             8.3            21.3
Congo	               442	       300               638             740                          45                     –        12.8             8.7            18.4
Costa	  Rica	        25          20                29                  18               2	  100                      –         1.8             1.4             2.1
Côte	  
d’Ivoire	              645         458             909              5	  400                   32                       –       13.4             9.5            18.9
Croatia	                 8           6              11                     3             7	  900                       –        0.6             0.4             0.7
Cuba	                   39          33              47                    45             1	  800                       –        1.8             1.5             2.1
Cyprus	                  7           4              12                     1             9	  400                       –        0.8             0.4             1.4
Czech	  
Republic	                 4             3               6                  5           14	  800                        –	       0.3            0.2              0.4
Democratic	  
People’s	  
Republic	  of	  
Korea	                   82           37           190                 300                  660                         –         2.8            1.3              6.5
Democratic	  
Republic	  of	  
the	  Congo	          693         509          1	  010          22	  000                    24                       –       22.3           16.4             32.5
Denmark	                 6           5                 9                  4              9	  500                       –	      0.5            0.4              0.7
Djibouti	              229         111               482                 50                   140                       –        5.4            2.6             11.3
Dominican	  
Republic	                92           77           111                 200                  400                         –         3.7            3.1              4.5
Ecuador	                 64           57            71                 210                  580                         –         4.4            3.9              4.9
Egypt	                   33           26            39                 820                  810                         –         3.5            2.8              4.1
El	  Salvador	          54           40            69                  57                  890                         –         1.9            1.4              2.4
Equatorial	  
Guinea	                342         207               542                100                   61                    5.6          8.8	          5.3             13.9
Eritrea	               501         332               750                880                   43                      –         20.5           13.6             30.6
Estonia	                 9           6                14                  1             6	  300                      –          0.5            0.3              0.7
Ethiopia	              353         247               567          11	  000                   64                      –         16.7           11.7             26.8
Fiji	                   30          23                41                  5             1	  200                      –          1.5            1.1              2.0
Finland	                 3           2                 3                  2            21	  700                      –          0.2            0.2              0.3
France	                  8           7                10                 66             6	  100	                    –	        0.7            0.6              0.9
Gabon	                 291         197               442                150	                 85                      –          8.6            5.8             13.1
Gambia	                706         484          1	  030                590                   24	                    –         31.1           21.4             45.5
Georgia	                36          28                47                 19             1	  500                      –          2.3            1.8              3.0
Germany	                 6           5                 8                 42            11	  700                      –          0.4            0.3              0.5
Ghana	                 319         216               458           2	  800                   74                      –         11.3            7.6             16.2
Greece	                  3           2                 4                  3            23	  700                      –          0.2            0.2              0.3
Grenada	                27          19                42                  1             1	  500                      –          1.7            1.2              2.7
Guatemala	              88          77               100                380                  330                      –          5.3            4.7              6.0	  
Guinea	                679         504               927           3	  100                   29                      –         23.3           17.3             31.8
Guinea-­‐
Bissau	                549         273          1	  090               370                    38                        –       13.3             6.6            26.3
Guyana	                229         184               301                34                   170                        –        4.7             3.8             6.2
Haiti	                 359         236               601               950                    90                        –       10.1             6.6            16.9
Honduras	              129          99               166               220                   300                        –        5.7             4.4             7.3
Hungary	                17          12                22	              15              4	  400                        –	      0.7             0.5             0.9
Iceland	                 3           2                 6                 0             14	  600                        –        0.4             0.2             0.7
                                 Range	  of	  MMR	                                               %	  of	  
                                  uncertainty	  	                           Lifetime	           AIDS-­‐                           Range	  of	  PM	  
                                    (UI	  80%)	         Number	             risk	  of	       related	                          uncertainty	  
                                                             of	             maternal	          indirect	  
                                 Lower	      Upper	     maternal	           death:	  	       maternal	                       Lower	        Upper	  
                           b                                        c                  d                        e
Country              MMR 	   estimate	     estimate	   deaths 	             1	  in 	        deaths 	             PM	   estimate	        estimate	  
India	               174         139             217	     45	  000                  220	                      –      6.2	      5.0                 7.7
Indonesia	           126          93             179        6	  400                  320                        –      6.3        4.6	               8.9
Iran	  (Islamic	  
Republic	  of)	      25          21               31              340            2	  000                    –         1.5           1.2             1.8
Iraq	                 50          35               69              620                 420                    –         6.2           4.3             8.5
Ireland	               8            6              11                5            6	  100                    –         0.8           0.6             1.2
Israel	                5            4               6                9            6	  200                    –         1.2           0.9             1.4
Italy	                 4            3               5               18           21	  970	                  –	       0.3           0.2             0.4
Jamaica	              89          70              115               43                 520                    –         3.8           3.0             4.9
Japan	                 5            4               7	             56           13	  400                    –         0.4	         0.3             0.5
Jordan	               58          44               75              110                 490                    –         5.2           4.0             6.8
Kazakhstan	           12          10               15               45            3	  000                    –         0.6           0.4             0.7
Kenya	               510         344              754         8	  000                  42                  2.3        17.4          11.7            25.7
Kiribati	             90          51              152                3                 300                    –         6.6           3.8            11.2
Kuwait	                4            3               6                3           10	  300                    –         0.9           0.7             1.2
Kyrgyzstan	           76	        59               96              120                 390                    –         5.2           4.1             6.5
Lao	  People’s	  
Democratic	  
Republic	            197         136	              307            350                  150                  –         10.3           7.1            16.1
Latvia	               18          13                 26              4             3	  500                  –          0.7           0.5             1.0
Lebanon	              15          10                 22             13             3	  700                  –          1.8           1.3             2.8
Lesotho	             487         310                871            300                   61               12.8          5.9           3.8            10.6
Liberia	             725         527           1	  030       1	  100                   28                  –         31.5          22.9            44.9
Libya	                 9            6                15             12             4	  200                  –          0.7           0.5             1.2
Lithuania	            10            7                14              3             6	  300                  –          0.4           0.3             0.5
Luxembourg	           10            7                16	            1             6	  500                  –          0.8	         0.6             1.4
Madagascar	          353         256                484       2	  900                   60                  –         16.4          11.9            22.5
Malawi	              634         422           1	  080       4	  200                   29                2.9         22.3          14.9            38.1
Malaysia	             40          32                 53            200             1	  200                  –          2.8           2.3             3.7
Maldives	             68          45                108              5                  600                  –         11.4           7.6            18.2
Mali	                587         448                823       4	  400                   27                  –         25.2          19.2            35.3
Malta	                 9            6                15              0             8	  300                  –          0.8           0.5             1.4
Mauritania	          602         399                984            810                   36                  –         27.4          18.2	          44.8
Mauritius	            53          38                 77              7             1	  300                  –          2.2           1.5             3.1
Mexico	               38          34                 42            890             1	  100                  –          2.5           2.2             2.8
Micronesia	          100          46                211              2                  310                  –          5.4           2.5            11.5
Mongolia	             44          35                 55             30                  800                  –          2.3           1.8             2.9
Montenegro	            7            4                12              1             8	  300                  –          0.4           0.2             0.7
Morocco	             121          93                142            850	                320                  –          6.3           4.8             7.4
Mozambiqu
e	                   489         360              686         5	  300                   40               10.7          9.5            7.0           13.4
Myanmar	             178         121              284         1	  700                  260                  –	        3.9            2.6            6.2
Namibia	             265         172              423              190                  100                4.3         11.1            7.2           17.8
Nepal	               258         176              425         1	  500                  150                  –          9.8            6.7           16.2
Netherlands	           7            5               9               12             8	  700                  –          0.6            0.4            0.7
New	  
Zealand	              11            9              14                7             4	  500                    –	      0.9           0.7             1.1
Nicaragua	           150         115              196              180                  270                    –        8.5           6.5            11.1
Niger	               553         411              752	       5	  400                   23                    –       34.3          25.5            46.6
                                 Range	  of	  MMR	                                             %	  of	  
                                  uncertainty	  	                          Lifetime	          AIDS-­‐                                 Range	  of	  PM	  
                                    (UI	  80%)	             Number	        risk	  of	      related	                                uncertainty	  
                                                                 of	        maternal	         indirect	  
                                Lower	       Upper	         maternal	      death:	  	      maternal	                            Lower	         Upper	  
                          b                                             c             d                       e
Country             MMR 	   estimate	      estimate	       deaths 	        1	  in 	       deaths 	                PM	        estimate	      estimate	  
Nigeria	                814     596            1	  180        58	  000                  22                   –        25.6            18.7             37.0
Norway	                   5        4                  6                 3      11	  500                       –	       0.5             0.4              0.6
Occupied	  
Palestinian	  
             g
Territory 	              45      21                99                  69               490                     –        6.1              2.8            13.2
Oman	                    17      13                24                  14          1	  900                     –        2.8              2.0             3.9
Pakistan	               178     111               283            9	  700               140                     –       10.9              6.8            17.3
Panama	                  94      77	             121                  71               420                     –        6.3              5.1             8.0
Papua	  New	  
Guinea	                 215      98               457                 460              120                      –	       7.4             3.4	          15.8
Paraguay	               132     107               163                 190              270                      –         9.3             7.6            11.6
Peru	                    68      54                80                 420              570                      –         4.7             3.7             5.5
Philippines	            114      87               175            2	  700              280                      –         6.3             4.8             9.7
Poland	                   3        2                4                  12        22	  100                      –         0.2             0.1             0.3
Portugal	                10        9               13                   8         8	  200                      –	       0.5             0.4             0.6
Puerto	  Rico	          14      10                18                   6         4	  300                      –         0.8             0.6             1.0
Qatar	                   13        9               19	                 3         3	  500                      –         2.6	           1.8             3.9
Republic	  of	  
Korea	                   11        9                13               50            7	  200                     –         0.7             0.6	            0.9
Republic	  of	  
Moldova	                 23      19                 28               10            3	  200                     –         1.0             0.8              1.3
Romania	                 31      22                 44               56            2	  300                     –         1.1             0.8              1.5
Russian	  
Federation	              25      18                33                 450          2	  300                     –        0.7              0.5             1.0
Rwanda	                 290     208               389            1	  100                85                     –       11.4              8.2            15.3
Saint	  Lucia	          48      32                72                   1          1	  100                     –        2.7              1.8             4.0
Saint	  
Vincent	  and	  
the	  
Grenadines	              45      34                63                  1           1	  100                     –         2.0             1.5             2.8
Samoa	                   51      24               115                  2                500                     –         6.2             2.9            13.8
Sao	  Tome	  
and	  Principe	        156      83                 268                10              140                      –        8.0             4.2             13.7
Saudi	  Arabia	         12        7                 20                72         3	  100                      –	      1.6             0.9              2.7	  
Senegal	                315     214                 468          1	  800               61                      –       16.3            11.1             24.2
Serbia	                  17      12                  24                15         3	  900                      –        0.8             0.6              1.1
Sierra	  Leone	   1	  360     999            1	  980          3	  100               17                      –       21.0	          15.4             30.6
Singapore	               10        6                 17                 5         8	  200                      –        0.8             0.5              1.2
Slovakia	                 6        4                  7                 3        12	  100                      –        0.3             0.3              0.4
Slovenia	                 9        6                 14                 2         7	  000                      –        0.8             0.5              1.2
Solomon	  
Islands	                114      75                175                 19              220                   –           6.6             4.4             10.1
Somalia	                732     361          13	  900           3	  400               22                   –          27.6            13.6             52.5
South	  Africa	        138     124                154           1	  500              300                32.1           1.7             1.5              1.8
South	  Sudan	         789     523           1	  150           3	  500               26                   –	        22.7            15.1             33.1
Spain	                    5        4                 6                 21        14	  700                   –           0.4             0.3              0.5
Sri	  Lanka	            30      26                 38                 98         1	  580                   –           1.9             1.7              2.4
Sudan	                  311     214                433           4	  100               72                   –          12.5             8.6             17.4
Suriname	               155     110                220	               15              270                   –	         7.4             5.2             10.4
                                     Range	  of	  MMR	                                               %	  of	  
                                      uncertainty	  	                            Lifetime	          AIDS-­‐                          Range	  of	  PM	  
                                        (UI	  80%)	            Number	           risk	  of	      related	                         uncertainty	  
                                                                   of	            maternal	         indirect	  
                                    Lower	        Upper	       maternal	         death:	  	      maternal	                     Lower	          Upper	  
                              b                                           c                 d                       e
Country             MMR 	   estimate	   estimate	             deaths 	           1	  in 	       deaths 	          PM	   estimate	   estimate	  
Swaziland	             389            251        627                150                         76           18.6        4.2           2.7            6.7
Sweden	                     4           3             5                   5          12	  900                       –   0.5           0.4            0.6
Switzerland	                5           4             7                   4          12	  400                       –   0.5           0.4            0.7
Syrian	  Arab	  
Republic	                  68          48         97                  300                400                      –      6.7           4.7            9.6
Tajikistan	                32          19         51                   82                790                      –      2.9           1.7            4.6
Thailand	                  20          14	       32                  140           3	  600                      –      0.6           0.4            0.9
The	  former	  
Yugoslav	  
Republic	  of	  
Macedonia	                  8           5         10                    2           8	  500                      –      0.5           0.3            0.6
Timor-­‐Leste	         215            150        300                   94                 82                      –     21.8          15.3           30.4
Togo	                  368            255        518                  940                 58                      –     10.7           7.4           15.1
Tonga	                 124             57        270                    3	              230                      –      5.2           2.4           11.3
Trinidad	  and	  
Tobago	                    63          49         80                   12                860                      –	    2.1           1.6            2.7
Tunisia	                   62          42         92                  130                710                      –      5.0           3.4            7.4
Turkey	                    16          12         21                  210           3	  000                      –      0.9           0.7            1.2
Turkmenista
n	                         42          20         73                   47                940                      –      1.3           0.6            2.3
Uganda	                343            247        493             5	  700	               47                    3.1     13.4           9.7           19.3
Ukraine	                   24          19         32                  120           2	  600                      –	    0.7           0.5            0.9
United	  Arab	  
Emirates	                   6           3         11                    6           7	  900                      –      0.7           0.4            1.4
United	  
Kingdom	                    9           8         11	                 74           5	  800                      –      0.8           0.6            0.9
United	  
Republic	  of	  
Tanzania	              398            281        570             8	  200                 45                    2.4     18.4          13.0           26.3
United	  
States	  of	  
America	                   14          12         16                  550           3	  800                      –      0.8	         0.7            0.9
Uruguay	                   15          11         19                    7           3	  300                      –      0.9           0.7            1.2
Uzbekistan	                36          20         65                  240           1	  000                      –      2.2           1.2            4.0
Vanuatu	                   78          36        169                    5                360                      –      6.8           3.1           14.7
Venezuela	  
(Bolivarian	  
Republic	  of)	           95          77        124                  570                420                      –      6.3           5.1            8.2
Viet	  Nam	               54          41         74                  860                870                      –      4.0           3.0            5.5
Yemen	                 385            274        582             3	  300                 60                      –     17.4          12.3           26.2
Zambia	                224            162        306             1	  400                 79                    9.4      8.3           6.0           11.3
Zimbabwe	              443            363        563             2	  400                 52                    4.7     13.2          10.8           16.7
PM:	  proportion	  of	  deaths	  among	  women	  of	  reproductive	  age	  that	  are	  due	  to	  maternal	  causes;	  UI:	  uncertainty	  
interval.	  
a
 	  Estimates	  have	  been	  computed	  to	  ensure	  comparability	  across	  countries,	  thus	  they	  are	  not	  necessarily	  the	  
same	  as	  official	  statistics	  of	  the	  countries,	  which	  may	  use	  alternative	  rigorous	  methods.	  
b	  
 MMR	  estimates	  have	  been	  rounded	  according	  to	  the	  following	  scheme:	  <	  100	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  1;	  100–999	  
rounded	  to	  nearest	  1;	  and	  ≥	  1000	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  10.	  
c
     	  Numbers	  of	  maternal	  deaths	  have	  been	  rounded	  according	  to	  the	  following	  scheme:	  <	  100	  rounded	  to	  
nearest	  1;	  100–999	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  10;	  1000–9999	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  100;	  and	  ≥	  10	  000	  rounded	  to	  
nearest	  1000.	  
d
       	  Life	  time	  risk	  has	  been	  rounded	  according	  to	  the	  following	  scheme:	  <	  100	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  1;	  100–999	  
rounded	  to	  nearest	  10;	  and	  ≥	  1000	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  100.	  
e
      	  Percentage	  of	  AIDS-­‐related	  indirect	  maternal	  deaths	  are	  presented	  only	  for	  countries	  with	  an	  HIV	  prevalence	  
≥5.0%	  in	  2014	  (How	  AIDS	  changed	  everything.	  MDG	  6:	  15	  years,	  15	  lessons	  of	  hope	  from	  the	  AIDS	  response.	  
UNAIDS;	  2015).	  
f
    	  Vital	  registration	  data	  were	  available	  for	  analysis	  only	  up	  to	  2011.	  Recent	  hospital	  surveillance	  data	  for	  
Canada	  excluding	  Quebec	  indicate	  a	  decline	  of	  maternal	  deaths	  per	  100	  000	  deliveries	  from	  8.8	  in	  2007/2008–
2008/2009	  to	  5.1	  in	  2011/2012.	  Some	  98%	  of	  deliveries	  in	  Canada	  occur	  in	  hospitals.	  
g
      	  Refers	  to	  a	  territory.	  
	                                                             	  
Annex 8. Estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR, maternal
   deaths per 100 000 live births), number of maternal deaths,
   and lifetime risk by WHO region, 2015
                                       Range	  of	  MMR	                                      Lifetime	  
                                        uncertainty                                               risk	  of	  
                                                                          Number	  of	         maternal	  
                                      Lower             Upper	            maternal	             death:
WHO	  region            MMR         estimate          estimate             deaths                  1	  in

Africa	                       542          506                 650             195	  000                   37

Americas	                      52            49                 59                7	  900                 920

South-­‐East	  Asia           164          141                 199              61	  000	                240

Europe	                        16            15                 19	              1	  800              3	  400

Eastern	  
Mediterranean	                166          142                 216              28	  000                  170

Western	  Pacific	            41            37	               50	              9	  800              1	  400

World                          216          207                 249             303	  000                  180
Annex 9. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR,
   maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by WHO region,
   1990–2015

                                                                              MMR	                                                    %	  change	      Average	  
                                                                                                                                       in	  MMR	       annual	  %	  
                                                                                                                                       between	   change	  in	  MMR	  
	                                                                                                                                     1990	  and	   between	  1990	  
WHO	  region	            1990	           1995	           2000	                2005	            2010	           2015	                2015	       and	  2015	  

Africa	                   965	            914	            840	                  712	            620	            542	                44	              2.3	  
Americas	                 102	            	  	  89	     	  	  76	           	  	  67	     	  	  62	     	  	  52	         49	              2.7	  
South-­‐East	  Asia	     525	            438	            352	                  268	            206	            164	                69	              4.7	  
Europe	                   	  	  44	     	  	  42	     	  	  33	           	  	  26	     	  	  19	     	  	  16	         64	              4.0	  
Eastern	  
Mediterranean	            362	            340	            304	                  250	            199	            166	                54	              3.1	  
Western	  Pacific	       114	            	  	  89	     	  	  75	           	  	  63	     	  	  50	     	  	  41	         64	              4.1	  
World	                    385	            369	            341	                  288	            246	            216	                44	              2.3	  
Annex 10. Estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR,
   maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), number of
   maternal deaths, and lifetime risk by UNICEF region, 2015
                                                                   Range	  of	  MMR	  uncertainty	  
                                                                                                           Number	  of	     Lifetime	  risk	  of	  
                                                                     Lower	              Upper	  	       maternal	        maternal	  death:	  
Region	                                                MMR	       estimate	           estimate	          deaths	               1	  in	  

Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa                                  546            511                   652            201	  000                    36

Eastern	  and	  Southern	  Africa                     417            387                   512              70	  000                   51

West	  and	  Central	  Africa                         679            599                   849            127	  000                    27

Middle	  East	  and	  North	  Africa                 110              95                  137              12	  000                 280

South	  Asia                                            182            157                   223              66	  000                 200

East	  Asia	  and	  the	  Pacific                      62             56                    76             18	  000                 880

Latin	  America	  and	  Caribbean                       68             64                    77               7	  300                670

Central	  and	  Eastern	  Europe	  and	  the	  
 Commonwealth	  of	  Independent	  
 States                                                    25             22                    30               1	  500             2	  000

Least	  developed	  countries                          436	          207	                 514	          135	  000	                  52	  

World                                                    216            207                   249            303	  000                  180

	  

	  
Annex 11. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio
   (MMR, maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by UNICEF
   region, 1990–2015
                                                                                                                              %	        Average	  
                                                                                                                         change	       annual	  %	  
                                                                                                                        in	  MMR	     change	  in	  
                                                               MMR	                                                    between	         MMR	  
                                                                                                                          1990	        between	  
                                                                                                                            and	       1990	  and	  
UNICEF	  region	               1990	         1995	          2000	        2005	        2010	        2015	          2015	          2015	  
Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa           987	         	  928	       846	         717	         624	         546	             45	             2.4	  
 Eastern	  and	  
 Southern	  Africa               926	         	  858	       755	         636	         509	         417	             55	             3.2	  
 West	  and	  Central	  
 Africa                          1070	         1020	          956	         814	         749	         679	             37	             1.8	  
Middle	  East	  and	  
North	  Africa                   221	         	  198	       170	         145	         122	         110	             50	             2.8	  
South	  Asia                     558	         	  476	       388	         296	         228	         182	             67	             4.5	  
East	  Asia	  and	  the	  
Pacific                           165	         	  134	       118	          	  98	      	  78	      	  62	         62	             3.9	  
Latin	  America	  and	  
Caribbean	                       135	         	  117	        	  99	      	  88	      	  81	      	  68	         49	             2.8	  
Central	  and	  Eastern	  
 Europe	  and	  the	  
 Commonwealth	  of	  
 Independent	  
 States	                          	  69	       	  71	       	  56	      	  43	      	  29	      	  25	         64	             4.2	  
Least	  developed	  
countries	                       903	         832	           732	         614	         519	         436	             52	             2.9	  
World	                           385	         369	           341	         288	         246	         216	             44	             2.3	  
Annex 12. Estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR,
   maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), number of
   maternal deaths, and lifetime risk by UNFPA region, 2015
                                                                       Range	  of	  MMR	  
                                                                        uncertainty	  
                                                                                                          Number	  of	            Lifetime	  risk	  of	  
                                                                  Lower	             Upper	              maternal	               maternal	  death:	  
UNFPA	  region	                                 MMR	          estimate	          estimate	             deaths	                      1	  in:	  
Arab	  States	                                   162	            138	               212	               	  15	  000	                        	  170	  
Asia	  and	  the	  Pacific	                    127	            114	               151	               	  84	  000	                        	  350	  
Eastern	  and	  Southern	  Africa	             407	            377	               501	               	  66	  000	                           	  52	  
Eastern	  Europe	  and	  Central	  Asia	       	  25	         	  22	                	  30	            	  1	  490	             2	  000	  
Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean	       	  68	         	  64	                	  77	            	  7	  290	                    	  670	  
West	  and	  Central	  Africa	                 679	            599	               849	              127	  000	                               	  27	  
	                                                   	  	           	  	             	  	              	  	                         	  
World	                                            216              207                 249	              303	  000                              	  180	  
   Annex 13. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio
      (MMR, maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by UNFPA
      region, 1990–2015
                                                                                                                                                             Average	  
                                                                                          MMR	                                                             annual	  %	  
                                                                                                                                          %	  change	     change	  in	  
                                                                                                                                          in	  MMR	         MMR	  
                                                                                                                                          between	         between	  
                                                                                                                                          1990	  and	     1990	  and	  
UNFPA	  region	                                 1990	        1995	        2000	            2005	         2010	        2015	            2015	         2015	  

	  Arab	  States	                                 306	         285	         250	              216	         181	        162	           47                2.5	  

	  Asia	  and	  the	  Pacific	                  353	         316	         271	              209	         160	        127	           64                4.1	  

Eastern	  and	  Southern	  Africa	               918	         848	         746	              627	         500	        407	           56                3.3	  

Eastern	  Europe	  and	  Central	  Asia	          70	          71	          56	               44	          29	         25	          64                4.2	  
Latin	  America	  and	  the	  
Caribbean	                                          135	         117	           99	               88	          81	         68	          49                2.8	  

West	  and	  Central	  Africa	                 1070	        1020	          956	              814	         749	        679	           37                1.8	  

	                                                                   	            	                 	            	             	                              	  


World	                                              385	         369	         341	              288	         246	        216	           44	              2.3	  
Annex 14. Estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR,
   maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), number of
   maternal deaths, and lifetime risk by World Bank Group
   region and income group, 2015
                                                                       Range	  of	  MMR	  uncertainty                                       Lifetime	  risk	  
                                                                                                                 Number	  of	                of	  maternal	  
       World	  Bank	  Group	  region	  and	                         Lower                Upper	             maternal	                         death:
       income	  group                                MMR               estimate             estimate              deaths                             1	  in:

       Low	  income                                  495                   468                 586                113	  000                       	  	  	  	  41	  

       Middle	  income                               185                   170                 221                188	  000                       	  	  220	  

        Lower	  middle	  income                     253                   229                 305                169	  000                       	  	  130	  

        Upper	  middle	  income                     	  	  55	          	  	  47	        	  	  73	       	  	  19	  000	               	  970	  

       Low	  and	  middle	  income                 242                   232                 279                300	  000                       	  	  150	  

        East	  Asia	  and	  Pacific                	  	  63	          	  	  57	        	  	  77	        	  	  18000	                   860	  

        Europe	  and	  Central	  Asia              	  	  25	          	  	  22	        	  	  30	        	  	  	  	  1000	          1900

        Latin	  America	  and	  the	  Caribbean   	  	  69	          	  	  65	        	  	  79	              6200	                     	  670	  

        Middle	  East	  and	  North	  Africa      	  	  90	          	  	  78	        116                       7800	                     	  350	  

        South	  Asia                                 182                   157                 223                    66000	                        200	  

        Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa                       547                   512                 653               	  	  201000	                  	  	  	  	  36	  

       High	  income                                 	  	  17	          	  	  16	        	  	  19	              2800	                    3300

       World                                          216                   207                 249                303	  000                       	  	  180	  

	  

	  
Annex 15. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio
   (MMR, maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by World
   Bank Group region and income group, 1990–2015
                                                                                                                    MMR	                                                                              Average	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      annual	  %	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    %	  change	     change	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    in	  MMR	         MMR	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    between	         between	  
       World	  Bank	  Group	  region	  and	                                                                                                                                    1990	  and	     1990	  and	  
       income	  group	                                       1990	                   1995	            2000	              2005	            2010	            2015	                 2015	         2015	  
       Low	  income	                                         1020	                   944	             839	               705	             593	             495	                   51	           2.9	  
       Middle	  income	                                      	  	  356	            330	             299	               248	             210	             185	                   48	           2.6	  
         Lower	  middle	  income	                           	  	  532	            470	             411	               337	             287	             253	                   52	           3.0	  
         Upper	  middle	  income	                           	  	  117	            101	              	  	  88	        	  	  75	      	  	  64	      	  	  55	           53	           3.0	  
       Low	  and	  middle	  income	                        	  	  435	            416	             383	               324	             276	             242	                   44	           2.3	  
         East	  Asia	  and	  Pacific	                      	  	  168	            137	             120	               100	              	  	  79	      	  	  63	           63	           3.9	  
         Europe	  and	  Central	  Asia	                    	  	  	  	  71	      	  	  67	      	  	  55	        	  	  43	      	  	  29	      	  	  25	           65	           4.3	  
         Latin	  America	  and	  the	  
         Caribbean	                                           	  	  138	             120	             101	               	  	  90	      	  	  83	      	  	  69	          50	              2.8	  
         Middle	  East	  and	  North	  Africa	            	  	  181	             152	             125	               110	             	  	  99	      	  	  90	          50	              2.8	  
           South	  Asia	                                     	  	  558	             476	             388	               296	             228	             182	                 67	              4.5	  
           Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	                           	  	  987	             928	             846	               717	             625	             547	                 45	              2.4	  
       High	  income	                                        	  	  	  	  27	      	  	  26	      	  	  22	        	  	  20	      	  	  19	          17	              37	              1.9	  
       World	                                                 	  	  385	             369	             341	               288	             246	             216	                 44	              2.3	  

	  

	  
	                                                      	  
Annex 16. Estimates of maternal mortality ratio (MMR,
   maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), number of
   maternal deaths, and lifetime risk by UNPD region, 2015
                                                                   Range	  of	  MMR	  uncertainty	                                                   Lifetime	  risk	  
                                                                                                             Number	  of	                              of	  maternal	  
                                                                     Lower                Upper	             maternal	                                       death:
       UNPD	  region                            MMR	              estimate             estimate              deaths                                           1	  in:

       Africa                                    495                    464                 590                204	  000                                     	  	  	  	  	  42	  

         Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  	           555                    518                 664                197	  000                                     	  	  	  	  	  35	  

       Asia                                      119                    108                 141                	  	  90	  000	                            	  	  	  370	  

       Europe                                     	  	  13	          	  	  11	        	  	  15	       	  	  	  	  1	  000	                     4	  800

       Latin	  America	  and	  the	  
       Caribbean                                  	  	  67	          	  	  64	        	  	  77	       	  	  	  	  7	  300	                     	  	  	  670	  

       Northern	  America                        	  	  13	          	  	  11	        	  	  15	        	  	  	  	  	  	  	  580	             4	  100

       Oceania                                    	  	  82	          	  	  44	        163                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  530	          	  	  	  510	  

       More	  Developed	  Regions	             	  	  12	          	  	  11	        	  	  14	       	  	  	  	  1	  700	                     4	  900

       Less	  Developed	  Regions	            238                    157                 210                302	  000                                     	  	  	  150	  

       Least	  developed	  countries	  	     436                    418                 514                135	  000                                     	  	  	  	  	  52	  

       Less	  developed	  regions,	  
       excluding	  least	  developed	  
       countries	                               174                    157                 210                167	  000	                                   	  	  	  230	  

       World                                     216                    207                 249                303	  000                                     	  	  	  180	  

	  

	  
Annex 17. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio
   (MMR, maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by UNPD
   region, 1990–2015
                                                                               MMR                                                       %	  change	  in	     Average	  annual	  
                                                                                                                                               MMR	              %	  change	  in	  
                                                                                                                                        between	  1990	        MMR	  between	  
  Region                 1990             1995                    2000             2005               2010             2015               and	  2015            1990	  and	  2015
  Africa                 870              834                     770              654                565              495                      43                       2.3
    Sub-­‐Saharan	  
    Africa               996              939                     858                728              635              555                        44                     2.3
  Asia                   329              293                     251                195              149              119                        64                     4.1
  Europe                 	  	  31	     	  	  30	            	  	  21	       	  	  17	     	  	  14	     	  	  13	               58                     3.6
  Latin	  America	  
  and	  the	  
  Caribbean              135              117                     	  	  99	       	  	  88	     	  	  81	     	  	  67	               50                     2.8
  Northern	  
  America                	  	  11	     	  	  11	            	  	  12	       	  	  13	     	  	  14	     	  	  13	            –18	  	  	           –0.6	  	  
  Oceania                159              138                     134                108              	  	  91	     	  	  82	             48                      2.7
  More	  
  Developed	  
  Regions                	  	  23	     	  	  22	            	  	  17	       	  	  15	     	  	  13	     	  	  12	               48                     2.6
  Less	  
  Developed	  
  Regions                430              409                     377	              319              272              238                        45                     2.4	  
  Least	  
  developed	  
  countries              903              832                     732                614              519              436                       	  52                  2.9	  
  Less	  
  developed	  
  regions,	  
  excluding	  
  least	  
  developed	  
  countries              328              303                     276                230              196              174                        47                     2.5	  
  World                  385	            369	                   341	              288	            246	            216	                      44	                   2.3	  
	  

	                                                         	  
Annex 18. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio
   (MMR, maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by United
   Nations Millennium Development Goal region (indicated in
   bold) and other grouping, 1990–2015
                                                                  MMR                                                               Average	  
                                                                                                                                   annual	  %	  
                                                                                                               %	  change	       change	  in	  
                                                                                                               in	  MMR	           MMR	  
                                                                                                               between	           between	  
                                                                                                               1990	  and	       1990	  and	  
MDG	  region                        1990         1995        2000        2005         2010        2015             2015             2015
World                                  385	       369	       341	        288	       246	       216	                 44                    2.3
Developed	  regionsa                    23          22          17           15          13          12                  48	                  2.6
Developing	  regions                  430         409         377          319         273         239                   44                    2.4
Africa                                 870         834         770          654         565         495                   43                    2.3	  
 Northern	  Africab                   171	       141	       113	          95	        82	        70	                59                    3.6
 Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	             987	       928	       846	        717	       624	       546	                 45                    2.4
   Eastern	  Africac                  995         906         790          659         521         424                   57                    3.4
   Middle	  Africad                   958         978         911          799         748         650                   32                    1.6
                          e
   Southern	  Africa 	               161         115         144          171         189         167                   –4                  –0.2
   Western	  Africaf                 1120        1050         974          812         734         675                   40                    2.0
Asia                                   341         303         259          201         154         123                   64                    4.1
 Eastern	  Asiag                        95	        71	        59	         48	        36	        27	                72                    5.0
   Eastern	  Asia	  
   excluding	  China                    51          51          68           57          52          43                  16	                  0.7
 Southern	  Asiah                     538	       461	       377	        288	       221	       176	                 67                    4.5
   Southern	  Asia	  
   excluding	  India                  495         438         384          306         235         180                   64                    4.1
                              i
 South-­‐eastern	  Asia               320	       241	       201	        166	       136	       110	                 66                    4.3
 Western	  Asiaj                      160	       141	       122	        110	         96	        91	                43                    2.2
 Caucasus	  and	  Central	  
 Asiak                                   69	        68	        50	         46	        37	        33	                52                    3.0
Latin	  America	  and	  the	  
Caribbean                              135         117           99           88          81          67                  50                    2.8
                      l
 Latin	  America                      124	       107	         91	         80	        74	        60	                52                    2.9
                                                                                   MMR                                                                 Average	  
                                                                                                                                                      annual	  %	  
                                                                                                                                 %	  change	        change	  in	  
                                                                                                                                 in	  MMR	            MMR	  
                                                                                                                                 between	            between	  
                                                                                                                                 1990	  and	        1990	  and	  
       MDG	  region                               1990          1995           2000       2005        2010         2015              2015              2015
         Caribbeanm                                    276	          257	      214	       198	        180	        175	                37                     1.8
                    n
       Oceania                                         391	          320	      292	       239	        206	        187	                52                     3.0

a
 	  Albania,	  Australia,	  Austria,	  Belarus,	  Belgium,	  Bosnia	  and	  Herzegovina,	  Bulgaria,	  Canada,	  Croatia,	  Cyprus,	  
Czech	  Republic,	  Denmark,	  Estonia,	  Finland,	  France,	  Germany,	  Greece,	  Hungary,	  Iceland,	  Ireland,	  Israel,	  Italy,	  
Japan,	  Latvia,	  Lithuania,	  Luxembourg,	  Malta,	  Montenegro,	  Netherlands,	  New	  Zealand,	  Norway,	  Poland,	  
Portugal,	  Republic	  of	  Moldova,	  Romania,	  Russian	  Federation,	  Serbia,	  Slovakia,	  Slovenia,	  Spain,	  Sweden,	  
Switzerland,	  the	  former	  Yugoslav	  Republic	  of	  Macedonia,	  Ukraine,	  United	  Kingdom,	  United	  States	  of	  America.	  
b
       	  Algeria,	  Egypt,	  Libya,	  Morocco,	  Tunisia.	  
c
 	  Burundi,	  Comoros,	  Djibouti,	  Eritrea,	  Ethiopia,	  Kenya,	  Madagascar,	  Malawi,	  Mauritius,	  Mozambique,	  Rwanda,	  
Somalia,	  South	  Sudan,	  Sudan,	  Uganda,	  United	  Republic	  of	  Tanzania,	  Zambia,	  Zimbabwe.	  
d
 	  Angola,	  Cameroon,	  Central	  African	  Republic,	  Chad,	  Congo,	  Democratic	  Republic	  of	  the	  Congo,	  Equatorial	  
Guinea,	  Gabon,	  Sao	  Tome	  and	  Principe.	  
e
       	  Botswana,	  Lesotho,	  Namibia,	  South	  Africa,	  Swaziland.	  
f
	  Benin,	  Burkina	  Faso,	  Cabo	  Verde,	  Côte	  d’Ivoire,	  Gambia,	  Ghana,	  Guinea,	  Guinea-­‐Bissau,	  Liberia,	  Mali,	  
Mauritania,	  Niger,	  Nigeria,	  Senegal,	  Sierra	  Leone,	  Togo.	  
g
       	  China,	  Democratic	  People’s	  Republic	  of	  Korea,	  Mongolia,	  Republic	  of	  Korea.	  
h
       	  Afghanistan,	  Bangladesh,	  Bhutan,	  India,	  Iran	  (Islamic	  Republic	  of),	  Maldives,	  Nepal,	  Pakistan,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  
i
	  Brunei	  Darussalam,	  Cambodia,	  Indonesia,	  Lao	  People’s	  Democratic	  Republic,	  Malaysia,	  Myanmar,	  Philippines,	  
Singapore,	  Thailand,	  Timor-­‐Leste,	  Viet	  Nam.	  
j
	  Bahrain,	  Iraq,	  Jordan,	  Kuwait,	  Lebanon,	  Occupied	  Palestinian	  Territory,	  Oman,	  Qatar,	  Saudi	  Arabia,	  Syrian	  
Arab	  Republic,	  Turkey,	  United	  Arab	  Emirates,	  Yemen.	  
k
       	  Armenia,	  Azerbaijan,	  Georgia,	  Kazakhstan,	  Kyrgyzstan,	  Tajikistan,	  Turkmenistan,	  Uzbekistan.	  
l
	  Argentina,	  Belize,	  Bolivia	  (Plurinational	  State	  of),	  Brazil,	  Chile,	  Colombia,	  Costa	  Rica,	  Ecuador,	  El	  Salvador,	  
Guatemala,	  Guyana,	  Honduras,	  Mexico,	  Nicaragua,	  Panama,	  Paraguay,	  Peru,	  Suriname,	  Uruguay,	  Venezuela	  
(Bolivarian	  Republic	  of).	  
m
 	  Bahamas,	  Barbados,	  Cuba,	  Dominican	  Republic,	  Grenada,	  Haiti,	  Jamaica,	  Puerto	  Rico,	  Saint	  Lucia,	  Saint	  
Vincent	  and	  the	  Grenadines,	  Trinidad	  and	  Tobago.	  
n
       	  Fiji,	  Kiribati,	  Micronesia	  (Federated	  States	  of),	  Papua	  New	  Guinea,	  Samoa,	  Solomon	  Islands,	  Tonga,	  Vanuatu.	  
	  

	                                                        	  
Annex 19. Trends in estimates of maternal mortality ratio
   (MMR, maternal deaths per 100 000 live births), by country,
   1990–2015
                                                                         Average         Range of
                                                                        annual %      uncertainty on
                                                            % change    change in    annual % change
                                    MMRb                     in MMR       MMR        in MMR (80% UI)
                                                            between     between                          Progress
                                                            1990 and    1990 and      Lower    Upper     towards
Countrya            1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015             2015c       2015       estimate estimate   MDG 5Ad
                                                                                                          Making
Afghanistan         1340   1270   1100   821    584   396        70.4          4.9        3.0      6.4    progress
Albania               71     53     43     30    30    29        59.2          3.7        1.6      6.2       NA
Algeria              216    192    170   148    147   140        35.2          1.8       –0.8      3.5 No progress
                                                                                                          Making
Angola              1160   1150    924   705    561   477        58.9          3.5        1.5      5.5    progress
Argentina             72     63     60     58    58    52        27.8          1.3        0.3      2.0       NA
Armenia               58     50     40     40    33    25        56.9          3.3        2.4      4.2       NA
Australia              8      8      9      7     6     6        25.0          1.3        0.1      2.0       NA
Austria                8      6      5      5     4     4        50.0          2.9        2.0      4.2       NA
Azerbaijan            64     86     48     34    27    25        60.9          3.8        2.3      5.4       NA
Bahamas               46     49     61     74    85    80       –73.9         –2.2       –4.4     –0.1       NA
Bahrain               26     22     21     20    16    15        42.3          2.1        0.7      3.2       NA
                                                                                                          Making
Bangladesh           569    479    399   319    242   176        69.1          4.7        2.5      6.1    progress
Barbados              58     49     48     40    33    27        53.4          3.0        1.8      4.8       NA
Belarus               33     33     26     13     5     4        87.9          8.1        6.4      9.6       NA
Belgium                9     10      9      8     8     7        22.2          0.8       –0.8      1.9       NA
Belize                54     55     53     52    37    28        48.1          2.7        1.6      4.0       NA
Benin                576    550    572   502    446   405        29.7          1.4       –0.6      2.8 No progress
Bhutan               945    636    423   308    204   148        84.3          7.4        5.0      9.1   Achieved
Bolivia
(Plurinational                                                                                           Insufficient
State of)            425    390    334   305    253   206        51.5          2.9        0.5      4.5    progress
Bosnia and
Herzegovina           28     22     17     14    13    11        60.7          3.6        2.1      5.4       NA
                                                                                                       Insufficient
Botswana             243    238    311   276    169   129        46.9          2.5        0.1      4.2 progress
                                                                                                          Making
Brazil               104     84     66     67    65    44        57.7          3.5        2.5      4.5    progress
Brunei Darussalam     35     33     31     30    27    23        34.3          1.8        0.3      3.7       NA
Bulgaria              25     24     21     15    11    11        56.0          3.3        2.0      4.6       NA
                                                                                                         Insufficient
Burkina Faso         727    636    547   468    417   371        49.0          2.7        1.3      4.4    progress
                                                                                                         Insufficient
Burundi             1220   1210    954   863    808   712        41.6          2.2        0.6      3.7    progress
Cabo Verde           256    150     83     54    51    42        83.6          7.2        5.2      9.2   Achieved
Cambodia            1020    730    484   315    202   161        84.2          7.4        5.6      8.9   Achieved
Cameroon             728    749    750   729    676   596        18.1          0.8       –1.0      2.0 No progress
Canadae                7      9      9      9     8     7         0.0          0.3       –0.9      1.6       NA
                                                                          Average         Range of
                                                                         annual %      uncertainty on
                                                             % change    change in    annual % change
                                    MMRb                      in MMR       MMR        in MMR (80% UI)
                                                             between     between                          Progress
                                                             1990 and    1990 and      Lower    Upper     towards
Countrya            1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              2015c       2015       estimate estimate   MDG 5Ad
Central African
Republic            1290   1300   1200   1060    909   882        31.6          1.5       –0.4      3.4 No progress
                                                                                                          Insufficient
Chad                1450   1430   1370   1170   1040   856        41.0          2.1        0.2      3.7    progress
Chile                 57     41     31     27     26    22        61.4          3.8        3.0      4.7       NA
China                 97     72     58     48     35    27        72.2          5.2        4.2      6.3       NA
                                                                                                        Insufficient
Colombia             118    105     97     80     72    64        45.8          2.4        1.0      3.3 progress
                                                                                                          Insufficient
Comoros              635    563    499    436    388   335        47.2          2.6        1.0      4.2    progress
Congo                603    634    653    596    509   442        26.7          1.2       –0.3      2.7 No progress
Costa Rica            43     44     38     31     29    25        41.9          2.2        1.5      3.1       NA
Côte d’Ivoire        745    711    671    742    717   645        13.4          0.6       –0.7      1.9 No progress
Croatia               10     12     11     11     10     8        20.0          0.6       –0.8      1.9       NA
Cuba                  58     55     43     41     44    39        32.8          1.6        0.7      2.5       NA
Cyprus                16     17     15     12      8     7        56.3          3.3        1.7      5.4       NA
Czech Republic        14     10      7      6      5     4        71.4          4.8        3.3      6.4       NA
Democratic
People’s Republic
of Korea              75     81    128    105     97    82        –9.3         –0.4       –2.3      1.6       NA
Democratic
Republic of the
Congo                879    914    874    787    794   693        21.2          1.0       –1.1      2.4 No progress
Denmark               11     11      9      8      7     6        38.8          2.0        0.6      2.9       NA
                                                                                                           Making
Djibouti             517    452    401    341    275   229        55.7          3.3        1.4      5.1    progress
Dominican                                                                                                  Making
Republic             198    198     79     64     75    92        53.5          3.1        1.3      4.7    progress
                                                                                                           Making
Ecuador              185    131    103     74     75    64        65.4          4.3        3.6      5.0    progress
                                                                                                           Making
Egypt                106     83     63     52     40    33        68.9          4.7        3.8      5.9    progress
                                                                                                           Making
El Salvador          157    118     84     68     59    54        65.5          4.3        3.0      5.7    progress
                                                                                                           Making
Equatorial Guinea   1310   1050    702    483    379   342        73.9          5.4        3.6      7.0    progress
                                                                                                           Making
Eritrea             1590   1100    733    619    579   501        68.5          4.6        3.0      6.0    progress
Estonia               42     43     26     15      8     9        78.6          6.1        4.3      7.9       NA
                                                                                                           Making
Ethiopia            1250   1080    897    743    523   353        71.8          5.0        2.7      6.5    progress
Fiji                  63     51     42     39     34    30        52.2          3.0        1.6      5.0       NA
Finland                6      5      5      4      3     3        50.0          3.3        2.1      5.1       NA
France                15     15     12     10      9     8        46.7          2.2        1.2      3.4       NA
Gabon                422    405    405    370    322   291        31.0          1.5       –0.5      2.9 No progress
Gambia              1030    977    887    807    753   706        31.5          1.5       –0.4      2.9 No progress
Georgia               34     35     37     37     40    36        –5.9         –0.2       –1.4      1.0       NA
                                                                     Average         Range of
                                                                    annual %      uncertainty on
                                                        % change    change in    annual % change
                                MMRb                     in MMR       MMR        in MMR (80% UI)
                                                        between     between                          Progress
                                                        1990 and    1990 and      Lower    Upper     towards
Countrya        1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015             2015c       2015       estimate estimate   MDG 5Ad
Germany           11      9      8      7     7     6        45.5          2.3        1.5      3.2       NA
                                                                                                   Insufficient
Ghana            634    532    467    376   325   319        49.7          2.7        1.3      4.4 progress
Greece             5      4      4      3     3     3        40.0          1.8        0.6      3.3       NA
Grenada           41     37     29     25    27    27        34.1          1.7       –0.4      3.0       NA
                                                                                                      Making
Guatemala        205    173    178    120   109    88        57.1          3.4        2.8      4.0    progress
                                                                                                     Insufficient
Guinea          1040    964    976    831   720   679        34.7          1.7        0.2      2.9    progress
                                                                                                     Insufficient
Guinea-Bissau    907    780    800    714   570   549        39.5          2.0        0.2      3.8    progress
Guyana           171    205    210    232   241   229       –33.9         –1.2       –2.6     –0.3 No progress
Haiti            625    544    505    459   389   359        42.6          2.2       –0.2      3.8 No progress
                                                                                                      Making
Honduras         272    166    133    150   155   129        52.6          3.0        2.0      4.1    progress
Hungary           24     20     15     14    15    17        29.2          1.5        0.2      2.7       NA
Iceland            7      6      5      4     4     3        57.1          2.6        1.1      4.8       NA
                                                                                                      Making
India            556    471    374    280   215   174        68.7          4.6        3.5      5.7    progress
                                                                                                      Making
Indonesia        446    326    265    212   165   126        71.7          5.0        3.4      6.3    progress
Iran (Islamic
Republic of)     123     80     51     34    27    25        79.7          6.4        5.3      7.8   Achieved
                                                                                                      Making
Iraq             107     87     63     54    51    50        53.3          3.1        1.5      5.2    progress
Ireland           11     10      9      8     7     8        27.3          1.5       –0.1      2.4       NA
Israel            11     10      8      7     6     5        54.5          3.0        2.1      3.9       NA
Italy              8      7      5      4     4     4        50.0          3.0        1.8      4.4       NA
Jamaica           79     81     89     92    93    89       –12.7         –0.4       –1.9      0.8       NA
Japan             14     11     10      7     6     5        64.3          3.6        2.6      4.8       NA
                                                                                                   Insufficient
Jordan           110     93     77     62    59    58        47.3          2.6        1.2      4.1 progress
Kazakhstan        78     92     65     44    20    12        84.6          7.5        6.5      8.5       NA
Kenya            687    698    759    728   605   510        25.8          1.2       –0.5      2.8 No progress
                                                                                                      Making
Kiribati         234    207    166    135   109    90        61.5          3.8        2.0      6.0    progress
Kuwait             7      9      7      6     5     4        42.9          2.0        0.4      3.0       NA
Kyrgyzstan        80     92     74     85    84    76         5.0          0.2       –0.9      1.3       NA
Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic         905    695    546    418   294   197        78.2          6.1        3.9      7.7   Achieved
Latvia            48     54     30     22    19    18        62.5          3.9        2.3      5.4       NA
Lebanon           74     54     42     27    19    15        79.7          6.4        4.6      7.8       NA
Lesotho          629    525    649    746   587   487        22.5          1.0       –1.9      2.9 No progress
                                                                                                     Insufficient
Liberia         1500   1800   1270   1020   811   725        51.7          2.9        0.8      4.2    progress
Libya             39     25     17     11     9     9        76.9          5.7        2.8      8.8       NA
                                                                              Average         Range of
                                                                             annual %      uncertainty on
                                                                 % change    change in    annual % change
                                        MMRb                      in MMR       MMR        in MMR (80% UI)
                                                                 between     between                          Progress
                                                                 1990 and    1990 and      Lower    Upper     towards
Countrya                1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015              2015c       2015       estimate estimate   MDG 5Ad
Lithuania                 29     28     16     12      9    10        65.5          4.3        2.8      5.8       NA
Luxembourg                12     13     13     13     11    10        16.7          0.8       –1.6      2.6       NA
                                                                                                               Making
Madagascar               778    644    536   508     436   353        54.6          3.2        1.8      4.5    progress
Malawi                   957    953    890   648     629   634        33.8          1.6       –0.7      3.3 No progress
Malaysia                  79     68     58     52     48    40        49.4          2.7        0.8      3.9       NA
Maldives                 677    340    163     101    87    68        90.0          9.2        6.2     11.6   Achieved
Mali                    1010    911    834     714   630   587        41.9          2.2        0.6      3.2 Insufficient
                                                                                                             progress
Malta                     13     14     15      13    11     9        30.8          1.6       –0.9      3.3       NA
Mauritania               859    824    813     750   723   602        29.9          1.4       –1.2      3.2 No progress
Mauritius                 81     60     40      39    59    53        34.6          1.6        0.1      3.1       NA
Mexico                    90     85     77      54    45    38        57.8          3.4        3.0      3.9       NA
Micronesia               183    166    153     134   115   100        45.4          2.4        0.4      4.4 Insufficient
(Federated States of)                                                                                        progress
Mongolia                 186    205    161      95    63    44        76.3          5.8        4.4      7.1   Achieved
Montenegro                10     12     11       9     8     7        30.0          1.3       –0.5      3.9       NA
                                                                                                               Making
Morocco                  317    257    221   190     153   121        61.8          3.8        2.7      5.1    progress
                                                                                                               Making
Mozambique              1390   1150    915   762     619   489        64.8          4.2        2.5      5.5    progress
                                                                                                               Making
Myanmar                  453    376    308   248     205   178        60.7          3.7        1.6      5.3    progress
Namibia                  338    320    352   390     319   265        21.6          1.0       –1.3      3.1 No progress
                                                                                                               Making
Nepal                    901    660    548   444     349   258        71.4          5.0        2.6      6.8    progress
Netherlands               12     13     14     11      8     7        41.7          2.0        1.1      3.3       NA
New Zealand               18     15     12     14     13    11        38.9          1.9        0.8      2.9       NA
Nicaragua                173    212    202   190     166   150        13.3          0.6       –0.7      1.9 No progress
                                                                                                              Insufficient
Niger                    873    828    794   723     657   553        36.7          1.8        0.4      3.0    progress
Nigeria                 1350   1250   1170   946     867   814        39.7          2.0       –0.2      3.3 No progress
Norway                     7      7      7      7      6     5        28.6          1.5        0.3      2.5       NA
Occupied
Palestinian                                                                                                    Making
Territoryf               118     96     72     62     54    45        61.9          3.8        1.8      5.8    progress
Oman                      30     20     20     20     18    17        43.2          2.3        0.6      3.8       NA
                                                                                                               Making
Pakistan                 431    363    306   249     211   178        58.7          3.5        1.8      5.1    progress
Panama                   102     94     82     87    101    94         7.8          0.3       –1.0      1.4 No progress
Papua New                                                                                                     Insufficient
Guinea                   470    377    342   277     238   215        54.3          3.1        1.1      5.3    progress
Paraguay                 150    147    158   159     139   132        12.0          0.5       –0.7      1.6 No progress
                                                                                                               Making
Peru                     251    206    140   114      92    68        72.9          5.2        4.2      6.7    progress
                                                                           Average         Range of
                                                                          annual %      uncertainty on
                                                              % change    change in    annual % change
                                    MMRb                       in MMR       MMR        in MMR (80% UI)
                                                              between     between                          Progress
                                                              1990 and    1990 and      Lower    Upper     towards
Countrya            1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015               2015c       2015       estimate estimate   MDG 5Ad
Philippines          152    122    124    127    129    114        25.0          1.1       –0.8      2.4 No progress
Poland                17     13      8      6      4      3        82.4          6.8        5.4      8.2       NA
Portugal              17     15     13     12     11     10        41.2          2.1        1.1      2.9       NA
Puerto Rico           26     25     22     19     16     14        46.2          2.4        1.5      3.9       NA
Qatar                 29     28     24     21     16     13        55.2          3.3        0.8      4.9       NA
Republic of Korea     21     19     16     14     15     11        47.6          2.6        1.8      3.5       NA
Republic of
Moldova               51     66     49     39     34     23        54.9          3.2        2.3      4.2       NA
                                                                                                            Making
Romania              124     77     51     33     30     31        75.0          5.5        4.0      6.9    progress
Russian
Federation            63     82     57     42     29     25        60.3          3.8        2.5      5.1       NA
Rwanda              1300   1260   1020    567    381    290        77.7          6.0        4.5      7.5   Achieved
Saint Lucia           45     43     54     67     54     48        –6.7         –0.2       –2.1      1.6       NA
Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines        58     81     74     50     50     45        22.4          1.1       –0.5      2.4       NA
                                                                                                            Making
Samoa                156    119     93     77     64     51        67.3          4.4        2.4      6.3    progress
Sao Tome and                                                                                                Making
Principe             330    263    222    181    162    156        52.7          3.0        1.2      5.4    progress
Saudi Arabia          46     33     23     18     14     12        73.9          5.5        3.7      7.5       NA
                                                                                                           Insufficient
Senegal              540    509    488    427    375    315        41.7          2.2        0.7      3.6    progress
Serbia                14     15     17     15     16     17       –21.4         –0.8       –2.8      0.9       NA
                                                                                                           Insufficient
Sierra Leone        2630   2900   2650   1990   1630   1360        48.3          2.6        0.5      4.0    progress
Singapore             12     13     18     16     11     10        16.7          0.8       –1.4      2.9       NA
Slovakia              11      9      8      7      6      6        45.5          2.8        1.8      4.0       NA
Slovenia              12     12     12     11      9      9        25.0          1.2       –1.0      2.6       NA
                                                                                                            Making
Solomon Islands      364    273    214    164    136    114        68.7          4.6        3.1      6.4    progress
Somalia             1210   1190   1080    939    820    732        39.5          2.0        0.3      3.9 Insufficient
                                                                                                          progress
South Africa         108     62     85    112    154    138       –27.8         –1.0       –2.5      0.6 No progress
South Sudan         1730   1530   1310   1090    876    789        54.4          3.1        1.4      4.7    Making
                                                                                                            progress
Spain                  6      6      5      5      5      5        16.7          1.0       –0.1      1.8       NA
Sri Lanka             75     70     57     43     35     30        60.0          3.6        2.6      4.5       NA
Sudan                744    648    544    440    349    311        58.2          3.5        2.0      5.4    Making
                                                                                                            progress
Suriname             127    177    259    223    169    155       –22.0         –0.8       –2.4      0.8 No progress
Swaziland            635    537    586    595    436    389        38.7          2.0       –0.1      3.4 No progress
Sweden                 8      6      5      5      4      4        50.0          2.5        1.2      3.3       NA
Switzerland            8      8      7      7      6      5        37.5          1.8        0.3      2.8       NA
Syrian Arab          123     89     73     58     49     68        44.7          2.4        0.3      3.9 Insufficient
Republic                                                                                                  progress
                                                                                                            Average             Range of
                                                                                                           annual %          uncertainty on
                                                                                            % change       change in        annual % change
                                                      MMRb                                   in MMR          MMR            in MMR (80% UI)
                                                                                            between        between                                       Progress
                                                                                            1990 and       1990 and          Lower    Upper              towards
Countrya                      1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                                   2015c          2015           estimate estimate            MDG 5Ad
Tajikistan                      107        129        68        46        35        32            70.1                4.8          2.9           7.0     Making
                                                                                                                                                         progress
Thailand                          40        23        25        26        23        20            50.0                2.7          0.8           4.3          NA
The former                        14        13        12        10          8         8           42.9                2.4          1.2           4.1          NA
Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia
Timor-Leste                    1080        897      694       506        317       215            80.1                6.5          4.8           8.0     Achieved
Togo                            568        563      491       427        393       368            35.2                1.7          0.5           3.2 Insufficient
                                                                                                                                                      progress
Tonga                             75       100        97      114        130       124          –65.3               –2.0          –4.0           0.0          NA
Trinidad and                      90        77        62        62        65        63            30.0                1.5          0.5           2.5          NA
Tobago
Tunisia                         131        112        84        74        67        62            52.7                3.0          1.4           4.3     Making
                                                                                                                                                         progress
Turkey                            97        86        79        57        23        16            83.5                7.2          5.2           9.1          NA
Turkmenistan                      82        74        59        53        46        42            48.8                2.7          0.4           5.8          NA
Uganda                          687        684      620       504        420       343            50.1                2.8          1.3           4.1     Making
                                                                                                                                                         progress
Ukraine                           46        52        34        30        26        24            47.8                2.6          1.4           3.7          NA
United Arab
Emirates                          17        12          8         6         6         6           64.7                4.1          2.2           6.8          NA
United Kingdom                    10        11        12        12        10          9           10.0                0.4         –0.3           1.2          NA
United Republic of                                                                                                                                       Making
Tanzania                        997        961      842       687        514       398            60.1                3.7          2.2           5.0     progress
United States of
America                           12        12        12        13        14        14          –16.7               –0.6          –1.4           0.1          NA
Uruguay                           37        36        31        26        19        15            59.5                3.7          2.4           5.1          NA
Uzbekistan                        54        32        34        42        39        36            33.3                1.6         –0.8           4.0          NA
                                                                                                                                                         Making
Vanuatu                         225        184      144       116         94        78            65.3                4.2          2.3           6.2     progress
Venezuela                         94        90        90        93        99        95            –1.1              –0.1          –1.3           0.9          NA
                                                                                                                                                         Making
Viet Nam                        139        107        81        61        58        54            61.2                3.8          1.6           5.2     progress
Yemen                           547        498      440       428        416       385            29.6                1.4         –0.8           3.0 No progress
                                                                                                                                                         Making
Zambia                          577        596      541       372        262       224            61.2                3.8          2.6           5.2     progress
Zimbabwe                        440        449      590       629        446       443            –0.7                0.0         –1.4           0.9 No progress
MDG:	  Millennium	  	  Development	  Goal;	  NA:	  data	  not	  available;	  UI:	  uncertainty	  	  interval.	  
a
 	  Estimates	  have	  been	  computed	  to	  ensure	  comparability	  across	  countries,	  thus	  they	  are	  not	  necessarily	  the	  
same	  as	  official	  statistics	  of	  the	  countries,	  which	  may	  use	  alternative	  rigorous	  methods.	  
b
 	  MMR	  estimates	  have	  been	  rounded	  according	  to	  the	  following	  scheme:	  <	  100	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  1;	  100–999	  
rounded	  to	  nearest	  1;	  and	  ≥	  1000	  rounded	  to	  nearest	  10.	  
c
    	  Percentage	  change	  in	  MMR	  is	  based	  on	  rounded	  numbers.	  
d
 	  Progress	  towards	  MDG	  5A	  (i.e.	  to	  reduce	  MMR	  by	  75%	  between	  1990	  and	  2015)	  was	  assessed	  for	  the	  95	  
countries	  with	  an	  MMR	  higher	  than	  100	  in	  1990.	  See	  section	  4.1	  and	  Box	  5	  for	  additional	  details	  in	  the	  full	  
report:	  World	  Health	  Organization	  (WHO),	  United	  Nations	  Children’s	  Fund	  (UNICEF),	  United	  Nations	  
Population	  Fund	  (UNFPA),	  World	  Bank	  Group,	  United	  Nations	  	  Population	  	  Division	  (UNPD).	  Trends	  in	  maternal	  
mortality:	  1990	  to	  2015.	  Geneva:	  WHO;	  2015	  (available	  from:	  
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/monitoring/maternal-­‐mortality-­‐2015/en/).	  
e
 	  Vital	  registration	  	  data	  were	  available	  for	  analysis	  only	  up	  to	  2011.	  Recent	  hospital	  surveillance	  data	  for	  
Canada	  (excluding	  Quebec)	  indicate	  a	  decline	  of	  maternal	  deaths	  per	  100	  000	  deliveries	  from	  8.8	  in	  
2007/2008–2008/2009	  	  to	  5.1	  in	  2011/2012;	  some	  98%	  of	  deliveries	  in	  Canada	  occur	  in	  hospitals.	  
f
    	  Refers	  to	  a	  territory.	  



	  
http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth
