                    GFSP Extended Leadership Group Meeting
                          World Bank, Washington DC
                              20-21 October 2015

                                      Meeting Minutes


1. A meeting of the Global Food Safety Partnership (GFSP) extended Leadership Group was
   convened by the World Bank in Washington on 20-21 October 2015. The purpose of the meeting
   was to finalize the GFSP Strategic Framework, new Charter and aspects of operationalization,
   following on the Strategy Revisit Retreat hosted by UNIDO in Vienna in early June 2015. The
   meeting agenda and list of participants are attached (Attachments 1 and 2).

2. The meeting reached consensus on a number of outcomes:

      The GFSP Strategic Framework 2015 - 2020 (Attachment 3) was finalized as the guiding
       document for the GFSP for the next five year period.

      The GFSP Charter (Attachment 4) that sets out the new governance arrangements for the
       GFSP was discussed in detail. The Charter will be proposed for formal adoption at the first
       meeting of the new Governing Council (GC).

      The Leadership Group agreed to the establishment of a GFSP Governing Council which will
       be the decision making body for the GFSP. The Governing Council membership will include
       financial donors, two international organizations (IOs), and up to two other organizations to
       be invited by the Governing Council. Current financial donors include the US, Netherlands,
       Denmark, Canada, Waters Corp., Mars Inc., and Food Industry Asia.

      Regarding specific IO participation on the GC, discussions are ongoing between the GFSP
       Secretariat and individual IOs.

      The GFSP Secretariat will send a call for representatives to sit on the Governing Council to
       eligible organizations by 31 October 2015, with a request for response by 15 November
       2015.

      The first meeting of the Governing Council is planned to be convened virtually on 23
       November 2015 at 7:00am EST (Washington time).
   A number of items will be prepared for the first meeting of the Governing Council. These
    include:

    a) The Draft 2016 Work Plan, including budget and project selection criteria
    b) Proposed Task Groups required to align with the GFSP work program
    c) An outline of the proposed application process for new partner and in-kind contributors
       to GFSP
    d) A Communication Action Plan and a Partner Engagement Strategy

   The meeting discussed a proposed new structure for the GFSP Secretariat. Whilst agreeing
    in principle to the proposed new structure, given the current budget constraints,
    participants suggested the following:

            -   Proceed with filling the GFSP CEO and Program Assistant positions;
            -   Combine the proposed 2 Program Manager positions into one Program
                Manager (Regulatory and Value Chain Systems)
            -   Evaluate engagement of further positions based on budget availability.

   In terms of the current GFSP Work Plan, the meeting agreed to the continuation and
    completion of all contracted activities, but requested that no new activities be initiated,
    pending approval of the 2016 Work Plan by the Governing Council at its first meeting.

   Meeting participants agreed that China, Indonesia, and Vietnam should be GFSP flagship
    activities in the near term, and that there would be a concerted effort by the new GC to
    focus the efforts and resources of the GFSP on these countries. This agreement aligned with
    formal request for GFSP support from the Indonesian Government.

   Going forward, the functions of the Leadership Group will be assumed by the GC, once it is
    formed and meets. Similarly, the current advisory Working Groups are expected to be
    replaced by the new Task Groups upon confirmation by the GC.
