                                                    101069




                  THE WORLD BANK



                    PRINCIPLES FOR
EFFECTIVE INSOLVENCY AND CREDITOR/DEBTOR RIGHTS SYSTEMS
                      (Revised 2015)
                                                            INTRODUCTION
         Effective creditor/debtor rights and insolvency systems are an important element of financial system
stability. The World Bank Group accordingly has been working with partner organizations to develop
principles for insolvency and creditor/debtor rights systems. The Principles for Effective Insolvency and
Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems (the Principles) are a distillation of international best practice on design
aspects of these systems, emphasizing contextual, integrated solutions and the policy choices involved in
developing those solutions.

        The Principles were originally developed in 2001 in response to a request from the international
community in the wake of the financial crises in emerging markets in the late 90s. At the time, there were
no internationally recognized benchmarks or standards to evaluate the effectiveness of domestic
creditor/debtor rights and insolvency systems. The World Bank’s initiative began in 1999 with the
constitution of an ad hoc committee of partner organizations and the assistance of leading international
experts who participated in the World Bank’s Task Force and Working Groups. 1 The Principles themselves
were vetted in a series of five regional conferences, involving officials and experts from some 75 countries,
and drafts were placed on the World Bank’s website for public comment. The Bank’s Board of Directors
approved the Principles in 2001 for use in connection with the joint IMF-World Bank program to develop
Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), subject to reviewing the experience and
updating the Principles as needed.

        From 2001 to 2004, the Principles were used to assess country systems under the ROSC and
Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) in some 24 countries in all regions of the world. Assessments
using the Principles have been instrumental to the Bank’s developmental and operational work and in
providing assistance to member countries. These assessments have yielded a wealth of experience and
enabled the Bank to test the sufficiency of the Principles as a flexible benchmark in a wide range of country
systems. In taking stock of that experience, the Bank has consulted a wide range of interested parties at the
national and international level, including officials, civil society, business and financial sectors, investors,
professional groups, and others.

        In 2003, the World Bank convened the Global Forum on Insolvency Risk Management (FIRM) to
discuss the experience with and lessons from the application of the Principles in the assessment program.
The forum convened over 200 experts from 31 countries to discuss the lessons from this application and to
discuss further refinements to the Principles themselves. During 2003 and 2004, the Bank also convened
three working group sessions of the Global Judges Forum, involving judges from approximately 70
countries who assisted the Bank in its review of the institutional framework principles and developed more
detailed recommendations for strengthening court practices for commercial enforcement and insolvency
proceedings. Other regional fora have also provided a means for sharing experience and obtaining feedback
in areas addressed by the Principles, including the Forum on Asian Insolvency Reform (FAIR) from 2002 to
2004 (organized by OECD and co-sponsored with the Bank and the Asian Development Bank), and the
Forum on Insolvency in Latin America (FILA) in 2004, organized by the Bank.

        In the area of the insolvency law framework and creditor/debtor rights, Bank staff has continued
their participation in the UNCITRAL working groups on insolvency law and security interests and have
liaised with UNCITRAL staff and experts to ensure consistency between the Bank’s Principles and the

1
  The ad hoc committee that served as an advisory panel comprised representatives from the African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank,
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Inter-American Development Bank, International Finance Corporation, International Monetary Fund,
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, INSOL International, and the
International Bar Association (Committee J). In addition, over 70 leading experts from countries around the world participated in the Task Force and
Working Groups.
UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law. The Bank has also benefited from an ongoing
collaboration with the International Association of Insolvency Regulators (IAIR) to survey the regulatory
practices of IAIR member countries and develop recommendations for strengthening regulatory capacity
and frameworks for insolvency systems. A similar collaboration with INSOL International has provided
feedback and input in the areas of director and officer liability and informal workout systems.

        Based on the experience gained from the use of the Principles, and following extensive
consultations, the publication has been thoroughly reviewed and updated in 2005, 2011 and 2015. The
revised Principles contained in this document have benefited from wide consultation and, more importantly,
from the practical experience of using them in the context of the Bank’s assessment and operational work.

        The Principles have been designed as a broad-spectrum assessment tool to assist countries in their
efforts to evaluate and improve core aspects of their commercial law systems that are fundamental to a
sound investment climate, and to promote commerce and economic growth. Efficient, reliable, and
transparent creditor/debtor rights and insolvency systems are of key importance for the reallocation of
productive resources in the corporate sector, for investor confidence, and for forward-looking corporate
restructuring. These systems also play a pivotal role in times of crisis to enable a country and stakeholders
to promptly respond to and resolve matters of corporate financial distress on systemic scales.

         National systems depend on a range of structural, institutional, social, and human foundations to
make a modern market economy work. There are as many combinations of these variables as there are
countries, though regional similarities have created common customs and legal traditions. The Principles
have been designed to be sufficiently flexible to apply as a benchmark to all country systems and to embody
several fundamentally important propositions. First, effective systems respond to national needs and
problems. As such, these systems must be rooted in the country’s broader cultural, economic, legal, and
social context. Second, transparency, accountability, and predictability are fundamental to sound credit
relationships. Capital and credit, in their myriad forms, are the lifeblood of modern commerce. Investment
and the availability of credit are predicated on both perceptions of risk and the reality of risks. Competition
in credit delivery is handicapped by lack of access to accurate information on credit risk and by
unpredictable legal mechanisms for debt enforcement, recovery, and restructuring. Third, legal and
institutional mechanisms must align incentives and disincentives across a broad spectrum of market-based
systems—commercial, corporate, financial, and social. This calls for an integrated approach to reform,
taking into account a wide range of laws and policies in the design of creditor/debtor rights and insolvency
systems.

        The Principles emphasize contextual, integrated solutions and the policy choices involved in
developing those solutions. The Principles are a distillation of international best practice in the design of
insolvency systems and creditor/debtor rights. Adapting international best practices to the realities of
countries requires an understanding of the market environments in which these systems operate. This is
particularly apparent in the context of developing countries, where common challenges include weak or
unclear social protection mechanisms, weak financial institutions and capital markets, ineffective corporate
governance and uncompetitive businesses, ineffective and weak laws, institutions and regulation, and a
shortage of capacity and resources. These obstacles pose enormous challenges to the adoption of systems
that address the needs of developing countries while keeping pace with global trends and good practices.
The application of the Principles at the country level will be influenced by domestic policy choices and by
the comparative strengths (or weaknesses) of applicable laws, institutions and regulations, as well as by
capacity and resources.

        The Principles highlight the relationship between the cost and flow of credit (including secured
credit) and the laws and institutions that recognize and enforce credit agreements (Part A). The Principles
also outline key features and policy choices relating to the legal framework for risk management and
informal corporate workout systems (Part B), formal commercial insolvency law frameworks (Part C), and
the implementation of these systems through sound institutional and regulatory frameworks (Part D).
        The Principles have broader application beyond corporate insolvency regimes and creditor rights.
The ability of financial institutions to adopt effective credit risk management practices to resolve or
liquidate non-performing loans depends on having reliable and predictable legal mechanisms that provide a
means for more accurately pricing recovery and enforcement costs. Where non-performing assets or other
factors jeopardize the viability of a bank, or where economic conditions create systemic crises,
creditor/debtor rights and insolvency systems are particularly important to enable a country and stakeholders
to respond promptly. These conditions raise issues that may require supplemental enhancement measures to
address the needs of the crisis.

        The Principles are designed to be flexible in their application and do not offer detailed prescriptions
for national systems. The Principles embrace practices that have been widely recognized and accepted as
good practices internationally. As markets evolve and competition increases globally, countries must adapt
and evolve to maximize their own advantages for commerce and to attract investment by adopting laws and
systems that create strong and attractive investment climates. Increasingly, businesses have become global
in nature and business failures or insolvencies have had international implications, which also bring into
context the importance of adopting modern practices that accommodate international business. As legal
systems and business and commerce are evolutionary in nature, so too are the Principles, and we anticipate
that these will continue to be reviewed going forward to take account of significant changes and
developments.



                                         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
       Following is a brief summary of the key elements in the Principles.

Credit Environment

        Compatible credit and enforcement systems. A regularized system of credit should be supported
by mechanisms that provide efficient, transparent, and reliable methods for recovering debt, including the
seizure and sale of immovable and movable assets and sale or collection of intangible assets, such as debt
owed to the debtor by third parties. An efficient system for enforcing debt claims is crucial to a functioning
credit system, especially for unsecured credit. A creditor’s ability to take possession of a debtor’s property
and to sell it to satisfy the debt is the simplest, most effective means of ensuring prompt payment. It is far
more effective than the threat of an insolvency proceeding, which often requires a level of proof and a
prospect of procedural delay that in all but extreme cases make the threat not credible to debtors as leverage
for payment.

        While much credit is unsecured and requires an effective enforcement system, an effective system
for secured rights is especially important in developing countries. Secured credit plays an important role in
industrial countries, notwithstanding the range of sources and types of financing available through both debt
and equity markets. In some cases, equity markets can provide cheaper and more attractive financing. But
developing countries offer fewer options, and equity markets are typically less mature than debt markets. As
a result, most financing is in the form of debt. In markets with fewer options and higher risks, lenders
routinely require security to reduce the risk of nonperformance and insolvency.

         Collateral systems. One of the pillars of a modern credit-based economy is the ability to own and
freely transfer ownership interests in property, and to grant security rights to credit providers as a means of
gaining access to credit at more affordable prices. Secured transactions play an enormously important role
in a well-functioning market economy. Laws governing secured credit mitigate lenders’ risks of default and
thereby increase the flow of capital and facilitate low-cost financing. Discrepancies and uncertainties in the
legal framework governing security rights are the main reasons for the high costs and unavailability of
credit, especially in developing countries.
        The legal framework for secured lending should address the fundamental features and elements for
the creation, recognition, and enforcement of security rights in all types of assets —movable and immovable,
tangible and intangible—including inventories, receivables, proceeds, and future property and, on a global
basis, including both possessory and non-possessory rights. The law should encompass any or all of a
debtor’s obligations to a creditor, present or future, and debt obligations between all types of persons. In
addition, it should allow effective notice and registration rules to be adapted to all types of property, and
should provide clear rules of priority on competing claims or interests in the same assets. For security rights
and notice to third parties to be effective, they must be capable of being publicized at reasonable costs and
easily accessible to stakeholders. A reliable, affordable public registry system is therefore essential to
promote optimal conditions for asset-based lending. Where several registries exist, the registration system
should be integrated to the maximum extent possible so that all notices recorded under the secured
transactions legislation can be easily retrieved.

        Enforcement systems. A modern, credit-based economy requires predictable, transparent and
affordable enforcement of both unsecured and secured credit claims by efficient mechanisms outside of
insolvency, as well as a sound insolvency system. These systems must be designed to work in harmony.
Commerce is a system of commercial relationships predicated on express or implied contractual agreements
between an enterprise and a wide range of creditors and constituencies. Although commercial transactions
have become increasingly complex as more sophisticated techniques are developed for pricing and
managing risks, the basic rights governing these relationships and the procedures for enforcing these rights
have not changed much. These rights enable parties to rely on contractual agreements, fostering confidence
that fuels investment, lending and commerce. Conversely, uncertainty about the enforceability of
contractual rights increases the cost of credit to compensate for the increased risk of nonperformance or, in
severe cases, leads to credit tightening.

Risk Management and Informal Workout Systems

        Credit information systems. A modern credit-based economy requires access to complete,
accurate, and reliable information concerning borrowers’ payment histories. This proces s should take place
in a legal environment that provides the framework for the creation and operation of effective credit
information systems. Permissible uses of information from credit information systems should be clearly
circumscribed, especially regarding information about individuals. Legal controls on the type of information
collected and distributed by credit information systems may often be used to advance public policies,
including anti-discrimination laws. Privacy concerns should be addressed through notice of the existence of
such systems, notice of when information from such systems is used to make adverse decisions, and access
by data subjects to stored credit information with the ability to dispute and have corrected inaccurate or
incomplete information. An effective enforcement and supervision mechanism should be in place that
provides efficient, inexpensive, transparent, and predictable methods for resolving disputes concerning the
operation of credit information systems along with proportionate sanctions that encourage compliance but
are not so stringent as to discourage the operation of such systems.

        Informal corporate workouts. Corporate workouts should be supported by an environment that
encourages participants to restore an enterprise to financial viability. Informal workouts are negotiated in
the “shadow of the law.” Accordingly, the enabling environment must include clear laws and procedures
that require disclosure of or access to timely and accurate financial information on the distressed enterprise;
encourage lending to, investment in, or recapitalization of viable distressed enterprises; support a broad
range of restructuring activities, such as debt write-offs, reschedulings, restructurings, and debt-equity
conversions; and provide favorable or neutral tax treatment for restructurings.

        A country’s financial sector (possibly with help from the central bank or finance ministry) should
promote an informal out-of-court process for dealing with cases of corporate financial difficulty in which
banks and other financial institutions have a significant exposure —especially in markets where enterprise
insolvency is systemic. An informal process is far more likely to be sustained where there are adequate
creditor remedies and insolvency laws.
Insolvency Law Systems

        Commercial insolvency. Though approaches vary, effective insolvency systems have a number of
aims and objectives. Systems should aspire to: (i) integrate with a country’s broader legal and commercial
systems; (ii) maximize the value of a firm’s assets and recoveries by creditors; (iii) provide for the efficient
liquidation of both nonviable businesses and businesses whose liquidation is likely to produce a greater
return to creditors and reorganization of viable businesses; (iv) strike a careful balance between liquidation
and reorganization, allowing for easy conversion of proceedings from one proceeding to another; (v)
provide for equitable treatment of similarly situated creditors, including similarly situated foreign and
domestic creditors; (vi) provide for timely, efficient, and impartial resolution of insolvencies; (vii) prevent
the improper use of the insolvency system; (viii) prevent the premature dismemberment of a debtor’s assets
by individual creditors seeking quick judgments; (ix) provide a transparent procedure that contains, and
consistently applies, clear risk allocation rules and incentives for gathering and dispensing information; (x)
recognize existing creditor rights and respect the priority of claims with a predictable and established
process; and (xi) establish a framework for cross-border insolvencies, with recognition of foreign
proceedings.

        Where an enterprise is not viable, the main thrust of the law should be swift and efficient liquidation
to maximize recoveries for the benefit of creditors. Liquidations can include the preservation and sale of the
business, as distinct from the legal entity. On the other hand, where an enterprise is viable, meaning that it
can be rehabilitated, its assets are often more valuable if retained in a rehabilitated business than if sold in a
liquidation. The rescue of a business preserves jobs, provides creditors with a greater return based on higher
going concern values of the enterprise, potentially produces a return for owners, and obtains for the country
the fruits of the rehabilitated enterprise. The rescue of a business should be promoted through formal and
informal procedures. Rehabilitation should permit quick and easy access to the process, protect all those
involved, permit the negotiation of a commercial plan, enable a majority of creditors in favor of a plan or
other course of action to bind all other creditors (subject to appropriate protections), and provide for
supervision to ensure that the process is not subject to abuse. Modern rescue procedures typically address a
wide range of commercial expectations in dynamic markets. Though insolvency laws may not be
susceptible to fixed formulas, modern systems generally rely on design features to achieve the objectives
outlined above.

Implementation: Institutional and Regulatory Frameworks

        Strong institutions and regulations are crucial to an effective insolvency system. The institutional
framework has three main elements: the institutions responsible for insolvency proceedings, the operational
system through which cases and decisions are processed, and the requirements needed to preserve the
integrity of those institutions—recognizing that the integrity of the insolvency system is the linchpin for its
success. A number of fundamental principles influence the design and maintenance of the institutions and
participants with authority over insolvency proceedings.

Overarching Considerations for Promoting Sound Investment Climates

        Transparency, accountability and corporate governance. Minimum standards of transparency
and corporate governance should be established to foster communication and cooperation. Disclosure of
basic information—including financial statements, operating statistics, and detailed cash flows —is
recommended for sound risk assessment. Accounting and auditing standards should be compatible with
international best practices so that creditors can assess credit risk and monitor a debtor’s financial viability.
A predictable, reliable legal framework and judicial process are needed to implement reforms, ensure fair
treatment of all parties, and deter unacceptable practices. Corporate law and regulation should guide the
conduct of the borrower’s shareholders. A corporation’s board of directors should be responsible,
accountable, and independent of management, subject to best practices on corporate governance. The law
should be imposed impartially and consistently. Creditor/debtor rights and insolvency systems interact with
and are affected by these additional systems, and are most effective when good practices are adopted in
other relevant parts of the legal system, especially the commercial law.

        Transparency and Corporate Governance. Transparency and good corporate governance are the
cornerstones of a strong lending system and corporate sector. Transparency exists when information is
assembled and made readily available to other parties and, when combined with the good behavior of
“corporate citizens,” creates an informed and communicative environment conducive to greater co operation
among all parties. Transparency and corporate governance are especially important in emerging markets,
which are more sensitive to volatility from external factors. Without transparency, there is a greater
likelihood that loan pricing will not reflect underlying risks, leading to higher interest rates and other
charges. Transparency and strong corporate governance are needed in both domestic and cross-border
transactions and at all phases of investment: at the inception when making a loan, when managing exposure
while the loan is outstanding, and especially when a borrower’s financial difficulties become apparent and
the lender is seeking to exit the loan. Lenders require confidence in their investment, and confidence can be
provided only through ongoing monitoring, whether before or during a restructuring or after a
reorganization plan has been implemented.

      From a borrower’s perspective, the continuous evolution in financial markets is evidenced by
       changes in participants, in financial instruments, and in the complexity of the corporate
       environment. Besides traditional commercial banks, today’s creditor (including foreign creditors) is
       as likely to be a lessor, an investment bank, a hedge fund, an institutional investor (such as an
       insurance company or pension fund), an investor in distressed debt, or a provider of treasury
       services or capital markets products. In addition, sophisticated financial instruments such as interest
       rate, currency, and credit derivatives have become more common. Although such instruments are
       intended to reduce risk, in times of market volatility they may increase a borrower’s risk profile,
       adding intricate issues of netting and monitoring of settlement risk exposure. Complex financial
       structures and financing techniques may enable a borrower to leverage in the early stages of a loan.
       But sensitivity to external factors, such as the interest rate environment in a developing economy,
       may be magnified by leverage and translate into greater overall risk.

      From a lender’s perspective, once it is apparent that a firm is experiencing financial difficulties and
       approaching insolvency, a creditor’s primary goal is to maximize the value of the borrower’s assets
       in order to obtain the highest debt repayment. A lender’s support of an exi t plan, whether through
       reorganization and rehabilitation or through liquidation, depends on the quality of the information
       flow. To restructure a company’s balance sheet, the lender must be in a position to prudently
       determine the feasibility of extending final maturity, extending the amortization schedule, deferring
       interest, refinancing, or converting debt to equity, while alternatively or concurrently encouraging
       the sale of non-core assets and closing unprofitable operations. The enterprise’s indicativ e value
       should be determined to assess the practicality of its sale, divestiture, or sale of controlling equity
       interest. Values must be established on both a going-concern and liquidation basis to confirm the
       best route to recovering the investment. And asset disposal plans, whether for liquidity
       replenishment or debt reduction, need to be substantiated through valuations of encumbered or
       unencumbered assets, taking into account where the assets are located and the ease and cost of
       access. All these efforts and the maximization of value depend on and are enhanced by transparency.

        Transparency increases confidence in decision making and so encourages the use of out-of-court
restructuring options. Such options are preferable because they often provide higher returns to lenders than
straight liquidation through the legal process—and also because they avoid the costs, complexities, and
uncertainties of the legal process. In many developing countries it is hard to obtain reliable data for a
thorough risk assessment. Indeed, it may be too costly to obtain the quantity and quality of information
required in industrial countries. Still, efforts should be made to increase transparency.
        Predictability. Investment in emerging markets is discouraged by the lack of well-defined and
predictable risk allocation rules and by the inconsistent application of written laws. Moreover, during
systemic crises, investors often demand uncertainty risk premiums too onerous to permit markets to clear.
Some investors may avoid emerging markets entirely despite expected returns that far outweigh known
risks. Rational lenders will demand risk premiums to compensate for systemic uncertainty in making,
managing, and collecting investments in emerging markets. The likelihood that creditors will have to rely on
risk allocation rules increases when the fundamental factors supporting investment deteriorate. That is
because risk allocation rules set minimum standards that have considerable application in limiting downside
uncertainty but usually do not enhance returns in non-distressed markets (particularly for fixed-income
investors). During actual or perceived systemic crises, lenders tend to concentrate on reducing risk and risk
premiums soar. At these times the inability to predict downside risk can cripple markets. The effect can
impinge on other risks in the country, causing lender reluctance even toward untroubled borrowers.

        Lenders in emerging markets demand compensation for a number of procedural uncertainties. First,
information on local rules and enforcement is often asymmetrically known. There is a widespread
perception among lenders that local stakeholders can manipulate procedures to their advantage and often
benefit from fraud and favoritism. Second, the absence or perceived ineffectiveness of corporate governance
raises concerns about the diversion of capital, the undermining of security interests, or waste. Third, the
extent to which non-insolvency laws recognize contractual rights can be unpredictable, leaving foreign
creditors in the sorry state of not having bought what they thought they bought. Fourth, the enforcement of
creditor rights may be disproportionately demanding of time and money. Many creditors simply are not
willing (or do not have the mandate) to try to improve returns if the enforcement process has an
unpredictable outcome. In the end, a procedure unfriendly to investors but consistently applied may be
preferred by lenders to uncertainty, because it provides a framework for managing risk through price
adjustment.

         Moreover, emerging markets appear to be particularly susceptible to rapid changes in the direction
and magnitude of capital flows. The withdrawal of funds can overwhelm fundamental factors supporting
valuation, and (as in the summer of 1998) creditors may race to sell assets to preserve value and reduce
leverage. As secondary market liquidity disappears and leverage is unwound, valuation falls further in a
self-reinforcing spiral. In industrial countries there is usually a class of creditor willing to make speculative
investments in distressed assets and provide a floor to valuation. In theory such creditors also exist in
emerging markets. But in practice, dedicated distressed players are scarce and tend to have neither the funds
nor the inclination to replace capital withdrawn by more ordinary creditors. Non-dedicated creditors often
fail to redirect capital and make up the investment deficit, partly because the learning curve in emerging
markets is so steep, but also because of uncertainty about risk allocation rules. The result? Markets fail
because there are no buyers for the price at which sellers not forced to liquidate simply hold and hope. If
risk allocation rules were more certain, both dedicated and non-dedicated emerging market creditors would
feel more comfortable injecting fresh capital in times of stress. In addition, sellers would feel more
comfortable that they were not leaving money on the table by selling.

        Relative to industrial countries, developing countries typically have weaker legal, institutional, and
regulatory safeguards to give lenders (domestic and foreign) confidence that investments can be monitored
or creditors’ rights will be enforced, particularly for debt collection. In general, a borrower’s operational,
financial, and investment activities are not transparent to creditors. Substantial uncertainty exists regarding
the substance and practical application of contract law, insolvency law, and corporate governance rules. And
creditors perceive that they lack sufficient information and control over the process used to enforce
obligations and collect debts. The lack of transparency and certainty erodes confidence among foreign
creditors and undermines their willingness to extend credit.

        In the absence of sufficient and predictable laws and procedures, creditors tend to extend funds only
in return for unnecessarily high-risk premiums. In times of crisis they may withdraw financial support
altogether. Countries would benefit substantially if creditor/debtor rights and insolvency systems were
clarified    and      applied     in     a       consistent     and      fully     disclosed    manner.
                                                     World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                               Revised–Jan & May 2015


                                         PRINCIPLES
No.   PART A. CREDITOR/DEBTOR RIGHTS
A1    Key Elements
A2    Security (Real Property)
A3    Security (Movable Property)
A4    Registry for Property and Security Rights over Immovable Assets
A5    Registry for Security Rights over Movable Assets
A6    Enforcement of Unsecured Debt
A7    Enforcement of Security Rights over Immovable Assets
A8    Enforcement of Security Rights over Movable Assets
      PART B. RISK MANAGEMENT AND CORPORATE WORKOUT
B1    Credit Information Systems
B2    Directors’ Obligations in the Period Approaching Insolvency
B3    Enabling Legislative Framework
B4    Informal Workout Procedures
B5    Regulation of Workout and Risk Management Practices
      PART C. LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR INSOLVENCY
C1    Key Objectives and Policies
C2    Due Process: Notification and Information
      Commencement
C3       Eligibility
C4       Applicability and Accessibility
C5       Provisional Measures and Effects of Commencement
      Governance
C6       Management
C7       Creditors and the Creditors Committee
      Administration
C8       Collection, Preservation, Administration and Disposition of Assets
C9       Stabilizing and Sustaining Business Operations
C10      Treatment of Contractual Obligations
C11      Avoidable Transactions
      Claims and Claims Resolution Procedures
C12      Treatment of Stakeholder Rights and Priorities
C13      Claims Resolution Procedures
C14   Reorganization Proceedings
         Plan Formulation and Consideration
         Voting and Approval of Plan
         Implementation and Amendment
         Discharge and Binding Effects
         Plan Revocation and Case Closure
C15   International Considerations
C16   Insolvency of Domestic Enterprise Groups
C17   Insolvency of International Enterprise Groups
      PART D. IMPLEMENTATION: INSTITUTIONAL & REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS
      Institutional Considerations
D1    Role of Courts
D2    Judicial Selection, Qualification, Training and Performance
D3    Court Organization
D4    Transparency and Accountability
D5    Judicial Decision Making and Enforcement of Orders

                                            - 10 -
                                                    World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                              Revised–Jan & May 2015


D6   Integrity of the System
     Regulatory Considerations
D7   Role of Regulatory or Supervisory Bodies
D8   Competence and Integrity of Insolvency Representatives




                                           - 11 -
                                                            World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                      Revised–Jan & May 2015




                                        PART A. CREDITOR/DEBTOR RIGHTS

A1        Key Elements
          A modern credit-based economy should facilitate broad access to credit at affordable rates
          through the widest possible range of credit products (secured and unsecured) inspired by a
          complete, integrated and harmonized commercial law system designed to promote:
               reliable and affordable means for protecting credit and minimizing the risks of non-
                 performance and default;
               transparency of credit instruments and a fair treatment of the rights of creditors and
                 debtors, including appropriate protection for natural persons with respect to consumer
                 debts and assets2;
               reliable procedures that enable credit providers and investors to more effectively assess,
                 manage and resolve default risks and to promptly respond to a state of financial distress
                 of an enterprise borrower;
               affordable, transparent and reasonably predictable mechanisms to enforce unsecured
                 and secured credit claims by means of individual action (e.g., enforcement and
                 execution) or through collective action and proceedings (e.g., insolvency);
               a consistent policy governing credit access, property rights, credit protection, credit risk
                 management and recovery, and insolvency through laws and regulations that are
                 compatible procedurally and substantively.
A2        Security (Immovable Property)
          One of the pillars of a credit economy is the ability to own and freely transfer ownership in land
          and land-use rights, and to grant a security right (such as a mortgage, charge or hypothec) to
          credit providers with respect to such rights as a means of gaining access to credit at more
          affordable prices. The typical hallmarks of such system include the following features:
               Clearly defined rules and procedures for granting, by agreement or operation of law,
                  security rights in all types of immovable assets;
               Security rights related to any or all of a debtor’s obligations to a creditor, present or
                  future, and between all types of persons;
               Clear rules of ownership and priority governing hierarchy of competing claims or rights in
                  the same assets, eliminating or reducing priorities over security rights as much as
                  possible;
               Methods of notice, including a system of registry, which will sufficiently publicize the
                  existence of security rights to creditors, purchasers, and the public generally at the lowest
                  possible cost.
A3        Security (Movable Property)
          A credit economy should broadly support all manner of modern forms of lending and credit
          transactions and structures, with respect to utilizing movable assets as a means of providing
          credit protection to reduce the costs of credit. A mature secured transactions system enables
          parties to grant a security right in movable property, with the primary features that include:
               Clearly defined rules for the creation, enforceability and effectiveness against third
                  parties of security rights over movable assets;
               Clear rules for security agreements, and security rights arising by operation of law, if any;
               Allowance of security rights in all types of movable assets, whether tangible or intangible
                  (for instance, equipment, inventory, goods in transit, attachments, accounts receivable,

2
    See Principle A6 footnote.

                                                   - 12 -
                                                       World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                 Revised–Jan & May 2015


            bank accounts, securities, intellectual property, agricultural products, commodities, and
            their proceeds, offspring and mutations), present, after-acquired or future assets
            (including goods to be manufactured or acquired); wherever located and taken as
            collateral as specific assets, categories of assets, or the totality of movable assets of the
            grantor; and based on both possessory and non-possessory rights;
           Security rights related to any or all of a debtor’s obligations to a creditor, present or
            future, and between all types of person;
           Methods of notice (especially, through a system of registration) that will sufficiently
            publicize the possibility that there may be security rights to creditors, purchasers, and the
            public generally at the lowest possible cost;
           Clear rules of priority governing hierarchy of competing claims or rights in the same
            assets, eliminating or reducing priorities over security rights as much as possible; and
           Specific rules for acquisition finance developed on the basis of the general rules
            applicable to security rights or based on the recognition of the ownership rights of sellers
            in reservation of title sales and of lessors in financial leases; including methods of notice
            that will sufficiently publicize such rights.
A4   Registry for Property and Security Rights over Immovable Assets
     There should be an efficient, transparent, and cost-effective registration system with regard to
     property rights and security rights in the grantor’s immovable assets.
     The registry should register property rights over land; land use rights; mortgages or hypothecs;
     charges or encumbrances over land, and it may also register permanent fixtures and attachments to
     the land. Land registries may be established by jurisdiction, region, or locale where the property is
     situated; ideally, they should provide for integrated, computerized search features.
     Mortgages, hypothecs and other charges or encumbrances over immovable assets should be
     registered in order to be effective vis-à-vis third parties.
     The registration system should be easily accessible, and inexpensive with respect to recording
     requirements and searches of the registry, and it should be secure.

A5   Registry for Security Rights over Movable Assets
     There should be an efficient, transparent and inexpensive means of providing notice of the
     possible existence of security rights in regard to the grantor’s movable assets, with registration in
     most cases being the principal and strongly preferred method, with limited exceptions. The
     registration system should be easily accessible and inexpensive with respect to recording
     requirements and searches of the registry, and should be secure.
     Registration of notices should be possible before or after the creation of the security right.
     Registration of notices should be done upon the inclusion of the required information in the
     registry forms.
     The registry record and should integrate the notices of security rights, rendering them searchable
     on the basis of the grantor’s name, and, in some cases, the serial number of assets.
     Ideally the registry system should be centralized and computerized.
     Special registries are beneficial in the case of certain kinds of highly mobile assets, such as
     aircraft and vessels.
     Security rights over intellectual property can be registered at the general security rights’ registry,
     or at a special intellectual property registry, if any.
     Special registries for securities and rights over securities may also be established.
     Special registries should be coordinated, when necessary, with the general registry for security
     rights over movable assets.


                                              - 13 -
                                                                        World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                                  Revised–Jan & May 2015



A6     Enforcement of Unsecured Debt
       A functional credit system should be supported by mechanisms and procedures that provide for
       efficient, transparent, and reliable methods for satisfying creditors’ rights by means of court
       proceedings or non-judicial dispute resolution procedures. To the extent possible, a country’s
       legal system should provide for abbreviated procedures for debt collection and execution3.
       The proceeds should be distributed according to the priority rules of the applicable substantive
       law.
A7     Enforcement of Security Rights over Immovable Assets
       Enforcement systems should provide efficient, cost-effective, transparent and reliable methods
       (including both judicial and non-judicial) for enforcing a security right over immovable assets.
       Enforcement proceedings should provide for prompt realization of the rights obtained in secured
       assets, designed to enable recovery in a commercially reasonable manner.
       The proceeds should be distributed according to the priority rules of the applicable substantive
       law.
A8     Enforcement of Security Rights over Movable Assets
       There should be efficient, cost-effective, transparent and reliable methods (including both judicial
       and non-judicial) for enforcing security rights over movable assets.
       Enforcement proceedings should provide for recovery of possession of the encumbered asset,
       the possibility of proposing the acquisition of the asset by the secured creditor in total or partial
       satisfaction of the secured debt, and the prompt realization of the value of the encumbered asset,
       in good faith and in a commercially reasonable manner.
       The proceeds should be distributed according to the priority rules of the applicable substantive
       law.




3
  Enforcement under this principle aims primarily at the treatment with respect to proceedings to recover against corporate debtors.
Where enforcement proceedings involve individuals, reasonable and clearly defined exemptions may need to be adopted to allow
individuals to retain household goods and those assets indispensable to the debtor’s profession or job as well as the subsist ence of
the debtor and his/her family.

                                                               - 14 -
                                                                       World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                                 Revised–Jan & May 2015



                                   Part B. Risk Management and Corporate Workout
B1 Credit Information Systems
   A modern credit-based economy requires access to complete, accurate, and reliable
   information concerning borrowers’ payment histories. Key features of a credit information
   system should address the following:
   B1.1 Legal framework. The legal environment should not impede but ideally should provide
          the framework for the creation and operation of effective credit information systems.
          Libel laws and similar laws have the potential to constrain good-faith reporting by credit
          information systems. While the accuracy of information reported is an important value,
          credit information systems should be afforded legal protection sufficient to encourage
          their activities without eliminating incentives to maintain high levels of accuracy.
   B1.2 Operations. Permissible uses of information from credit information systems should be
          clearly circumscribed, especially regarding information about individuals. Measures
          should be employed to safeguard information contained in the credit information system.
          Incentives should exist to maintain the integrity of the database. The legal system
          should create incentives for credit information services in order to collect and maintain a
          broad range of information on a significant part of the population.
   B1.3 Public policy. Legal controls on the type of information collected and distributed by
          credit information systems can be used to advance public policies. Legal controls on the
          type of information collected and distributed by credit information systems may be used
          to combat certain types of societal discrimination, such as discrimination based on race,
          gender, national origin, marital status, political affiliation, or union membership. There
          may be public policy reasons for restricting the ability of credit information services to
          report negative information beyond a certain period of time, such as five or seven years.
   B1.4 Privacy. Subjects of information in credit information systems should be made aware of
          the existence of such systems and be able to access information about themselves. In
          particular, they should be notified when information from such systems is used to make
          adverse decisions about them. They should be able to dispute inaccurate or incomplete
          information and mechanisms should exist to have such disputes investigated and have
          errors corrected.
   B1.5 Enforcement/Supervision. One benefit of the establishment of a credit information
          system is to permit regulators to assess an institution’s risk exposure, thus giving the
          institution the tools and incentives to assess that exposure itself. Enforcement systems
          should provide efficient, inexpensive, transparent, and predictable methods for resolving
          disputes concerning the operation of credit information systems. Both nonjudicial and
          judicial enforcement methods should be considered. Sanctions for violations of laws
          regulating credit information systems should be sufficiently stringent to encourage
          compliance but not so stringent as to discourage the operation of such systems.

B2 Directors’ Obligations in the Period Approaching Insolvency
   Laws governing directors’ obligations in the period approaching insolvency should promote
   responsible corporate behavior while fostering reasonable risk taking and encouraging business
   reorganization. The law should provide appropriate remedies for breach of directors’
   obligations, which may be enforced after insolvency proceedings have commenced.4

      B2.1        The obligation. The law should require that when they know or ought reasonably to

4
  This principle addresses only accountabilities of directors in the period when they know or ought reasonably to have known that
the enterprise imminently or unavoidably faces insolvency. General principles for corporate governance and officer and director
liability to their shareholders are dealt with under the OECD Principles for Corporate Governance.

                                                              - 15 -
                                                                         World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                                   Revised–Jan & May 2015


                   know that insolvency of the enterprise is imminent or unavoidable, directors should
                   have due regard to the interests of creditors and other stakeholders, and should take
                   reasonable steps either to avoid insolvency, or where insolvency is unavoidable, to
                   minimize its extent.
      B2.2         Persons owing the obligation. The law should specify the persons owing the obligation,
                   which may include any person formally appointed as a director and any other person
                   exercising factual control and performing the functions of a director5.
      B2.3         Liability and Remedies. Where creditors suffer loss or damage due to a director’s
                   breach of their obligations, the law should impose liability subject to possible defenses
                   (including that the director took reasonable steps to avoid or minimize the extent of
                   insolvency). The extent of any liability should not exceed the loss or damage suffered
                   by creditors as a result of the breach. The law should specify that the remedies for
                   liability found by the court to arise from a breach of the obligations should include
                   payment in full to the insolvency estate of any damages assessed by the court. The
                   insolvency representative should have primary standing to pursue a cause of action for
                   breach6.
      B2.4         Funding of actions. The law should provide for the costs of an action against a director
                   to be paid as administrative expenses.
B3 Enabling Legislative Framework
   Corporate workouts and restructurings should be supported by an enabling environment, one
   that encourages participants to engage in consensual arrangements designed to restore an
   enterprise to financial viability. An environment that enables debt and enterprise restructuring
   includes laws and procedures that:
   B3.1 Require disclosure of or ensure access to timely, reliable, and accurate financial
          information on the distressed enterprise;
   B3.2 Encourage lending to, investment in, or recapitalization of viable financially distressed
          enterprises;
   B3.3 Flexibly accommodate a broad range of restructuring activities, involving asset sales,
          discounted debt sales, debt write-offs, debt reschedulings, debt and enterprise
          restructurings, and exchange offerings (debt-to-debt and debt-to-equity exchanges);
   B3.4 Provide favorable or neutral tax treatment with respect to losses or write-offs that are
          necessary to achieve a debt restructuring based on the real market value of the assets
          subject to the transaction;
   B3.5 Address regulatory impediments that may affect enterprise reorganizations; and
   B3.6 Give creditors reliable recourse to enforcement, as outlined in Section A, and to
          liquidation and/or reorganization proceedings, as outlined in Section C.
B4 Informal Workout Procedures
   B4.1 An informal workout process may work better if it enables creditors and debtors to use
         informal techniques, such as voluntary negotiation or mediation or informal dispute
         resolution. While a reliable method for timely resolution of inter-creditor differences is
         important, the financial supervisor should play a facilitating role consistent with its
         regulatory duties as opposed to actively participating in the resolution of inter-creditor
         differences.
   B4.2 Where the informal procedure relies on a formal reorganization, the formal proceeding

5
  Persons owing the obligation are referred to in this principle as "directors”.
6
  The liability to compensate creditors for damage caused due to the breach of the obligation does not preclude imposing other
remedies in additional to the payment of compensation, for example the disqualification of a director from being a director. It also
does not preclude holding directors accountable for fraudulent activities including through taking criminal actions against directors.

                                                                - 16 -
                                                      World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                Revised–Jan & May 2015


            should be able to quickly process the informal, pre-negotiated agreement.
     B4.3   In the context of a systemic crisis, or where levels of corporate insolvency have reached
            systemic levels, informal rules and procedures may need to be supplemented by interim
            framework enhancement measures in order to address the special needs and
            circumstances encountered with a view to encouraging restructuring. Such interim
            measures are typically designed to cover the crisis and resolution period without
            undermining the conventional proceedings and systems.
B5 Regulation of Workout and Risk Management Practices
   B5.1 A country’s financial sector (possibly with the informal endorsement and assistance of
         the central bank, finance ministry, or bankers’ association) should promote the
         development of a code of conduct on a voluntary, consensual procedure for dealing with
         cases of corporate financial difficulty in which banks and other financial institutions have
         a significant exposure, especially in markets where corporate insolvency has reached
         systemic levels.
   B5.2 In addition, good risk-management practices should be encouraged by regulators of
         financial institutions and supported by norms that facilitate effective internal procedures
         and practices supporting the prompt and efficient recovery and resolution of
         nonperforming loans and distressed assets.




                                             - 17 -
                                                         World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                   Revised–Jan & May 2015



                               PART C. LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR INSOLVENCY
C1 Key Objectives and Policies
   Though country approaches vary, effective insolvency systems should aim to:
      (i) Integrate with a country’s broader legal and commercial systems;
         (ii) Maximize the value of a firm’s assets and recoveries by creditors;
         (iii) Provide for the efficient liquidation of both nonviable businesses and those where
               liquidation is likely to produce a greater return to creditors and the reorganization of
               viable businesses;
         (iv) Strike a careful balance between liquidation and reorganization, allowing for easy
              conversion of proceedings from one procedure to another;
         (v) Provide for equitable treatment of similarly situated creditors, including similarly
             situated foreign and domestic creditors;
         (vi) Provide for timely, efficient, and impartial resolution of insolvencies;
         (vii) Prevent the improper use of the insolvency system;
         (viii) Prevent the premature dismemberment of a debtor’s assets by individual creditors
                seeking quick judgments;
         (ix) Provide a transparent procedure that contains, and consistently applies, clear risk
              allocation rules and incentives for gathering and dispensing information;
         (x) Recognize existing creditor rights and respect the priority of claims with a predictable
             and established process; and
         (xi) Establish a framework for cross-border insolvencies, with recognition of foreign
              proceedings.
C2 Due Process: Notification and Information
   Effectively protecting the rights of parties with an interest in a proceeding requires that such
   parties have a right to be heard on and to receive proper notice of matters that affect their
   rights, and that such parties be afforded access to information relevant to protecting their rights
   or interests and to efficiently resolving disputes. To achieve these objectives, the insolvency
   system should:
   C2.1 Afford timely and proper notice to interested parties in a proceeding concerning matters
           that affect their rights. In insolvency proceedings, there should be procedures for
           appellate review that support timely, efficient, and impartial resolution of disputed
           matters. As a general rule, appeals do not stay insolvency proceedings, although the
           court may have power to do so in specific cases.
   C2.2 Require the debtor to disclose relevant information pertaining to its business and
           financial affairs in detail sufficient to enable the court, creditors, and affected parties to
           reasonably evaluate the prospects for reorganization. The system should also provide
           for independent comment on and analysis of that information. Provision should be made
           for the possible examination of directors, officers and other persons with knowledge of
           the debtor’s financial position and business affairs, who may be compelled to give
           information to the court, the insolvency representative, and the creditor’s committee.
   C2.3 Provide for the retention of professional experts to investigate, evaluate, or develop
           information that is essential to key decision-making. Professional experts should act
           with integrity, impartiality, and independence.


                                                - 18 -
                                                                     World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                               Revised–Jan & May 2015



      Commencement
C3 Eligibility
   The insolvency proceeding should apply to all enterprises or corporate entities, including state-
   owned enterprises.7 Exceptions should be limited, clearly defined, and should be dealt with
   through a separate law or through special provisions in the insolvency law.
C4 Applicability and Accessibility
   C4.1 Access to the system should be efficient and cost-effective. Both debtors and creditors
         should be entitled to apply for insolvency proceedings.
   C4.2 Commencement criteria and presumptions about insolvency should be clearly defined in
         the law. The preferred test to commence an insolvency proceeding should be the
         debtor’s inability to pay debts as they mature, although insolvency may also exist where
         the debtor’s liabilities exceed the value of its assets, provided that the values of assets
         and liabilities are measured on the basis of fair-market values.8
   C4.3 Debtors should have easy access to the insolvency system upon showing proof of basic
         criteria (insolvency or financial difficulty).
   C4.4 Where the application for commencement of a proceeding is made by a creditor, the
         debtor should be entitled to prompt notice of the application, an opportunity to defend
         against the application, and a prompt decision by the court on the commencement of the
         case or the dismissal of the creditor’s application.
C5 Provisional Measures and Effects of Commencement
   C5.1 When an application has been filed, but before the court has rendered a decision,
          provisional relief or measures should be granted when necessary to protect the debtor’s
          assets and the interests of stakeholders, subject to affording appropriate notice to
          affected parties.
   C5.2 The commencement of insolvency proceedings should prohibit the unauthorized
          disposition of the debtor’s assets and suspend actions by creditors to enforce their rights
          or remedies against the debtor or the debtor’s assets. The injunctive relief (stay) should
          be as wide and all-encompassing as possible, extending to an interest in assets used,
          occupied, or in the possession of the debtor.
   C5.3 A stay of actions by secured creditors also should be imposed in liquidation proceedings
          to enable higher recovery of assets by sale of the entire business or its productive units,
          and in reorganization proceedings where the collateral is needed for the reorganization.
          The stay should be of limited, specified duration, strike a proper balance between
          creditor protection and insolvency proceeding objectives, and provide for relief from the
          stay by application to the court based on clearly established grounds when the
          insolvency proceeding objectives or the protection of the secured creditor’s interests in
          its collateral are not achieved. Exceptions to the general rule on a stay of enforcement
          actions should be limited and clearly defined.
       Governance
C6    Management
      C6.1 In liquidation proceedings, management should be replaced by an insolvency
           representative with authority to administer the estate in the interest of creditors. Control
           of the estate should be surrendered immediately to the insolvency representative. In

7
  Ideally, the insolvency process should apply to SOEs, or alternatively, exceptions of SOEs should be clearly defined and based
upon compelling state policy.
8
  A single or dual approach may be adopted, although where only a single test is adopted it should be based on the liquidity
approach for determining insolvency – that is, the debtor’s inability to pay due debts.

                                                            - 19 -
                                                       World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                 Revised–Jan & May 2015


            creditor-initiated filings, where circumstances warrant, an interim administrator with
            limited functions should be appointed to monitor the business to ensure that creditor
            interests are protected.
     C6.2   There are typically three preferred approaches in reorganization proceedings: (i)
            exclusive control of the proceeding is entrusted to an independent insolvency
            representative; or (ii) governance responsibilities remain invested in management; or (iii)
            supervision of management is undertaken by an impartial and independent insolvency
            representative or supervisor. Under the second and third approaches, complete
            administrative power should be shifted to the insolvency representative if management
            proves incompetent or negligent or has engaged in fraud or other misbehavior.
C7 Creditors and the Creditors' Committee
   C7.1 The role, rights, and governance of creditors in proceedings should be clearly defined.
          Creditor interests should be safeguarded by appropriate means that enable creditors to
          effectively monitor and participate in insolvency proceedings to ensure fairness and
          integrity, including by creation of a creditors’ committee as a preferred mechanism,
          especially in cases involving numerous creditors.
   C7.2 Where a committee is established, its duties and functions, and the rules for the
         committee’s membership, quorum and voting, and the conduct of meetings should all be
         specified by the law. The committee should be consulted on non-routine matters in the
         case and have the ability to be heard on key decisions in the proceeding. The
         committee should have the right to request relevant and necessary information from the
         debtor. It should serve as a conduit for processing and distributing that information to
         other creditors and for organizing creditors to decide on critical issues. In reorganization
         proceedings, creditors should be entitled to participate in the selection of the insolvency
         representative.

     Administration
C8 Collection, Preservation, Administration and Disposition of Assets
   C8.1 The insolvency estate should include all of the debtor’s assets, including encumbered
          assets and assets obtained after the commencement of the case. Assets excluded from
          the insolvency estate should be strictly limited and clearly defined by the law.
   C8.2 After the commencement of the insolvency proceedings, the court or the insolvency
          representative should be allowed to take prompt measures to preserve and protect the
          insolvency estate and the debtor’s business. The system for administering the
          insolvency estate should be flexible and transparent and enable disposal of assets
          efficiently and at the maximum values reasonably attainable. Where necessary, the
          system should allow assets to be sold free and clear of security interests, charges, or
          other encumbrances, subject to preserving the priority of interests in the proceeds from
          the assets disposed.
   C8.3 The rights and interests of a third-party owner of assets should be protected where its
          assets are used during the insolvency proceedings by the insolvency representative
          and/or the debtor in possession.

C9 Stabilizing and Sustaining Business Operations.
   C9.1 The business should be permitted to operate in the ordinary course. Transactions that
           are not part of the debtor’s ordinary course of business activities should be subject to
           court review.
   C9.2 Subject to appropriate safeguards, the business should have access to commercially
          sound forms of financing, including on terms that afford a repayment priority under

                                              - 20 -
                                                                           World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                                     Revised–Jan & May 2015


                    exceptional circumstances, to enable the debtor to meet its ongoing business needs.
C10 Treatment of Contractual Obligations9
    C10.1 To achieve the objectives of insolvency proceedings, the system should allow
          interference with the performance of contracts where both parties have not fully
          performed their obligations.       Interference may imply continuation, rejection, or
          assignment of contracts.
    C10.2 To gain the benefit of contracts that have value, the insolvency representative should
          have the option of performing and assuming the obligations under those contracts.
          Contract provisions that provide for termination of a contract upon either an application
          for commencement or the commencement of insolvency proceedings should be
          unenforceable subject to special exceptions.
    C10.3 Where the contract constitutes a net burden to the estate, the insolvency representative
          should be entitled to reject or cancel the contract, subject to any consequences that may
          arise from rejection.
    C10.4 Exceptions to the general rule of contract treatment in insolvency proceedings should be
          limited, clearly defined, and allowed only for compelling commercial, public, or social
          interests, such as in the following cases: (i) upholding general setoff rights, subject to
          rules of avoidance; (ii) upholding (subject to a possible short stay for a defined period)
          termination, netting, and close-out provisions contained in clearly defined types of
          financial contracts, where undue delay of such actions would, because of the type of
          counterparty or transaction, create risks to financial market stability10; (iii) preventing the
          continuation and assignment of contracts for irreplaceable and personal services where
          the law would not require acceptance of performance by another party; and (iv)
          establishing special rules for treating employment contracts and collective bargaining
          agreements.

C11 Avoidable Transactions
    C11.1 After the commencement of an insolvency proceeding, transactions by the debtor that
          are not consistent with the debtor’s ordinary course of business or engaged in as p art of
          an approved administration should be avoided (cancelled), with narrow exceptions
          protecting parties who lacked notice.
    C11.2 Certain transactions prior to the application for or the date of commencement of the
          insolvency proceeding should be avoidable (cancelable), including fraudulent and
          preferential transfers made when the enterprise was insolvent or that rendered the
          enterprise insolvent.
    C11.3 The suspect period, during which payments are presumed to be preferential and may be
          set aside, should be reasonably short in respect to general creditors to avoid disrupting
          normal commercial and credit relations, but the period may be longer in the case of gifts
          or where the person receiving the transfer is closely related to the debtor or its owners.
          Claims and Claims Resolution Procedures

 9
     Treatment of contracts typically also includes leases.
 10 The identification of relevant types of financial contracts should be determined in advance in accordance with existing
 international instruments (see below). The operation of termination, netting, and close-out provisions would not preclude the
 application of a short stay for a defined period under the national law governing bank resolution, or of a similar stay that the national
 insolvency law may provide, particularly to accomplish the orderly transfer of the contracts to a solvent counterparty. Such stay
 should be subject to appropriate safeguards. Early termination rights would be suspended, provided that the substantive obligations
 of the debtor under the relevant contracts continue to be performed in full. The relevant provisions of national law should be
 reviewed generally for consistency with existing international instruments, including specifically the European Union Bank Recovery
 and Resolution Directive, the European Union Directive on Financial Collateral Arrangements, the FSB Key Attributes of Effective
 Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions, and the UNIDROIT Principles on The Operation of Close-out Netting Provisions.

                                                                  - 21 -
                                                                        World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                                  Revised–Jan & May 2015



C12 Treatment of Stakeholder Rights and Priorities
    C12.1 The rights of creditors and the priorities of claims established prior to insolvency
          proceedings under commercial or other applicable laws should be upheld in an
          insolvency proceeding to preserve the legitimate expectations of creditors and
          encourage greater predictability in commercial relationships. Deviations from this
          general rule should occur only where necessary to promote other compelling policies,
          such as the policy supporting reorganization, or to maximize the insolvency estate’s
          value. Rules of priority should enable creditors to manage credit efficiently, consistent
          with the following additional principles:
    C12.2 The priority of secured creditors in their collateral should be upheld and, absent the
          secured creditor’s consent, its interest in the collateral should not be subordinated to
          other priorities granted in the course of the insolvency proceeding. Distributions to
          secured creditors should be made as promptly as possible.
    C12.3 Following distributions to secured creditors from their collateral and the payment of
          claims related to the costs and expenses of administration, proceeds available for
          distribution should be distributed pari passu to the remaining general unsecured
          creditors,11 unless there are compelling reasons to justify giving priority status to a
          particular class of claims. Public interests generally should not be given precedence
          over private rights. The number of priority classes should be kept to a minimum.
    C12.4 Workers are a vital part of an enterprise, and careful consideration should be given to
          balancing the rights of employees with those of other creditors.
    C12.5 In liquidation, equity interests or the owners of the business are not entitled to a
          distribution of the proceeds of assets until the creditors have been fully repaid. The
          same rule should apply in reorganization, although limited exceptions may be made
          under carefully stated circumstances that respect rules of fairness entitling equity
          interests to retain a stake in the enterprise.

C13 Claims Resolution Procedures
    Procedures for notifying creditors and permitting them to file claims should be cost effective,
    efficient, and timely. While there must be a rigorous system of examining claims to ensure
    validity and resolve disputes, the delays inherent in resolving disputed claims should not be
    permitted to delay insolvency proceedings.
C14 Reorganization Proceedings
    C14.1 The system should promote quick and easy access to the proceeding; assure timely and
          efficient administration of the proceeding; afford sufficient protection for all those
          involved in the proceeding; provide a structure that encourages fair negotiation of a
          commercial plan; and provide for approval of the plan by an appropriate majority of
          creditors. Key features and principles of a modern reorganization proceeding include
          the following:
    C14.2 Plan Formulation and Consideration. There should be a flexible approach for
          developing the plan consistent with fundamental requirements designed to promote
          fairness and prevent commercial abuse.
    C14.3 Plan Voting and Approval. For voting purposes, classes of creditors may be provided
          with voting rights weighted according to the amount of a creditor’s claim. Claims and
          voting rights of insiders should be subject to special scrutiny and treated in a manner
          that will ensure fairness. Plan approval should be based on clear criteria aimed at
          achieving fairness among similar creditors, recognition of relative priorities, and majority

 11
    Subject to any intercreditor agreements and contractual subordination provisions or where equitable subordination of a creditors
 claim may be appropriate.

                                                               - 22 -
                                                         World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                   Revised–Jan & May 2015


            acceptance, while offering opposing creditors or classes a dividend equal to or greater
            than they would likely receive in a liquidation proceeding. Where court confirmation is
            required, the court should normally defer to the decision of the creditors based on a
            majority vote. Failure to approve a plan within the stated time period, or any extended
            periods, is typically grounds for placing the debtor into a liquidation proceeding.
      C14.4 Plan Implementation and Amendment. Effective implementation of the plan should
            be independently supervised. A plan should be capable of amendment (by vote of the
            creditors) if it is in the interests of the creditors. Where a debtor fails or is incapable of
            implementing the plan, this should be grounds for terminating the plan and liquidating
            the insolvency estate.
      C14.5 Discharge and Binding Effects. The system should provide for plan effects to be
            binding with respect to forgiveness and to cancellation or alteration of debts. The effect
            of approval of the plan by a majority vote should bind all creditors, including dissenting
            minorities.
      C14.6 Plan revocation and closure. Where approval of the plan has been procured by fraud,
            the plan should be reconsidered or set aside. Upon consummation and completion of
            the plan, provision should be made to swiftly close the proceedings and enable the
            enterprise to carry on its business under normal conditions and governance.
C15 International Considerations
    Insolvency proceedings may have international aspects, and a country’s legal system should
    establish clear rules pertaining to jurisdiction, recognition of foreign judgments, cooperation
    among courts in different countries, and choice of law. Key factors to effective handling of
    cross-border matters typically include:
        (i)    A clear and speedy process for obtaining recognition of foreign insolvency
        proceedings;
        (ii) Relief to be granted upon recognition of foreign insolvency proceedings;
        (iii) Foreign insolvency representatives to have access to courts and other relevant
        authorities;
        (iv) Courts and insolvency representatives to cooperate in international insolvency
        proceedings; and
        (v) Non-discrimination between foreign and domestic creditors.




                                                - 23 -
                                                            World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                      Revised–Jan & May 2015



C16 Insolvency of Domestic Enterprise Groups
    C16.1 Procedural Coordination . The system should specify that the
           administration of insolvency proceedings with respect to two or more
           enterprise group members may be coordinated for procedural
           purposes. The scope and extent of the procedural coordination should
           be specified by the court.
          C16.2 Post-commencement Finance. The system should permit an
               enterprise group member subject to insolvency proceedings to provide
               or facilitate post-commencement finance or other kind of financial
               assistance to other enterprises in the group which are also subject to
               insolvency proceedings. The system should specify the priority
               accorded to such post -commencement finance.
          C16.3 Substantive Consolidation. The insolvency system should respect
                the separate legal identity of each of the enterprise group members.
                When substantive consolidation is contemplated, it should be
                restricted to circumstancees where: (i) assets or liabilities of the
                enterprise group members are intermingled to such an extent that the
                ownership of assets and responsibility for liabilities cannot be
                identified without disproportionate expense or delay; or (ii) the
                enterprise group members are engaged in a fraudulent scheme or
                activity with no legitimate business purpose. The court should be able
                to exclude specific claims and assets from an order of consolidation.
                In the event of substantive consolidation, the system should
                contemplate an adequate treatment of secured transactions, priorities,
                creditor meetings, and avoidance actions. The system should specify
                that a substantive consolidation order would cause the assets and
                liabilities of the consolidated enterprises to be treated as if they were
                part of a single estate; extinguish debts and claims as amongst the
                relevant enterprises; and cause claims against the relevant
                enterprises to be treated as if they were against a single insolvency
                estate.
          C16.4. Avoidance actions 12. The system should authorise the court
                considering whether to set aside a transaction that took place among
                enterprise group members, or between any of them and a related
                person, to take into account the specific circumstances of the
                transaction.
           C16.5 Insolvency Representative. The system should permit a single or the same insolvency
                 representative to be appointed with respect to two or more enterprise group members,
                 and should include provisions addressing situations involving conflicts of interest. Where
                 there are different insolvency representatives for different enterprise group members,
                 the system should allow insolvency representatives to communicate directly and to
                 cooperate to the maximum extent possible.
           C16.6 Reorganization Plans. The system should permit coordinated reorganization plans to
                be proposed in insolvency proceedings with respect to two or more enterprise group
                members. The system should allow enterprise group members not subject to insolvency
                proceedings to voluntarily participate in a reorganization plan of other group members
                subject to insolvency proceedings.




 12
      See Principle C11.

                                                   - 24 -
                                                            World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                      Revised–Jan & May 2015



C17 Insolvency of International Enterprise Groups 13
           C17.1. Access to court and Recognition of Proceedings. In the context of
                  the insolvency of enterprise group members, the system should
                  provide foreign representatives and creditors with access to the court,
                  and for the recognition of foreign insolvency proceedings, if
                  necessary.
           C17.2. Cooperation involving courts. The system should allow the
                 national court to cooperate to the maximum possible extent with
                 foreign courts or foreign representatives, either directly or through the
                 local insolvency representative. The system should permit the
                 national court to communicate directly with, or to request information
                 or assistance directly from, foreign courts or representatives.
           C17.3. Cooperation involving insolvency representatives. The system
                 should allow insolvency representatives appointed to administer
                 proceedings with respect to an enterprise group member to
                 communicate directly and to cooperate to the maximum extent
                 possible with foreign courts and with foreign insolvency
                 representatives in order to facilitate coordination of the proceedings.
           C17.4. Appointment of the insolvency representative. The system should
                 allow, in specific circumstances, for the appointment of a single or the
                 same insolvency representative for enterprise group members in
                 different States. In such cases, the system should include measures
                 addressing situations involving conflicts of interest.
           C17.5. Cross-border insolvency agreements. The system should permit
                 insolvency representatives and other parties in interest to enter into
                 cross-border insolvency agreements involving two or more enterprise
                 group members in different States in order to facilitate coordination of
                 the proceedings. The system should allow the courts to approve or
                 implement such agreements.




 13
      See Principle C15. See also Principle C16.

                                                   - 25 -
                                                         World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                   Revised–Jan & May 2015



                  Part D. Implementation: Institutional and Regulatory Frameworks
     Institutional Considerations
D1 Role of Courts
        D
   D1.1 Independence,
            1                Impartiality and Effectiveness. The system should guarantee the
          independence of the judiciary. Judicial decisions should be impartial. Courts should act
          in a competent manner and effectively.
   D1.2 Role of Courts in Insolvency Proceedings. Insolvency proceedings should be
          overseen and impartially disposed of by an independent court and assigned, where
          practical, to judges with specialized insolvency expertise. Nonjudicial institutions playing
          judicial roles in insolvency proceedings should be subject to the same principles and
          standards applied to the judiciary.
   D1.3 Jurisdiction of the Insolvency Court. The court’s jurisdiction should be defined and
          clear with respect to insolvency proceedings and matters arising in the conduct of these
          proceedings.
   D1.4 Exercise of Judgment by the Court in Insolvency Proceedings. The court should
          have sufficient supervisory powers to efficiently render decisions in proceedings in line
          with the legislation without inappropriately assuming a governance or business
          management role for the debtor, which would typically be assigned to management or
          an insolvency representative.
   D1.5 Role of Courts in Commercial Enforcement Proceedings. The general court system
          must include components that effectively enforce the rights of both secured and
          unsecured creditors outside of insolvency proceedings. If possible, these components
          should be staffed by specialists in commercial matters. Alternatively, specialized
          administrative agencies with that expertise may be established.

D2 Judicial Selection, Qualification, Training, and Performance

     D2.1   Judicial Selection and Appointment. Adequate and objective criteria should govern
            the process for selection and appointment of judges.
     D2.2   Judicial Training. Judicial education and training should be provided to judges.
     D2.3   Judicial Performance. Procedures should be adopted to ensure the competence of the
            judiciary and efficiency in the performance of court proceedings. These procedures
            serve as a basis for evaluating court efficiency and for improving the administration of
            the process.

D3    Court Organization
     The court should be organized so that all interested parties—including the attorneys, the
     insolvency representative, the debtor, the creditors, the public, and the media—are dealt with
     fairly, in a timely manner, objectively, and as part of an efficient, transparent system. Implicit in
     that structure are firm and recognized lines of authority, clear allocation of tasks and
     responsibilities, and orderly operations in the courtroom and case management.
D4 Transparency and Accountability
   An insolvency and creditor rights system should be based upon transparency and
   accountability. Rules should ensure ready access to relevant court records, court hearings,
   debtor and financial data, and other public information.
D5 Judicial Decision Making and Enforcement of Orders

                                                - 26 -
                                                              World Bank Principles for Effective Creditor/Debtor Rights Systems
                                                                                                        Revised–Jan & May 2015


         D5.1      Judicial Decision Making. Judicial decision making should encourage consensual
                   resolution among parties where possible, and should otherwise undertake timely
                   adjudication of issues with a view to reinforcing predictability in the system through
                   consistent application of the law.
         D5.2      Enforcement of Orders. The court must have clear authority and effective methods of
                   enforcing its judgments.
         D5.3      Creating a Body of Jurisprudence. A body of jurisprudence should be developed by
                   means of consistent publication of important and novel judicial decisions, especially by
                   higher courts, using publication methods that are both conventional and electronic
                   (where possible).
D6 Integrity of the System
         D6.1      Integrity of the court. The system should guarantee security of tenure and adequate
                   remuneration of judges, personal security for judicial officers, and the security of court
                   buildings. Court operations and decisions should be based on firm rules and regulations
                   to avoid corruption and undue influence.
         D6.2      Conflict of interest and bias. The court must be free of conflicts of interest, bias, and
                   lapses in judicial ethics, objectivity, and impartiality.
         D6.3      Integrity of participants. Persons involved in a proceeding must be subject to rules and
                   court orders designed to prevent fraud, other illegal activity, and abuse of the insolvency
                   and creditor rights system. In addition, the court must be vested with appropriate powers
                   to enforce its orders and address matters of improper or illegal activity by parties or
                   persons appearing before the court with respect to court proceedings.
D7 Role of Regulatory or Supervisory Bodies
   The bodies responsible for regulating or supervising insolvency representatives should:
      - Be independent of individual representatives;
      - Set standards that reflect the requirements of the legislation and public expectations of
          fairness, impartiality, transparency, and accountability; and
      - Have appropriate powers and resources to enable them to discharge their functions,
          duties, and responsibilities effectively.
D8 Competence and Integrity of Insolvency Representatives
   The system should ensure that:
      - Criteria as to who may be an insolvency representative should be objective, clearly
          established, and publicly available;
      - Insolvency representatives be competent to undertake the work to which they are
          appointed and to exercise the powers given to them;
      - Insolvency representatives act with integrity, impartiality, and independence; and
      - Insolvency representatives, where acting as managers, be held to director and officer
          standards of accountability, and be subject to removal for incompetence, negligence,
          fraud, or other wrongful conduct.14




14
     See Principle B2.

                                                     - 27 -
