                                                                        101071
 October 2015
 2015


REPORT ON THE G20 SURVEY ON
DE-RISKING ACTIVITIES IN THE
REMITTANCE MARKET




            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking in the Remittance Market
October 2015

Prepared by the World Bank Group for the G20 Turkish Presidency


Acknowledgments

This report was prepared by the Finance and Markets Global Practice of the World Bank Group.

Relevant inputs and guidance were received from World Bank Group experts, the Global Partnership for
Financial Inclusion and the Development Working Group of the G20. The report is based on the analysis
of data from a dedicated survey funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.


© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank Group with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank Group, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of The World Bank Group concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank Group encourages dissemination
of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial purposes as long
as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the:
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org
Table of Contents

EXEC UTIVE S UMMARY ......................................................................................................................................................... 1
INTRODUCTION AND OBJ ECTIVES ................................................................................................................................. 3
SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS ............................................................................................................................................ 7
SURVEY METHODOLOGY .................................................................................................................................................. 12
RES ULTS OF THE S URVEY ................................................................................................................................................. 15
CONCLUS IONS AND S UGGESTED AREAS OF INTERVENTION........................................................................ 23
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                            1


Executive Summary
1.       In September 2014, the Group of Twenty (G20) Global Partnership for Financial Inclusio n
(GPFI) requested the World Bank Group to undertake a survey in the G20 countries on the issue
of commercial banks’ actions to de-risk their operations, specifically in relation to non-bank
international remittance service providers or, as they are alternatively referred to throughout this
report, money transfer operators (MTOs). According to the definition provided by the Financia l
Action Task Force (FATF), the term “de-risking refers to the phenomenon of financial institutions
terminating or restricting business relationships with clients or categories of clients to avoid,
rather than manage, risk in line with the FATF’s risk -based approach”.
2.      The objective of the survey was to assess the status of the de-risking phenomenon in the
G20 countries, and to collect evidence from which conclusions on the main drivers and the impact
for the MTO market could be drawn.
3.        In total, 13 governments, 25 banks and 82 MTOs completed the survey. Despite the
relatively low response rates on the banks’ side, the data gathered can still be considered to be
indicative of the MTOs market reality, as the companies that provided inputs include some of the
most prominent players in the market. In fact, it is important to note that MTO responses were
received from entities with global coverage and thus, in terms of market share of the overall
remittance market, can be considered quite substantial. The data obtained by the banks are
statistically not significant, but they offer interesting indications, particularly when cross-
referenced with the inputs of the other two groups.
4.      Those countries where MTOs completed the survey and where the phenomenon seems to
be present include Australia, Canada, Germany, France, Italy, Mexico, the UK, and the USA. T he
relevance of the phenomenon varies by country. The number of accounts being closed appears to
be increasing; both MTOs and banks report an increased trend of closed and/or restricted number
of accounts between 2010 and 2014; 46 percent of MTO respondents have received notificatio ns
from their banks about the upcoming closure of their accounts.
5.      The responses of the banks and MTOs on the main drivers for MTO account closure are
mutually reinforcing on most points. They mainly include : (1) profitability, (2) pressure from other
actors (correspondent banks) and fear of regulatory scrutiny, (3) lack of confidence in the MTOs’
procedures, (4) reputational risk. Neither banks nor MTOs cited AML/CFT-related violations or
sanctions by MTOs as one of the top 5 reasons for account closures.
6.      A significant portion of MTOs declared that the MTO principal (28 percent of the
respondents) or its agents (45 percent of respondents) can no longer access banking services. Of
that smaller group of MTO principal without access, 74 percent are maintaining their presence in
the market by using alternative channels to clear and settle the amounts at international level.
Notably the following methods are reported: a) using other MTOs, b) operating via cash
management companies and physically transporting cash, and c) using personal bank accounts.
The other 26 percent of MTO principal respondents are currently unable to operate regularly
through bank channels. The inability for the agents to obtain a bank account raises the concern
about the possibility for the MTOs to continue serving remote and rural areas, in particular in the
receiving countries. Thanks to the extensiveness of the agent network, MTOs can efficie ntly
provide their service in remote and rural areas, where the physical presence of the principa l
company is not economically and logistically viable. The reduction of access to the bank accounts


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                             2

for the agents can impose higher operational and compliance risks and costs to the MTOs. An
increased level of costs would ultimately be transferred to the customers.
7.      There are differing views on the effectiveness of supervision of the MTOs sector. 85
percent of the governments that responded stated that they believe banks can rely on adequate
supervision of the MTOs sector in order to inform their risk-based decisions on
opening/maintaining accounts for MTOs’ customers. 88 percent of MTO responde nts agreed that
their sector was sufficiently supervised. Only 52 percent of bank respondents judged that the
MTOs sector is sufficiently supervised and only 48 percent of bank respondents felt that they can
rely on the supervision of the MTOs sector to inform risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining
accounts for MTO customers.
8.      The MTOs business model is often perceived as high risk, in particular in relation to
ML/FT. However, the survey highlights a rather low number of violations of the relevant legal
requirements. This finding therefore corroborates to a large extent the one above on the
consistency between risk perceptions and effectiveness of supervision of MTOs. According to the
answers received from the governments, there are very few MTOs (principals or agents) that have
been fined, suspended, sanctioned or received some other enforcement action for an AML/CFT-
related violation between 2012 and 2014, however, the number has increased over time. Only two
of the responding governments indicated that a bank operating in their country has been fined,
suspended, sanctioned or has received some other enforcement action for an AML/CFT-related
violation associated with their relationship with MTOs. In addition, 78 percent of MTO
respondents indicated no record of sanctions or other enforcement actions related to AML/CFT.
9.      The survey highlighted that there is a limited capacity to monitor the rapid developme nts
of the de-risking phenomenon. Before the implementation of the survey a number of jurisdictio ns
indicated that they had no information of problems in this area. Currently there are no clear and
defined plans to systematically gather more data and structure national plans to discuss the issue
with the industry and find a coherent solution. Without an adequate monitoring system, capable
of providing accurate and up to date information, it is quite difficult to evaluate whether or not the
real peak of de-risking has been reached and therefore set up measures to prevent further worsening
of the situation or revert the current trends.
10.     Based on these survey results, three suggested areas of intervention have been proposed
thus far:
       Money transfer operators are still perceived as “inherently high risk”. Making a concerted
        effort to get out the message that not all MTOs are “high risk” seems critical. The FATF
        should play a key role in that respect, but these efforts need to be complemented at the
        country level;
       There is a clear need to clarify the regulatory expectations, and provide more guidance on
        the boundaries of a risk based approach – from higher risks to lower risks. Given the cross
        border dimension of the issue, coordination between jurisdictions on regulator y
        expectations is a challenge that must be addressed;
       A more effective, proportionate supervision of money transfer operators is essential,
        including to allow a genuine implementation of a risk-based approach by banks when
        dealing with them. This is relevant both for developed and developing countries.




                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                   3


Introduction and Objectives

11.      According to the definition provided by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the term
“de-risking refers to the phenomenon of financial institutions terminating or restricting business
relationships with clients or categories of clients to avoid, rather than manage, risk in line with
the FATF’s risk -based approach”.1 Over the last few years, numerous anecdotal reports have
circulated within the international financial community about banks’ actions to de -risk their
operations and about the negative impact that such actions have had, in particular, on remittance
services providers.
12.      In 2013, the World Bank Group, under the umbrella of the Global Remittances Working
Group, published the report “Barriers to Access to Payment Systems in Sending Countries and
Proposed Solutions”,2 which addresses to some extent the topic of de-risking and provides both
examples in key remittances sending markets and recommendations on potential actions to reduce
the impact of the phenomenon. In 2014, the World Bank Group also published the report “Makin g
Remittances Work: Balancing Financial Integrity and Inclusion, ”3 highlighting the
complementarity of public policies to promote integrity and inclusion through the remittances
market. The work undertaken by the World Bank Group in the remittances sector aims at the
implementation of the WB/CPMI General Principles for International Remittances Services (Box
1), the international standards in this sector, published in 2007. 4

                       Box 1. List of the General Principles and related Roles
 The General Principles are aimed at the public policy objectives of achieving safe and efficient
 international remittance services. To this end, the markets for the services should be contestable,
 transparent, accessible and sound.
 Transparency and consumer protection
 General Principle 1. The market for remittance services should be transparent and have adequate
 consumer protection.

 Payment system infrastructure
 General Principle 2. Improvements to payment system infrastructure that have the potential to increase
 the efficiency of remittance services should be encouraged.

 Legal and regulatory environment
 General Principle 3. Remittance services should be supported by a sound, predictable, non-discriminatory
 and proportionate legal and regulatory framework in relevant jurisdictions.



1.   See also http://www.fatf-gafi.org/topics/fatfrecommendations/documents/rba-and-de-risking.html
2.   Available at
      http://siteresources.worldbank.org/FINANCIALSECTOR/ Resources/2820441359488786791/barriers_web.pdf
3.   Available at
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/18551/884820PUB0Bo x300EPI2101090May29
      2014.pdf?sequence=1
4.   Available at
      http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPAYMENTREMMITTANCE/ Resources/New_Remittance_Report.pdf


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                            4

 Market structure and competition
 General Principle 4. Competitive market conditions, including appropriate access to domestic payments
 infrastructures, should be fostered in the remittance industry.

 Governance and risk management
 General Principle 5. Remittance services should be supported by appropriate governance and risk
 management practices.

 Roles of remittance service providers and public authorities
 A. The role of remittance service providers. Remittance service providers should participate actively in
 the implementation of the General Principles.
 B. The role of public authorities. Public authorities should evaluate what action to take to achieve the
 public policy objectives through implementation of the General Principles.



13.      In September 2014, the Group of Twenty (G20) Global Partnership for Financial Inclusio n
(GPFI) requested the World Bank Group to undertake a survey in the G20 countries on the issue
of commercial banks’ actions to de-risk their operations, specifically in relation to non-bank
international remittance service providers or, as they are alternatively referred to throughout this
report, money transfer operators (MTOs). The purpose of this report is to summarize the findings
of the survey.
14.     The survey was distributed online, in the G20 countries,5 between May and August 2015,
and collected information from governments, banks, and MTOs. The content, audience and the
overall approach of the survey were approved by GPFI before its launch. The objective of the
survey was to assess the scale of the de-risking phenomenon in the G20 countries, and to collect
evidence from which conclusions on the main drivers and the impact for the MTO market could
be drawn. The report also offers recommendations with the goal of supporting the internatio na l
community in its understanding and policy response to address the problems faced by the industry.
The survey was conducted with the financial support of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
15.     Since 2013, different sources have reported that banks have cut off access to banking
services to MTOs, allegedly due to the increased risks and costs associated with the existing
compliance requirements, particularly in the area of anti-money laundering and combating the
financing of terrorism (AML/CFT). Additionally, it had been reported that banks seem to be
increasingly concerned about the potential fines and penalties that could be levied against violators
of the legal and regulatory framework. Some of these concerns were reported in studies from
standard setting bodies and other institutions. 6


5.   Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea,
      Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America;
      the European Union is not included in the surveys as it is an organ representing multiple countries.
6.   Please see “De-Risking: Global Impact and Unintended Consequences for Exclusion and Stability ,” FATF
      Plenary Document 1, October 2014; available at
      https://classic.regonline.com/custImages/340000/341739/ G24%20AFI/ G24_2015/ De-risking_Report.pdf. The
      CPMI ha recently published the “ Correspondent banking - consultative report”, available at
      https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d136.htm


                            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                            5

16.     MTOs deliver the large majority of international remittances flows at global level and are
a crucial part of the international remittance services industry. In most of the national markets
they represent the channel through which more than 90 percent of the remittances flows are
processed. Even in countries with a higher level of competition from other remittance service
providers (banks, other financial institutions and telecommunication companies), MTOs still
maintain a dominant share of the market. The services they provide are important for many
migrants and their families as they help extend reach and access to remittances and other financ ia l
services in many remote locations where banks are not present.
17.     The limitations suffered by the MTOs can have a detrimental effect of the efforts
undertaken by countries to increase the level of financial inclusion. The services provided by the
MTOs to millions of migrants around the world spark a multiple set of outcomes in the receiving
countries. Remittances contribute to sustaining the welfare of about 700 million people globally
and they often represent the only source of income to provide food, healthcare, housing, and
education to migrants’ families. Remittances also represent the main—and frequently the only—
form of financial service that a large part of the lowest income segment of the population ever
experiences. Via the remittances transfer migrants and their families have the opportunity to
progressively access a more sophisticated set of financial products, such as savings, microcredit
and insurances. In this direction, a large number of MTOs have established partnerships with other
financial institutions and created products that can satisfy additional needs of the population. In
many countries banks are starting to leverage the remittances flows to attract new customers and
cross-sell tailored products that can increase the level of financial capability of the population.
18.     The need to increase the potential of remittances in the area of financial inclusion, thereby
reducing poverty and driving economic growth, has been recognized by the G20. The work
developed in this area can substantially contribute to and align with the Sustainable Developme nt
Goals and Addis Ababa Action Agenda. The G20 is particularly focused on: a) achieving
remittance cost reductions, b) encouraging savings and other financial services, c) increasing
competition, and d) fostering public and private investments. The G20 aims to accelerate financ ia l
inclusion, literacy and consumer protection for individuals, with particular attention to women,
youth, elderly, the disabled, people in rural areas and small and medium enterprises.
19.      At the same time, however, remittance channels can be a source of money laundering and
financing of terrorism (ML/FT) risks. As remittance volumes grow, so do concerns about potential
risks. There is a general perception that remittances and wire transfers are more vulnerable to
ML/FT risks than other financial activities such as deposit taking, lending, leasing, and money
management, particularly when transactions are conducted by operators that are not subject to, or
do not comply with, AML/CFT obligations. For these reasons, the AML/CFT community has for
the last 15 years actively promoted policies and practices to ensure that remittances use legal and
regulated channels. Relevant actions undertaken to increase the integrity of the sector include
enhanced level of oversight on the market (including the introduction of registration and/or
licensing), as well as institutional measures within the sector (including AML/CFT preventive
measures). At the international level, the FATF recommendations include relevant requireme nts
in Recommendations 14 (money or value transfer services) and 16 (wire transfers).
20.      The key findings of this survey and the relative recommendations on potential actions are
provided in this report to assist the G20 governments, standard setting bodies, private sector
entities and the other relevant stakeholders in the financial sector on future discussions on this
topic.


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                     6

21.      In addition to working with the G20 on de-risking in the remittance market, the World
Bank Group collaborated with the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Committee on
Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) to conduct a global survey on access to foreign
correspondent banking relationships. This survey is focused on banking authorities, large
international banks, and regional/local banks. The G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors endorsed this work in February 2015.




                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                        7


Summary of Key Findings
22.    The survey identified some notable similarities and differences in the perspectives of the
respondent stakeholders on very important issues. Some of the most salient are highlighted below.

Existence of the “De -risking” Phenomenon

         Those countries where MTOs completed the survey and where the phenomenon seems to
          be present include Australia, Canada, Germany, France, Italy, Mexico, the UK, and the
          USA. The relevance of the phenomenon varies by country.
         The “de- risking” trend impacts more MTOs today than a few years ago; in 2010, 67 percent
          of MTOs indicated that they had not had a single bank account closed and, in 2014, that
          number has declined to 42 percent (Figure 1).
         The main drivers for MTO account closure mainly include: (1) profitability, (2) pressure
          from other actors (correspondent banks) and fear of regulatory scrutiny, (3) lack of
          confidence in the MTOs’ procedures, (4) reputational risk.
         The issue of de-risking for MTOs seems to be closely related to the overall global
          phenomenon of de-risking affecting other business lines or clients. The link with the
          decline in correspondent banking relationships is clearly demonstrated by the MTO and
          bank responses, and confirmed by the preliminary findings of the correspondent banking
          survey.

                    Figure 1. Trend in Bank Account Closures for MTO Clients
                                 (2010 – 2014, MTO Perspective)

Has your firm, as principal MTO, had bank accounts closed that impede your ability to provide in ternational
remittance services? Please record the number of accounts closed.


 80%
              67%
 70%
                           60%
 60%                                     56%                       54%
                                                      50%
 50%                                                        48%
                                         38%                           45%
 40%                       35%                        47%              42%                           0
              28%
 30%                                     35%
                           33%                                                                       1-10
 20%          26%
 10%                                                                                                 At least one
                                                                                                     (1-1,000+)
   0%
             2010         2011           2012        2013          2014




                           Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                               8

Bank Account Access for MTOs

        Six of the 13 responding governments indicated that, in the past two years, they had
         received complaints or requests for assistance from MTOs in obtaining and/or maintaining
         access to bank account.
        When asked whether they provide banking services to MTOs and their agents, five of the
         responding banks indicated that they do not offer their services to MTO principals, while
         15 indicated that they do not open accounts for agents of MTOs.
        A significant portion of MTOs declared that the MTO principal (28 percent of the
         respondents) or its agents (45 percent of respondents) can no longer access banking
         services (Figure 2). Within this group, six MTOs (7 percent of respondents) are currently
         unable to operate regularly through bank channels. In addition, 38 MTOs (46 percent of
         respondents) have received notifications from their banks about the upcoming closure of
         their accounts.
        The number of accounts being closed appears to be increasing; both MTOs and banks
         report an increased trend of closed and/or restricted number of accounts between 2010 and
         2014 (see Figures 1 and 3). In both cases, there is a shift in distribution towards higher
         brackets, indicating that there are (i) more MTOs having their accounts closed and (2) that
         each MTO is having a higher number of accounts closed. The difference among the two
         groups in the reported intensity of the increase could be due to the larger statistical baseline
         of the MTO answers.
        When asking for explanations about the reason for the account closure provided by their
         banks, these MTOs reported that the most common answers they received relate to fear of
         regulatory scrutiny, reputational risk, profitability, and fear of losing access to
         correspondent banking relationships.

                   Figure 2. Access to Bank Accounts for MTOs and their Agents 7
                                                                    In the country in which you are based,
                                                                    does your firm, as a principal M TO,
                                                                    currently lack complete access to a bank
                                                                    account in providing international
                                                                    remittance services?
                                                                           Yes              No         Total

                   In the country in which                               23                  14         37
                                                     Yes
                   you are based, do your                               100%                24%        45%
                   agents currently lack                                  0                  45         45
                   complete access to a               No
                                                                         0%                 76%        55%
                   bank account in
                   providing remittance             Total             23     28%       59        72%    82
                   transfer services?




7.   The figure aims at comparing the answers provided by the MTOs in relation to the indicated questions. So, for
      example, 23 MTOs reported that they lack complete access to bank accounts and all those same companies also
      have agents that cannot access bank accounts (upper left corner). At the same time, 14 MTOs that still have
      access as principals to a bank account declared that their agents do not have access (upper right corner). Finally,
      45 MTOs reported that neither them as principals, nor their agents lack access to bank accounts.


                            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                             9

        Banks that are no longer providing banking services to the MTOs (five out of 25) declared
         that they would re-engage in this business if: a) MTOs were better supervised and banks
         could better rely on government oversight, and b) regulators published new guidance
         spelling out the requirements for managing risks for MTOs. Both the measures would
         increase the confidence of the banks in the remittances business and would support the
         efforts that banks are already putting in place to properly perform their own risk-based
         assessments of the MTOs.

Figure 3. Trend in Bank Accounts Closed and/or Restricted (2010 - 2014, Bank Perspective) 8




Requirements to Operate in Remittances Business
        In all 13 countries for which governments responded, MTO principals are required either
         to register or obtain a license to operate (12 of the 13 require registration; nine of the 13
         required obtaining a license) (Table 1).
        The responses were less consistent for MTO agents; while practice goes beyond the
         international standard in the vast majority of countries. In seven of the 13 countries MTO
         agents are required to register, and in four of the 13 countries MTO agents are required to
         obtain a license. In two countries MTO agents are not required to obtain a license or a
         registration.
        Of the 82 MTO respondents, 75 companies (92 percent of respondents) indicate that they
         are registered or licensed in the country where they operate.

                 Table 1. MTO Requirements to operate (Government Responses)
                                                        MTO Principals      MTO Agents
                Registration required                   12                  7
                License required                        1                   4
                Neither required                        0                   2


8.   Indicates number of accounts


                           Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                            10

Supervision of MTOs
       In all 13 countries the governments state that MTOs are supervised in their country. When
        asked whether the MTO sector was sufficiently supervised, 11 of the 13 governme nts
        replied positively. In 11 of the 13 countries, the governments stated that they believe banks
        can rely on adequate supervision of the MTO sector in order to inform their risk-based
        decisions on opening/maintaining accounts for MTO customers (Table 2).
       The overwhelming majority of MTOs agreed that the remittances business sector is
        sufficiently supervised (88 percent) and that banks can rely on the regulatory supervis io n
        of the MTO sector in order to inform risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining accounts
        for MTO customers (90 percent).
       Contrary to the responses from the government and MTOs, only 13 out of 25 (52 percent)
        of the responding banks judged the MTO sector as sufficiently supervised and 12 out of 25
        (48 percent) of the responding banks feel that they can rely on the supervision of the MTO
        sector to inform risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining accounts for MTO
        customers.

                        Table 2. Differing Perspectives on MTO supervision
                                             Governments         Banks                MTOs
     Remittance business sector is
     adequately supervised                   11/13 (84%)         13/25 (52%)          72/82 (87%)
     Banks can rely on adequate
     supervision to inform their risk-
     based decisions on opening/
     maintaining accounts for MTO
     customers                               11/13 (84%)         12/25 (48%)          74/82 (90%)

MTO Sector Guidance
       11 of the 13 governments have issued guidance for the MTO sector, but only six of the 13
        governments have issued guidance to banks on the provision of bank accounts and banking
        services to MTOs (Table 3).
       While the majority of MTOs (90 percent) report receiving some guidance on their sector,
        intended to clarify and facilitate adherence to compliance requirements, fewer than half of
        the responding banks indicate having received guidance from supervisory authorities on
        providing banking services to MTOs.
       Banks and MTOs also express disparate views on the usefulness of the guidance received;
        the majority of MTOs (91 percent) found the guidance helpful, but only 46 percent of banks
        would agree.




                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                            11



                                    Table 3. MTO Sector Guidance
                                       Governments                 Banks              MTOs
     Guidance issued to the MTO sector 11/13 (84%)                                    75/82 (91%)
     Guidance issued to Banks on the
     provision of bank accounts and
     banking services to MTOs          6/13 (46%)                  13/25 (52%)
     Was the guidance helpful?                                     6/13 (46%)         68/75 (90%)

AML/CFT Violations and Sanctions
       In this sample, according to the answers received from the governments, there are very few
        MTOs (principals or agents) that have been fined, suspended, sanctioned or received some
        other enforcement action for an AML/CFT-related violation between 2012 and 2014,
        however, the number has increased over time (Table 4).
       Only two of the 13 countries indicated that a bank operating in their country has been fined,
        suspended, sanctioned or has received some other enforcement action for an AML/CFT-
        related violation associated with their relationship with MTOs.
       In terms of the supervisory sanctions received, 64 MTOs (78 percent of respondents)
        indicated no record of sanctions or other enforcement actions in the country of reference
        for the survey.
       Neither banks nor MTOs cited AML/CFT-related violations or sanctions by MTOs as one
        of the top five reasons for account closures.

                            Table 4. MTO Fined, Suspended, Sanctioned
                              MTOs fined,
                              suspended or
                                sanctioned         2014      2013       2012
                              0                       8        8           9
                              1 – 10                  2        3           2
                              11-50                   1
                              51 – 100                1
                                  Don't
                              know/Refusal            1        2           2




                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                          12


Survey Methodology
23.    The respondents for the survey on de-risking in the remittance market (the survey)
represent three primary stakeholders on this issue —governments, banks, or MTOs.9 The
stakeholders were defined as follows:
        Governments : All G20 members, with the exception of the European Union, as it is an
         organ representing multiple countries;
        Banks : A range of large-, medium-, and small-sized banks, based in the G20 countries;
        MTOs : A range of MTOs, based in the G20 countries, of different market share sizes and
         serving different corridors.

24.    A combination of different sources was used to market the survey to the differe nt
respondent categories, primarily based on the World Bank Group knowledge of the internatio na l
market for remittances. The sources used for each respondent category are outlined below.


Governments

25.     The survey was sent to the contact details indicated by the different members of the G20.
In some cases the survey was sent to multiple individuals within the same government and they
coordinated a single response on behalf of their government, in other cases the G20 representatives
indicated one single contact person who would manage the collection of the information at national
level on behalf of their government. As the European Union was not included, the survey was sent
to 19 governments.

Banks

26.      The survey was sent to banks identified via three different methods. 1) The World Bank
Group contacted commercial banks via a set of databases of the banks’ headquart ers present in
each of the G20 countries.10 2) The World Bank Group, through contacts in national banking
associations, contacted specific banks that expressed interest in the survey. 3) Banks in the USA
were invited to participate in the survey clicking on a “generic” link, specifically developed for
that market. This option for the USA market was set up in response to a specific request from the
authorities in the USA who expressed concern that a dedicated link for each respondent might be
interpreted as a way to trace responses back to individual banks and, as a result, could discourage
participation in the survey. In addition, and in order to increase the sample size in the banking
sector, the World Bank Group worked closely with certain national Bankers Associatio ns


9.  For the purpose of this survey the MTOs are defined according to the WB-CPMI General Principles for
     International remittances services as “ a non-deposit taking payment service provider where the service involves
     payment per transfer (or possibly payment for a set or series of transfers) by the sender to the payment service
     provider (for example, by cash or bank transfer) – i.e. as opposed to a situation where the payment service
     provider debits an account held by the sender at the payment service provider ”. As per the definition above
     MTOs area all the non-bank entities that provide remittances services in a given country.
10. The databases were purchased from a specialized company, Dunn and Bradstreet.


                           Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                           13

(Australia, Canada, Indonesia, Italy, Mexico, Turkey, UK and USA) and other internatio na l
organizations such as the Institute of International Finance and the World Savings and Retail
Banking Institute.
27.   As indicated in Table 5, 3000 contacts in banks outside of the USA (plus 11 of them in the
USA) received an individually dedicated link to answer the survey online.


       Table 5. Number of contacts reached in banks and other deposit taking institutions
                                                                           Banks
                       Country
                                                                          Contacted
                       ARGENTINA                                              29
                       AUSTRALIA                                              53
                       BRAZIL                                                 78
                       CANADA                                                153
                       CHINA                                                 100
                       FRANCE                                                618
                       GERMANY                                               912
                       INDIA                                                 211
                       ITALY                                                 323
                       JAPAN                                                  1
                       MEXICO                                                 91
                       RUSSIA                                                211
                       SAUDI ARABIA                                           4
                       SOUTH AFRICA                                           9
                       TURKEY                                                 38
                       UNITED KINGDOM                                        158
                       UNITED STATES of AMERICA                               11
                       TOTAL                                                3000


MTOs

28.     The World Bank Group had a pre-existing list of contacts of MTOs, and additional details
were obtained with the support of national authorities and the local and global industry
associations.
29.      The MTOs with global coverage (Western Union, Money Gram, RIA, UAE exchange)
were individually invited to take part in the survey. Other MTOs expressed their interest in taking
part in the survey after being prompted by their association or after the announcement of the surve y
on the World Bank Group website or other social media.
30.     Similar to USA-based banks, MTOs in the USA were invited to participate in the survey
clicking on a “generic” link, specifically developed for that market . This option for the USA
market was set up in response to a specific request from the authorities in the USA who expressed
concern that a dedicated link for each respondent might be interpreted as a way to trace responses
back to individual MTOs and, as a result, could discourage participation in the survey.


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                     14



31.      A total of 310 contacts in MTOs received an individually dedicated link to answer the
survey, with at least one MTO based in every country in the survey.11 Table 6 presents the
distribution of the links sent out per country, counting multiple times the MTOs which have
presence in more than one jurisdiction.


                            Table 6. Number of contacts reached in MTOs
                          Country                                      MTOs
                                                                      Contacted
                          ARGENTINA                                       8
                          AUSTRALIA                                       29
                          BRAZIL                                          7
                          CANADA                                          44
                          CHINA                                           6
                          FRANCE                                          11
                          GERMANY                                         13
                          INDIA                                           16
                          INDONESIA                                       65
                          ITALY                                           19
                          JAPAN                                           5
                          KOREA REP OF                                    2
                          MEXICO                                         191
                          RUSSIA                                          16
                          SAUDI ARABIA                                    3
                          SOUTH AFRICA                                    4
                          TURKEY                                          3
                          UNITED KINGDOM                                  28
                          UNITES STATES OF AMERICA                        31
                          TOTAL                                         501




11.   This number excludes the USA-based MTOs which were directly contacted by their associations, and accounts
      only once the MTOs that received multiple links because they are active in two or more countries. The two
      Korean MTOs are international MTOs operating in that country (see below).


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                          15


Results of the survey
32.      In total, 13 governments, 25 banks and 82 MTOs completed the survey. 12 Despite
relatively low response rates achieved (Table 7), the data gathered can still be considered to be
indicative of the MTOs market reality, considering that the companies that provided inputs include
some of the most prominent players in the market. In terms of the MTO responses, it is important
to note that responses were received from entities with global coverage (see above) and thus, in
terms of market share of the overall remittance market, can be considered quite substantial. 13 The
data obtained by the banks are statistically not significant, but they offer interesting indicatio ns,
particularly when cross-referenced with the inputs of the other two groups. The low rate of
response among banks may be interpreted as a lack of interest on the topic, considered the result
of “survey fatigue”, and/or be a reflection of their desire to maintain confidentiality on their
commercial decisions.


                       Table 7. Survey Response Rate by Respondent Category
                                                  Governments               Banks                MTOs
      Participated                                     13                     25                   82
      Invited to participate                           19                   3,000                 501
      RESPONSE RATE                                  68.4%                  0.8%                 16.4%


Government Responses

33.     Of the 19 governments invited to respond, 13 completed the survey, namely Australia,
Brazil, Canada, China, France, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, South Africa, Turkey, UK,
and USA (Figure 4). Nine of the respondent countries are net senders of remittances, and four
are net receivers of remittances. The following analysis will consider only the responses received
from the 13 governments that completed the survey.




12.   The total numbers include cases in which banks or MTOs operating in different G20 countries have provided
      multiple answers, one per each country. Purely as an example, the company XZY Remit LTD could have
      provided two answers, one for Brazil and another one for India.
13.   It is quite complex to define the exact level of market share covered by the MTOs' responses in each market, as
      the exact percentage is not publicly available and it changes substantially in each country. However, based on
      the general knowledge of the main players, it is possible to say that in some of the countries the responding
      MTOs represent more than 50 percent of the overall market.


                            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                          16

                        Figure 4. Survey Participation among G20 Countries




34.    The respondents with the greatest number of MTO principals currently registered or
licensed are the USA, Mexico, the UK, Australia and Canada.
35.     In all 13 countries MTO principals are required either to register or obtain a license
to operate (12 of the 13 require registration; nine of the 13 require obtaining a license). This
would indicate that most of the respondents have an accurate understanding of the scope of MTO
principals operating in their jurisdiction, and ML/FT risks associated with MTOs.
36.    The responses were less uniform for MTO agents. In seven of the 13 countries MTO
agents are required to register with the relevant supervisory or regulatory authorities, and
in four of the 13 countries MTO agents are required to obtain a license. In two countries
MTO agents are not required to obtain a license or a registration. This generally indicates that the
governments rely on the principal for the supervision of the agents.
37.     In all 13 countries the governments state that MTOs are supervised in their country.
In 11 of the 13 countries, the governments stated that they believe banks can rely on adequate
supervision of the MTO sector in order to inform their risk-based decisions on
opening/maintaining accounts for MTO customers. This is notable in that many banks cited
concerns about inadequate government supervision of the MTO sector.
38.    When asked whether the banking sector is sufficiently supervised, all 13 governments
replied positively. When asked whether the MTO sector was sufficiently supervised, 11 of
the 13 governments replied positively.
39.      11 of the 13 governments have issued guidance for the MTO sector, but only six of the
13 governments have issued guidance to banks on the provision of bank accounts and
banking services to MTOs. While many governments have addressed the MTO side of the
relationship, there appears to be a need for guidance on the banking side of the relationship. This
may be an area of opportunity for governments to take additional action.



                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                   17

40.     In the 13 countries in the sample there are very few MTOs (principals or agents) that
have been fined, suspended, sanctioned or received some other enforcement action for an
AML/CFT-related violation between 2012 and 2014. However, the number has increased
over time. Of the respondents, only five of the 13 reported such actions over the past three years.
In 2014, two jurisdictions took significant action with one country issuing between 11 and 50
violations and one country issuing between 51 and 100 violations.
41.    Only two of the 13 countries indicated that a bank operating in their country had
been fined, suspended, sanctioned or been subject to some other enforce ment action for an
AML/CFT-related violation associated with their relationship with MTOs.
42.    Six of the 13 governments indicated that they had received complaints or requests for
assistance from MTOs in the past two years in obtaining and/or maintaining access to a bank
account. Of those six, four stated that requests have increased in frequency over the past two
years while two stated the frequency of the requests has remained the same.


MTO responses

43.     The 82 MTOs that participated in the survey are active in 13 of the G20 countries. 14
The sample gathers 21 micro and small companies that serve less than 10,000 customers every
year, 52 medium-size companies, providing remittances services to a range of 10,000 and 1 millio n
customers and 9 companies serving between 1 and 10 million customers.
44.      In some of the countries the MTO responses do not point to a problem of de-risking.
This, however, also reflects specific conditions of each national market. In Argentina the local
legislation is such that the MTOs do not use banks to clear and settle the funds at internatio na l
level. In the Republic of Korea the legislation allows the provision of remittances only through
banks and there are no MTOs directly operating in the country. In two other countries (Japan and
Turkey) the MTOs did not report past or current problems in this area, but they indicated that the
issue may impact them in the future (paragraph 52). In India, four MTOs participated in the survey
and did not report any recent account closure.
45.      In the remaining countries where MTOs completed the survey (Australia, Canada,
Germany, France, Italy, Mexico, the UK, and the US) the phenomenon seems to be present,
with different degrees of relevance (Table 8). If the MTOs are disaggregated by size (Table 9),
the incidence of the phenomenon does not change and large MTOs are affected by the phenomenon
as much, if not more, as the other categories. In this sense, the data go against the general
assumption that the reputation of the MTOs and the amount of investments and resources dedicated
to the compliance with the legislation could positively influence the decision of the banks to
maintain or close the relationships with them.




14.   The countries of operation of the 82 MTOs do not match with the 13 countries whose governments answered
      the survey.


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                                  18

                            Table 8. MTO Account Closures at Firm Level per country (2014)
         Has your firm, as principal MTO, had bank accounts closed that impede your ability to provide
international remittance services. Please record the number of accounts closed
 Number
 of
                     ARG      AUS   CAN     GER      FRA   ITA   JPN      RUS   UK    US A   TUR   IND   MEX      TOTAL
 Accounts
 Closed
        0               1      2      4          4    1     1         1    1    4      9      1     4     1        34

      1 – 10                   8      4          1    1     1                   4     18                  1        38

  11 – 50                                                                              2                            2

 51 – 100                      1      1                                                2                            4
      101 –
                                                                                       1                            1
       500
  1,000 +
      Don't
                                                                                1      2                            3
      know
  TOTAL                 1      11     9          5    2     2         1    1    9     34      1     4     2        82




                     Table 9. MTO Account Closures at Firm Level (2014) per MTOs size 15
Has your firm, as principal MTO, had bank accounts closed that impede your ability to provide international
remittance services. Please record the number of accounts closed
                                          S MALL             MEDIUM                  LARGE               TOTAL
                 0                          17                   13                    4                  34
               1 – 10                       17                   14                    7                  38
               11 – 50                                           2                                            2
            51 – 100                        2                    1                     1                      4
            101 - 500                                                                  1                      1
               1,000 +
         Don’t know
                                            1                                          2                      3
        Not Answered
          TOTAL                             37                   30                   15                  82




46.    In the countries where there are reports of de-risking, the phenomenon has also
increased in prevalence in the last few years. 45 MTOs (54 percent of respondents) reported that
they had an account closed in 2014, versus the 24 MTOs (29 percent of respondents) that had an
account closed in 2010.The same conclusion is confirmed by the fact that 55 MTOs (67 percent of
respondents) reported that in 2010 they did not experience any closure of accounts, while in 2014
the number dropped to 34 (42 percent of respondents). In terms of the number of accounts closed,
in some extreme cases MTOs reported a very large number of accounts shut down in 2014: one


15.     The responding MTOs have been divided in three categories based on the declared annual customer basis: 1)
        “Small” the MTOs with less than 50,000 customers per year; 2) “Medium” the MTOs with between 50,000 and
        500,000 customers per year; and 3) “Large” the MTOs with more than 500,000 customers per year.


                                    Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                            19

operator reported between 101 and 500 accounts closed and four MTOs reported that they had
between 51 and 100 accounts closed.
47.     When asking for explanations about the reasons for the account closure provided by
their banks, these MTOs reported that the most common answers they received relate to
concerns with regulatory scrutiny, reputational risk, profitability, and concerns of losing
access to correspondent banking relationships. The responses most indicated were the
following:
            a. The bank(s) do(es) not even want the names of MTOs, supposedly in full
               compliance with AML/CFT standards, in their computer systems because they fear
               this invites increased supervisory scrutiny of their business (23 respondents).
            b. The bank(s) took this decision because enforcement examiners indicated to them
               that they should stop banking all MTOs - even in those when MTOs were possibly
               in compliance with all requirements (23 respondents).
            c. Concern about reputational risks if the bank(s) continued to bank MTOs (22
               respondents).
            d. The bank reassessed risk-reward trade-offs of providing accounts and decided the
               risks of continuing to provide these services to MTOs outweighed the revenue -
               generating potential (20 respondents).
            e. The bank(s) told the MTOs that one or more of their correspondent banks has been
               pressing them to close MTO accounts (15 respondents).

48.      The survey also highlighted that 23 MTOs (28 percent of the total respondents )
declared that both the MTO principal and its agents can no longer access banking services.
Within this smaller group of 23 respondents, 6 MTOs (26 percent of those without access)
are currently unable to operate regularly. The other 17 MTOs (74 percent of those without
access) are maintaining their presence in the market by using alternative channels to clear and
settle the amounts at international level, notably the following methods: a) using other MTOs, b)
operating via cash management companies and physically transporting cash, and c) using personal
bank accounts.
49.     In addition to the 23 MTOs mentioned above for which the access to banking services is
unavailable to both principals and agents, an additional 14 MTOs noted that while the principal
may still maintain access, the agents do not – bringing the total of MTOs which completed the
survey noting that their agents no longer have access to banking services to a total of 37 companies
(45 percent of respondents).
50.     Of these 37 cases of agents without access, 11 agent networks are currently unable to
operate, while in the other 26 cases a set of alternative solutions are being used to clear and settle
funds with the principal company. It is important to notice that agents develop an essential role in
the overall process of collection and disbursement of remittances, as they represent the main
contact point for a large percentage of migrants and their families. The inability for the agents to
obtain a bank account raises the concern about the possibility for the MTOs to continue serving
remote and rural areas, in particular in the receiving countries. In many cases small enterprises like
grocery stores, gas stations and microfinance institutions are the only entities with presence in
remote areas and therefore the only access point for migrants and their families. The inability for
these entities to access a bank account would progressively reduce the coverage of the MTOs in



                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                20

these areas, with quite onerous consequences for the migrants and their families, in terms of costs,
both direct (increased fees) and indirect (loss of working hours, travel costs, risks related to cash
transportation, etc.).
51.     Another interesting element of analysis can be extracted by the comparison between the
numbers of accounts closed to the numbers of accounts opened by the same MTOs. In 2014, 45
MTOs had at least one account closed or restricted and 16 of them did not manage to open any
bank account. Similarly, in the same year, 30 MTOs report the closure of bank accounts for their
agents, and 19 of them indicate that agents managed to have some accounts opened in that year.
52.     Collected data indicate that 38 MTOs (46 percent of respondents) have received
notifications from their banks about the upcoming closure of their accounts (Table 10). In
27 of these cases, the banks informed the MTOs that the accounts will be closed within three
months from the submission of the survey, while for the remainder the window for account closure
spans between four and 12 months. As outlined above, in this group of notified upcoming account
closures, there are MTOs from Turkey and Japan, which had not experienced problems in the past.

                            Table 10. Notification of account closures by banks
Q24. Have you been formally notified that any of the bank accounts for international remittance services
held by you or your agents will be closed in the future by any of your banking relationships?
           ARG    AUS     CAN    FRA     GER   ITA    JPN    RUS    UK    US A   TUR      IND   MEX   TOTAL

   Yes              5      5              2            1             5     18         1          1     38


   No         1     6      4       2      3      2            1      4     16              4     1     44

 TOTAL        1     11     9       2      5      2     1      1      8     34         1    4     2     82




53.      Of the 82 MTO respondents, 75 companies (92 percent of respondents) indicate that
they are registered or licensed in the country where they operate , while 6 MTOs (7 percent of
respondents) report that there is no need for license or registration in their jurisdiction and only in
one case the MTO indicates it is not licensed or registered (although it is required in its jurisdic tio n
of activity). With only one exception, all the MTOs in the survey stated that they have a formal
AML/CFT compliance program, in accordance with international good practices, and in 90 percent
of the cases the MTOs confirm that both the principal and the agents are regularly examined by
the supervisory authorities.
54.     In 88 percent of the cases, MTOs expressed the opinion that the remittances business
sector is sufficiently supervised and banks can rely on the regulatory supervision of the MTO
sector in order to inform risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining accounts for MTO
customers. This aligns closely with the same question posed to governments, where 11 of the 13
governments stated that they believe banks can rely on adequate supervision of the MTO sector in
order to inform their risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining accounts for MTO customers.
55.    The    examinations of the MTOs by supervisory authorities are reported as regular:
while in 34   percent of the cases they are not predictable, for 30 percent of respondents the
inspections   happen once a year or more often. In 10 percent of the cases the examinatio ns
happen less   frequently and only 4 percent of the MTOs declared that there are no inspectio ns


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                               21

whatsoever. It is important to stress that in the narrative section on the answers, the MTOs
indicated that examinations can follow a quite complex procedure, sometimes involving multip le
governmental agencies that overlap and duplicate.
56.     In terms of the supervisory sanctions received, 64 MTOs (78 percent of respondents )
indicated no record of sanctions or other enforcement actions in the country of reference for
the survey. The analysis of the additional clarifications provided by the 16 MTOs which were
subject to sanctions indicates that the majority of them were related to problems of compliance by
their agents. There was no response to this question by 2 respondents.
57.    Finally, 75 MTOs (92 percent of respondents) confirmed that they received some kind
of guidelines issued by the government to clarify the compliance requirements to which
MTOs are subject. In 90 percent of cases the MTOs consider these guidelines relevant and useful.


Bank Responses 16
58.   The 25 banks that responded to the survey are distributed as follows: eight in the
USA, six in Mexico, four in Turkey and the UK, two in Italy and one in South Africa.
59.     When asked whether they provide banking services to MTOs and their agents, five of
the responding banks indicated that they do not offer their services to MTO principals, while
15 indicated that they do not open accounts for agents of MTOs. The 20 banks that indicated
they provide banking services to MTO principals, also indicated the revenue generated by this
business is quite low and in 13 cases below 1 percent of the bank’s total revenues in the most
recent financial year. Only in one case was it indicated that the income produced by this line of
business was higher than 20 percent of the total annual revenue.
60.     From 2010 to 2013 the de-risking activities towards some MTO principals and their
agents were matched by a parallel activity of opening of bank accounts for the same group
of entities. The net effect is however not possible to extract from the survey.
61.    By analyzing the answers of the banks, the main reasons for account closure put
forward are profitability, pressure from other actors (correspondent bank or law
enforcement), lack of confidence in the MTOs’ procedures, and reput ational risk. The exact
responses most indicated were the following:
              a. Reassessed tradeoffs of providing accounts and decided the risks outweighed the
                 revenue-generating potential (four respondents);
              b. One or more of our correspondent banks has been pressing us to close MTO
                 accounts (four respondents);
              c. Law enforcement enquiries led us to close or not open MTO accounts (three
                 respondents);
              d. Cannot manage risk with MTO accounts because lack of confidence they vet their
                 customers (three respondents);

16.   The low number of respondents among the banks does not allow to consider the results of this section of the
      survey as statistically valid. However, for the purpose of identifying the most relevant inputs, the analysis of the
      answers has been conducted with the goal of extracting potential conclusions that could be compared with the
      opinions of the other categories of respondents. The conclusions reported should be considered as a general and
      partial indication of the banks opinion and should be further corroborated by additional consultations at national
      level.


                            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                         22

            e. Concerned by reputational risks to our bank if we continued to bank MTOs (three
               respondents).

62.     Banks that are no longer providing banking services to the MTOs (five out of 25)
declared that they would re-engage in this business if: a) MTOs were better supervised and
banks could better rely on government oversight, and b) regulators published new guidance
spelling out the requirements for managing risks for MTOs. This is complementary to the
finding in the government survey that 11 of the 13 governments have issued guidance for the MTO
sector, but only six of the 13 governments have issued guidance to banks on the provision of bank
accounts and banking services to MTOs.
63.     Contrary to the government and MTOs responses, only 13 out of 25 (52 percent) of
the responding banks judged the MTO sector as sufficiently supervised. Also contrary to the
government and MTO responses, 13 out of 25 (52 percent) of the responding banks consider
that they cannot rely on the supervision of the MTO sector so as to inform their risk-based
decisions on opening/maintaining accounts for MTO customers. Banks also indicated that they
constantly review their own portfolio and apply internal oversight on the remittances-related
accounts. Out of 25 responding banks, 14 perform an internal review of the MTO account holders
once or twice every year and seven of them more frequently.
64.     In terms of guidance from public authorities to banks, 12 out of 25 banks (48 percent
of respondents) indicated that they have not received any information in this area by the
supervisors. When such guidance is provided, six of the 13 banks indicated the guidance is not
useful or relevant.
65.    The issue of de-risking for MTOs seems to be closely related to the overall global
phenomenon of de-risking – of other business lines or clients. The link with the decline in
correspondent banking relationships is clearly demonstrated by the MTO and bank
responses (see paragraphs 34(e) and 46(b) above). Banks were asked to indicate whether their
correspondent banks have closed or restricted their accounts as a consequence of the relations hips
with MTOs: three banks confirmed that they have had one or more accounts closed for this reason,
seven have received requests of clarifications about their relationships with MTOs, and four have
been requested to terminate any relationship with this segment of the industry. The remaining 11
bank respondents did not report this phenomenon.




                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                               23


Conclusions and Suggested Areas of Intervention
Conclusions
66.     The survey provided a good evidence base for further discussions on de-risking in the
remittance market, and identification of potential responses. Certain areas of divergence between
governments, banks, and MTOs highlight the crucial need for greater communication, in particular
when it comes to the compliance obligations, supervision requirements and enforcement actions .
The industry convenes on the fact that a quite useful tool could consist in two precise sets of
national guidelines: a) for banks, on how to provide banking services to MTOs under a risk based
approach, and, b) for countries, on how to effectively supervise MTOs, in particular to pursue at
the same time financial integrity and financial inclusion . The guidelines should include clear and
proportionate measure to ensure that the MTOs are assessed properly and with a focus on the actual
risk that they can represent, taking into account the quality of their oversight/supervision. Such
guidelines should also avoid general approaches but focus on practical steps and
expectations/recommendations. They should also provide an opportunity to clarify the roles,
functions and responsibilities of the different supervisory authorities.
67.      The response rate from private sector players was lower than expected, pointing to some
disconnect between the intensity of the anecdotal evidence and advocacy by the industry and the
response level to the survey. Language barriers, resources constraints and other obstacles might
have played a relevant role in reducing the number of potential answers. This does not weaken
the fact base and analysis of this survey, but instead raises questions for policy makers on how to
best engage the industry (both MTOs and banks) and the potential design of future fact-based
policy and operational responses. This also points to the need to continue to closely monitor the
situation, but also to diversify the tools used (not least given the low levels of responses to surveys).
68.      While the survey indicates that the de-risking phenomenon exists, it is not fully global in
nature. It is more acute in some jurisdictions and affects a substantial part of certain markets.
There is also confirmed acceleration of the phenomenon, with new MTOs in a broader set of
jurisdictions at risk to be affected in the near future. Some markets and corridors are relative ly
more significantly affected, and the survey confirms the risk that operators unable to access the
banking services decide to use clearing and settlement mechanisms that are less transparent and
reliable than banks.
69.      It is also important to stress that the problems in accessing bank accounts for MTOs in G20
sending countries will eventually impact a large number of non-G20 receiving countries. The lack
of access to bank accounts in a sending country automatically excludes the possibility of
transferring abroad the amounts collected among the migrant population for the MTOs operating
in that jurisdiction. The remittances sending countries members of the G20 are currently the main
source of remittances for several countries in the world and the potential inability or severe
restriction of the international clearing and settlement mechanisms would impact not only the
MTOs, but also the economies of the countries that are relying on the remittances flows.
70.     The de-risking phenomenon might also trigger a shrinking of the competition levels in
certain countries, with possible consequences on the cost of sending remittances and on the
availability of adequate coverage to remote and rural areas. This could hamper the potential of
remittances in the area of financial inclusion and cause economic disruption to migrants and their
families in some of the countries highly dependent on these flows.


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                            24

71.      The effects of the de-risking phenomenon on the cost of sending remittances are still
uncertain. At the moment there are no evident patterns that could clearly link cost increases to the
de-risking phenomenon. In particular, fluctuations of the costs are normal and happen also in
countries where MTOs are not experiencing problems of access to the bank accounts. However,
in some of the countries where de-risking is more acute, some cost increase trends have been
identified in a review of the country corridors covered by the World Bank Remittance Prices
Worldwide database. In the last year, the cost of sending remittances increased in 64 percent of
the corridors from the UK and in 50 percent of the corridors from Australia. If compared to data
from the last quarter, 55 percent of the corridors from the USA experienced a cost increase. The
data also provides additional observations from the receiving country perspective. In the last year
the cost of sending money to Somalia increased both in the UK and, to a lesser degree, in the USA.
Similarly, sending money to other African countries (e.g. Ghana, Nigeria, Rwanda, and
Zimbabwe) has become more expensive in all or in the large majority of the sending countries
monitored. All the corridors to Lebanon and Pakistan also saw cost increases in the last year. These
trends are in themselves not conclusive and will need to be examined in the upcoming months to
further assess their possible causes, as many factors may contribute to cost increases in any given
corridor.
72.     De-risking of MTOs is driven by a variety of factors—most notably ML/FT risk
management issues and profitability. It is not simply an issue for banks to be confronted with
unmanageable risks. There is also a stronger aversion to regulatory risk, irrespective of the residual
ML/FT risk profile of the MTOs, or the amount of risk that remains even after controls are taken
in to account.
73.      The survey shows that the some of the responding banks have different views than
governments and MTOs on the quality of the regulation, supervision and compliance of the MTOs.
Such divergent opinions produce quite diverse expectations in MTOs and governments on banks’
capacity to rely on the legal and regulatory framework to properly assess the risks generated by
MTOs. There is also a significant gap between the same populations on the value and impact of
guidance to banks on the provision of bank accounts and banking services to MTOs. There is also
a significant gap between the same populations on the value and impact of guidance to banks on
the provision of bank accounts and banking services to MTOs.


Recommendations
74.      Listed below are some recommendations for consideration. Given the cross-sectoral set of
responsibilities in the area of remittances, a number of national authorities might be involved in
the implementation of these actions. Among the others, the central bank, the ministry of finance,
the authorities in charge of the enforcement of the AML/CFT legislation (whenever not embedded
in the previous two authorities) and any other governmental body with responsibilities in the
regulation and supervision of the remittances providers and the banking sector. Authorities should
establish a strong coordination at national level and constantly interact with the industry to shape
the actions as per the local needs.
         Progress on the overall understanding and architecture for risk perception,
          allocation, and management is necessary to move beyond what appears at the mome nt
          as a dead-end. The survey highlights significantly different perspectives between MTOs,
          governments, and banks on the risks and vulnerabilities associated with the provision of


                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                  25

          remittance services. This is compounded by different views and expectations on how the
          overall residual risk17 is distributed and shared among these three sets of players. In
          addition, the consequences of MTO account closures on financial exclusion and the
          resulting increased ML/FT risks associated should be of concern to policy makers and
          supervisors. More clarity on ML/FT risks and risk differentiation, regulatory expectations,
          focus on risk management and not risk avoidance (including by the public sector), and
          alignment of practices by and within supervisory bodies, are essential to ensure that the
          practical measures suggested below deliver their full impact.
         The results of the survey also suggest that regulators, supervisory entities and other
          enforcement authorities need to take a more direct role, in particular in the areas of
          proactive and effective risk based supervision, as well as enforcement. Regulators need
          to ensure that market participants can meet the minimum legal requirements, therefore
          giving banks comfort about MTOs’ compliance with the rele vant regulations. A more
          thorough oversight of the market, as well as a set of auditing and enforcement actions
          towards MTOs (either by regulators or trusted third-parties) could help prevent ille ga l
          activities. An increased level of attention by the regulators could also reassure banks when
          considering the risk involved in providing services to MTOs.
         Increased communication and outreach on supervisory practices and actions towards
          MTOs seems essential, to further contribute to more differentiated risk decision by
          banks. There is also an evident need to provide all stakeholders more comprehensive data
          and information on the rationale and the outcomes of regulatory enforcement actions
          concerning MTOs. Such information could support efforts to properly implement risk
          mitigation in the sector and in individual institutions. Public information on the grounds
          for enforcement actions by supervisors concerning MTOs may provide clarity to banks on
          what issues MTOs are actually facing, and assist them in further differentiating their risk-
          based decisions on banking MTOs. As of today the publicly available information indicates
          that the de-risking may result from the fear of enforcement actions that have little to do
          with violations of the law from the side of the MTOs, or lack of compliance by banks in
          their MTO related business. Similar conclusions are available from the analysis of the
          narrative included in the survey answers. At the same time, it is necessary to admit that
          there is an overall limited amount of information in this area. On the one hand, limited
          enforcement action can be signal that the MTOs supervisory system does not work; on the
          other hand, enforcement actions are often over-read as applying to all actors in the sector.
         While many governments have issued guidance to MTOs, there is also a need for
          guidance to banks on the provision of bank accounts and banking services to MTOs
          and their agents . This may be beneficial from both a national level and an internatio na l
          standard setter level. Banks specifically noted they would consider re-engaging with the
          sector if regulators published new guidance spelling out the requirements for managing
          risks for MTOs. Such guidance should enable banks to differentiate between higher and
          lower risk providers and corridors and to adopt appropriate, proportionate risk-based
          controls in respect of these categories. Similarly, it could limit the risk of corresponding
          banks terminating their relationships with banks that provide services to the MTOs.



17.   The residual risk is the amount of risk that remains even after controls are taken in to account.


                            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                                              26

         In addition to guidance on the provision of bank accounts to MTOs, there is also a need
          to provide more explicit information on risks and risk management of the MTO
          sector, notably residual risks. This information may also be useful at both a national
          level and an international standard setter level.
         Additional measures to reduce the problem of de-risking could include legal provisions to
          ensure that all the financial sector entities legally operating in a market can have access to
          the national payment systems infrastructure . In this sense, the provisions of the Revised
          EU Directive on Payment Services (PSD2) are introducing much more precise rules for
          banks in terms of their possibility to limit or restrict access to bank accounts to other
          payment service providers, including MTOs. The PSD2 will indeed guarantee all
          remittance service providers which are registered under EU legislation access to banks'
          payment accounts services unless there is an objectively justified reason to refuse such
          access.18
         Particular attention should be given to the issues pertaining to MTOs ’ agents. Agents
          are essential to traditional money transfer models, which continue to be prevalent in the
          remittance business. Establishing an extensive network of agents is vital to MTOs on both
          the sending and the receiving end, the latter in particular being often the most challenging.
          At the same time, agents can represent the weak link of the chain and agent misconduct is
          not uncommon. It is critical for operational purposes that agents be able to open a bank
          account; however, MTO agents seem to be severely affected by de-risking. Guidance could
          be issued to clarify the allocation of risk, requirements, and good practices for agent
          onboarding and management.
         On the side of the MTOs it would be beneficial to establish clear and transparent codes
          of conduct related to the enforcement of the legislation, establishing indus try
          minimum standards above the bar set by the legislation. This would produce an
          increased level of confidence among the banks, in particular if the measures are properly
          advertised via a communication campaign supported by third party auditing and constant
          corporate dialogue with the regulators and the banks.

75.     While the survey confirms the link between account closures for MTOs and increased risk
aversion or de-risking in the realm of correspondent banking relations, it is likely that policy and
operational responses to address de-risking with regards to intermediated relationships will only
be effective if taking into account drivers that go beyond MTOs. As the World Bank Group fact


18.   In particular, see Recital 27 “Payment service providers when engaging in the provision of one or more of the
      payment services covered by this Directive should always hold payment accounts used exclusively for payment
      transactions. For payment service providers to be able to provide payment services, it is indispensable that they
      have the possibility to open and maintain accounts with credit institutions. Member States should ensure that
      access to such accounts is provided in a non-discriminatory way and proportionately to the legitimate aim it
      intends to serve. While the access could be basic, it should always be extensive enough for the payment institution
      to be able to provide its services in an unobstructed and efficient way." and art. 29a “Access to a ccounts
      maintained with a credit institution“ - Member States shall ensure that payment institutions have access to credit
      institutions' payment accounts services on an objective, non -discriminatory and proportionate basis. Such
      access shall be extensive enough to allow payment institutions to provide payment services in an unhindered
      and efficient manner. The credit institution shall provide the competent authority with duly motivated reasons
      for any rejection."


                            Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking
in the Remittance Market                                                                           27

gathering is still on-going with regards to correspondent banking relationships, this report will not
try to put forward at this stage specific recommendations. However, the results of this survey will,
at the appropriate time, be incorporated with the results of the survey on correspondent banking
relationships, enabling the identification of common aspects to the general problem of de-risking
and the formulation of holistic recommendations in addressing the issues, also taking into
consideration the work undertaken in this field in other fora such as the Financial Stability Board,
the Committee on Payment and Market Infrastructures and the Financial Action Task Force.




                          Finance and Markets Global Practice, The World Bank Group
