Unsettled:                    101065 v2




Water and Sanitation
in Urban Settlement Communities
of the Pacific
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report was written by Alyse Schrecongost and Katherine Wong, with support from Ingvar
Anda and Ben Gerritsen (Castalia Ltd) and Penny Dutton (Consultant).

The authors gratefully acknowledge and thank the many people from Solomon Islands, Fiji,
Vanuatu, Papua New Guinea and elsewhere who contributed time, information and expertise to
this review. Thanks is also extended to the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) partners,
UN-HABITAT and UNICEF for the excellent teamwork and cooperation during the field work and
the study workshop held in Nadi, Fiji in March 2015.

Thanks too for the advice and inputs of peer reviewers David Lord, Clementine Stip and Jean-
Martin Brault. The task team leader was Isabel Blackett.
      Unsettled:
    Water and Sanitation in Urban
Settlement Communities of the Pacific


                          November 2015




      Prepared with The Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF)
                     and country level support from
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Acronyms and Abbreviations
ADB		            Asian Development Bank

CBO		            Community-Based Organization

CSO		            Community Service Obligation

DFAT		           Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

FS		             Fecal sludge

FSM		            Fecal sludge management

GDP		            Gross Domestic Product

HCC		            Honiara City Council

JMP		            Joint Monitoring Programme

LICs		           Low-income communities

LPCD		           Liters per capita per day

MDGs		           Millennium Development Goals

NGO		            Non-governmental Organization

PCN		            People’s Community Network

PNG		            Papua New Guinea

PVUDP		          Port Vila Urban Development Project

KAP		            Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice

SDA		            Service Delivery Analysis

SW		             Solomon Water

UN-Habitat	      United Nations Human Settlements Programme




ii
                                                           Acronyms and Abbreviations




VIP		    Ventilated improved pit

WASH		   Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene

WHO		    World Health Organization

WSP		    Water and Sanitation Program of World Bank Group’s Water Global Practice

WWTP		   Wastewater treatment plant




                                                                                    iii
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Table of Contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations................................................................................................ ii

Executive Summary.............................................................................................................. ix

1	Introduction.................................................................................................................. 1

        1.1	     Review Approach and Limitations ...................................................................... 1

        1.2	     Structure of this Report........................................................................................ 2

2	      Regional Statistics and Context of Settlement Growth............................................ 4

3	      Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis ........................................................10

        3.1	     Formally Reported Urban Water and Sanitation Access Rates ........................ 10

        3.2	     Service Providers and Associated Service Costs.............................................. 12

                 3.2.1	 Paying for water and sanitation............................................................... 20

        3.3	     Summary of Water Supply in Settlements.......................................................... 25

        3.4	     Summary of Sanitation in Settlements............................................................... 28

4	      Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements......................... 32

        4.1	     Reasons for Inadequate WASH Service Delivery in Informal Settlements......... 32

        4.2	     International Experience.................................................................................... 40

        4.3	     Recommendations for Improving WASH Services to Informal Settlements....... 42




iv
                                                                                                              Table of Contents




Tables

Table 2.2:	 Economic Statistics.............................................................................................. 6

Table 2.3:	 Health Statistics................................................................................................... 8

Table 3.1:	 Urban Water Access Estimates from JMP Data 2012..........................................11

Table 3.2:	 Urban Sanitation Access Estimates from JMP Data 2012...................................12

Table 3.3:	 Overview of Utility Services ...............................................................................13

Table 3.4:	 National Water Supply and Sanitation Access by Utilities...................................14

Table 3.5:	 Utilities’ Settlement Access and Pro-poor Policies.............................................. 20

Table 3.6: 	 Typical Water and Sanitation Tariffs for Connected Households........................ 22

Table 3.7:	 Cost of Connection Fees and Desludging.......................................................... 24

Table 3.8:	 Approach to IRC Factors.................................................................................... 25

Table 3.9:	 Water Supply Service Level Rating for Informal Settlements............................. 26

Table 3.10:	 Approach to IRC Factors.................................................................................... 28

Table 3.11:	 Sanitation Service Level Rating for Settlements................................................ 29




                                                                                                                                     v
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Figures

Figure 2.1: 	 Poor Solid Waste Management and Drainage in Lord Howe Settlement,
              Honiara................................................................................................................. 7

Figure 2.2: 	 Segani (Konedobu) Settlement has High Population Density.............................. 7

Figure 2.3: 	 Women and Children Collecting Water in PNG.................................................... 8

Figure 3.1:	 Community Taps in Port Moresby........................................................................15

Figure 3.2:	 Water Meters at the Edge of a Settlement in Suva..............................................17

Figure 3.3:	 Latrine Slabs for Sale Behind HCC Building.......................................................18

Figure 3.4:	 Interior of a Typical Dry Pit Toilet in PNG............................................................19

Figure 3.5: 	 Shared Water Taps in Blacksands Settlement in Vanuatu.................................. 22

Figure 3.6:	 Rainwater Catchment Container in Blacksands Settlement in Vanuatu............. 23

Figure 3.7:	 Drum of Purchased Water in Port Vila................................................................ 24

Figure 3.8:	 Shallow Well Lined with Drums in Burns Creek near Honiara........................... 27

Figure 3.9:	 Makeshift Water Storage Container from Blacksands Settlement in Vanuatu.... 27

Figure 3.10:	Cluster of Functioning and Closed Pit Toilets in Burns Creek near Honiara...... 30

Figure 4.1:	 Lagilagi Housing for Settlers.............................................................................. 34

Figure 4.2:	 Re-building Homes along the Matanika River in Honiara after the Floods......... 37

Figure 4.3: 	 Household Informal Collection Points and Collection Containers in PNG.......... 39




vi
                                                                                                         Table of Contents




Boxes

Box 3.1: 	   Community Taps to Circumvent Land Tenure Requirements in Port Moresby.....15

Box 3.2: 	   Reaching Settlement Residents as Customers in Fiji .........................................17

Box 3.3: 	   Honiara City Council and World Vision Help Extend Sanitation Products to
             Settlement Residents..........................................................................................18

Box 3.4: 	   Fund to Help Low Income Households Access Water in Vanuatu...................... 21

Box 3.5:	    ADB Collaborates with NGOs to Upgrade Settlements...................................... 30

Box 4.1:	    Strong National Advocates Can Collaborate with the Government to Improve
             WASH in Informal Settlements........................................................................... 34

Box 4.2:	    Evicting Settlers Does Not Work and is Not a Permanent Solution.................... 37




                                                                                                                           vii
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




viii
                                                                                 Executive Summary




Executive Summary

Urbanization is occurring rapidly in Melanesia at 3-4% per annum. Due to unaffordable housing
in formal areas and migration from rural areas, many people settle on marginal lands without
formal legal titles (referred to as “informal settlements” in this report). Informal settlements are
growing in number and new settlements are emerging both within and on the outskirts of major
cities across the Melanesia region. This is happening at a rate that far outpaces city or regional
efforts to plan for or serve them. People living in settlements in the Melanesian capitals of Suva,
Port Vila, Honiara, and Port Moresby comprise 20%-45% of the city population and at current
urbanization rates by 2023 will be between 30% and 65%.

Information about informal settlements is scarce

Data on informal settlements in Melanesia are scarce, including particularly about water,
sanitation, and hygiene services. At the request of the World Bank Group—Water and Sanitation
Program and its partners, this report provides a rapid review of water and sanitation services
in the informal settlements in and around the capital cities of Solomon Islands, Fiji, Vanuatu,
and Papua New Guinea, with a focus on gender, equity, and health impacts. This report also
provides high-level regional and country-specific recommendations on how to improve service
provision.

Informal settlements lack formal services such as water, sanitation, electricity, waste
management, drainage and roads

Characteristics of informal settlements vary within and across Melanesia, but most settlements
have inadequate basic services such as water, sanitation, electricity, waste management,
drainage, and roads, although the situation in Fiji is better than elsewhere. Settlements are
expanding rapidly, as families grow and extended family members from their home islands or
villages move in, compounding the health and social problems associated with poor water,
sanitation, and hygiene service provision. Water supply is typified by crowded standpipes with
an irregular unpredictable supply, low pressure, illegal connections, or unimproved sources
such as open wells. A significant proportion of settlement sanitation is provided through shared
or private dry pit latrines which are unsanitary and uncovered, or no latrines at all. For urban
areas including the formal sewered neighborhoods the use of shared or private unimproved
latrines and open defecation is over 40% in PNG, 35% in Vanuatu, 19% in Solomon Islands,
and 8% in Fiji, implying proportionally higher rates in the informal settlements where sewerage
is unavailable.




                                                                                                 ix
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Women are impacted most by poor water and sanitation services

The impact of poor water and sanitation services falls disproportionately on women who bear
responsibility for all household water and sanitation related tasks such as cleaning, cooking,
washing, caring for children and the sick. The burden on women includes time and physical
labor required to collect water (often weighing 20-30 kilograms) from water sources and carry
water home. The risk of sexual and physical violence from collecting water or defecating away
from home late at night or in the early morning is real. Men are the main decision makers and
influencers in the household, in settlement community leadership, and in local government.

Utilities are constrained by technical, financial and legal barriers to serve informal
settlements

In many cases, water and sanitation services are not extended to informal settlements. Utilities
underprovide these services, partly because they do not have a clear obligation to serve
informal settlements and in some cities to not have the authority to do so. In the four countries
reviewed, no utility or government body had an obligation or budget to provide sanitation
services to informal settlements. Where authorization to deliver services does exist, utilities
tend not to prioritize extending services because they are technically, legally, and commercially
more challenging to serve relative to formal urban communities. Utility investments are also
influenced by internal, Government, and donor technical preferences which tend to favor
investments in piped water infrastructure systems to formal areas.

In most cases, it is not financially feasible for utilities to extend mains or distribution lines to
settlement communities and households under current institutional and financing arrangements.
Many utilities struggle to provide acceptable water supply services to existing customer bases
(access to piped water on the household premises is 61% in urban Honiara, 96% in Fiji, 51% in
Vanuatu and 55% in PNG) and are unable to cope with the pace of urban growth in formalized
communities. Challenges are greater for extending services to settlements with insecure land
tenure, those in peri-urban areas that may be more remote or outside of formal utility service
districts, and those on land that is technically challenging to reach with traditional infrastructure.
There is also experience and/or the perception that settlers may vandalize distribution lines
for illegal connections, increasing non-revenue water losses. It is also more difficult to collect
connection fees and enforce bill payment from settlement customers by relying on traditional
customer engagement models alone.

Even where water and sanitation services are provided, settlement households often
cannot access them due to land tenure and financial obstacles

When water and sanitation services are available within a community, they can be particularly
difficult for many settlement households to access. For settlement residents, securing formal
water and sanitation services is challenging due to household financial constraints, unmet land
tenure requirements, and in some cases cultural norms. For instance, rural migrants may be
accustomed to getting water and sanitation services without payment.




x
                                                                               Executive Summary




As a result, many households in Melanesia’s rapidly growing informal settlements are forced to
use ad hoc alternatives—particularly for sanitation—that are poor quality, unsafe and, at times,
more costly than utility provided services. Living conditions are consequently degraded within
these communities. The public health and environmental costs associated with these missing
services are not confined to settlements; they drain resources and create public health hazards
and damages that extend into the greater urban areas.

There are some promising efforts to improve water service provision to the settlements,
but there are no comprehensive, meaningful sanitation projects

Although most projects that target settlements in the region are uncoordinated and serve a small
number of households, there are a few positive efforts in the study countries to improve water
service delivery to settlements. These provide examples worth studying further and replicating
or scaling where appropriate. Small-scale sanitation improvement initiative were identified but
unfortunately, no study country demonstrated meaningful efforts to deliver sanitation services
in settlements or to support comprehensive city-wide fecal sludge management. Even where
residents construct improved toilets, virtually none of the waste appears to be safely removed,
transported, and treated or reused.

International examples provide tested approaches and lessons that                are relevant to
Melanesia

The issues found in Melanesian settlements are similar to those in informal settlements in Africa,
South America and the Caribbean and Southeast Asia. There are rich examples of approaches
that have been adopted by water and sewerage utilities and other stakeholders in the quest
to improve services for settlements and low income households. Evidence-based advocacy to
government to secure policy and financial commitment for services to settlements is a critical
first step.

Solutions and recommendations

Finding solutions to these service shortfalls is challenging. Solutions need to respond to the
particular circumstances found in each settlement, and need to be implemented with relatively
limited financial and technical resources. This report provides institutional recommendations to
motivate further discussion on a next steps agenda. These recommendations include:

     •	 Central Government authorities to establish clear national mandates for service delivery,
        clarify the organizational authority and their obligations to implement services, and set
        clear service level targets for settlements
     •	 Stakeholders to incorporate settlements into existing or emerging sector investment
        plans
     •	 Performance monitoring and evaluation to be associated with payment-based
        performance incentives
     •	 Partnerships to be explored between Local Government or the water and sewerage
        utility and NGO’s and/or the private sector have some potential




                                                                                               xi
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




There is considerable scope for development partners to constructively support settlement
inclusion through the provision of technical assistance and analysis in key areas which may not
yet be a priority for government and which may not yet be within the operating scope of utilities.
These areas include: cost benefit analysis of water and sanitation investments; advocacy;
policy development and strategic planning; research of technical options and piloting with
NGOs and community-based organizations; private sector support; peer-to-peer learning and
exposure to international experience; and innovative financing.




xii
Chapter 1.	
Introduction




The World Bank Group’s Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) engaged Castalia to undertake
a review of water, sanitation, and health (WASH) services in informal urban settlements in four
countries in Melanesia—Solomon Islands, Fiji, Vanuatu, and Papua New Guinea (PNG). The
purpose of this project is to better understand WASH service levels and gaps in the urban and
peri-urban informal settlements in these four Melanesian countries. The projects also attempts
to identify how material improvements in WASH service delivery can be made in informal
settlements, and to share what works well in other countries within the region.

For the purposes of this report, “informal settlements” are defined as:

      Informal or unplanned residential areas that have developed outside of the formal urban
      planning rules of a city, often in physically marginal or peri-urban areas. They are characterized
      by uncertain or illegal land tenure; minimal or no services such as water supply, sanitation,
      electricity, and roads; informal employment and low incomes; and lack of recognition by
      formal governments.1



1.1	 Review Approach and Limitations
The primary research method informing this report is interviews with stakeholders. The authors
also relied on available primary data, secondary literature, and observations made in-country.
Interviews and settlement visits were conducted in and around the capital cities in Solomon




1
 Dutton, Penny. 2015. Social Research Findings and Recommendations. Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Sup-
ply, and Hygiene In Urban Informal Settlements. World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program.



                                                                                                           1
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Islands, Fiji, and Vanuatu. For the PNG country profile, observations and analysis are based
largely on recent comprehensive survey data and in-country investigations conducted by
another team from WSP, complementary secondary sources, and some key informant interviews
conducted by telephone. Interviewees were engaged to contribute to the situation assessment
and identify successful relevant initiatives in the region.

WSP presented the findings of this report at a two-day workshop before the Pacific Urban Forum
hosted by United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat). Workshop participants
came from all four countries and included stakeholders from local and national governments,
non-governmental organizations (NGO), donor agencies, universities, and utilities.

WSP guided participants to begin to develop a “next steps” agenda and action plan for each
city and the region at large. The action plans are based on a common understanding that
service delivery for informal settlements cannot be meaningfully or efficiently addressed with
one-off projects in isolation from city-wide plans for improving service delivery. Participants
were encouraged to continue developing and implementing their agenda and action plan after
the workshop. WSP also encouraged participants to provide feedback on the report. These
suggestions have been incorporated.

It is worth underscoring that data sought for this analysis were often unavailable or unreliable.
Data on the settlements were particularly poor quality; with little or no quantitative data available
on WASH conditions in settlements. Little information was available to support a rigorous
gender analysis. Expert interviews and site visits were used to complement the data available
and facilitate a more complete situation assessment.



1.2	 Structure of this Report
Section 2 of this report presents a snapshot of the region using selected statistics to compare
economic, demographic, and urban development trends across the four countries, their capital
cities—Honiara, Suva, Port Vila, and Port Moresby—and the informal settlements in those cities.
These statistics provide important context for the subsequent WASH analysis.

This is followed in Section 3 by a cross-country regional analysis focusing on WASH conditions
in informal settlements. Section 3.1 presents an overview of people’s access to improved or
unimproved water points and toilets using Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) data. These data
represent urban areas broadly, and may not incorporate peri-urban settlements. Section 3.2
compares the scope of water and sewerage utility mandates, activities, and funding for urban
service provision in each country. It focuses on the utilities’ efforts to serve informal settlements.
Information on the prices that informal settlers pay to receive services relative to their income
is also presented.




2
                                                                                  Introduction




Sections 3.3 and 3.4 compare WASH service delivery across each city’s informal settlements
using the IRC Service Level framework, which evaluates access to hardware and the level of
service provided. The water and sanitation situation analysis integrates gender issues to the
extent possible.

In conclusion, Section 4 presents key findings and high-level recommendations for improving
water and sanitation service delivery to informal settlements in Melanesia. These findings
and recommendations provide a basis for stakeholders to develop a “next steps” agenda for
improving WASH services. These recommendations are relevant to donors, civil society, utility
leaders, and Governments in the region.

Detailed profiles for each study country available from the World Bank. Each country profile
includes:

     •	 An overview of the informal settlements in each country’s capital city,
     •	 A description of WASH service provision in each city, with a focus on services to
        settlements,
     •	 An analysis of WASH services,
     •	 Country-specific recommendations for how to improve and expand WASH service
        delivery in informal settlements in Melanesia, and
     •	 A list of key sector-specific stakeholders, with a brief description of their work.




                                                                                            3
Chapter 2.
Regional Statistics and
Context of Settlement
Growth



Urban areas throughout Melanesia are changing rapidly. Cities are growing, and an increasingly
high proportion of city-dwellers are living in informal settlements. These settlements are difficult
to reach using traditional public service delivery approaches, and a lack of service delivery
leads to poor outcomes such as public health.

This section presents economic and demographic statistics, and relevant, high-level policy,
cultural, and historical indicators across the four study countries. This provides context for
understanding the challenges of delivering water and sanitation services in rapidly growing
urban areas and informal settlements.

Rapid urbanization and population growth strains the capacity of the Government and
utilities

Rapid urbanization, complex land tenure laws, and frequent natural disasters (that are likely
to be heighted by climate change) are clear regional trends that directly affect informal
settlements. Each of these factors complicates and increases the expense of delivering basic
public services.

As illustrated in Table 2.1, Melanesian cities are facing tremendous urban growth that strains
cities’ financial, physical, and administrative capacities. Growth in informal settlements far
outpaces city-wide growth in the study areas. The disparity between settlement and formal
urban growth is greatest in the Solomon Islands, where some settlements are growing at an
estimated 26% per annum (compared to city growth of 2.7%).




4
                                                                       Regional Statistics and Context of Settlement Growth




Table 2.1:	              Comparison of Estimated Population Data

                     Population           Estimated            Annual               Annual     Settlements Settlements
                     (City, 2013)        Population           Population          Population   as Percent  as Percent
                                        (Settlements)          Growth              Growtha       of City     of City
                                                              Rate (City)        (Settlements) Population Population
                                                                                                as of 2013  by 2023b

Honiara,                 64,600              22,600                 3%             6% to 26%                    35%         64%
Solomon
Islands

Suva, Fiji              244,000              50,000                 2%                   8%                     20%         31%
(Greater
Suva Area)

Port Vila,               44,000              15,400                 4%             3% to 12%                    35%         43%
Vanuatu

Port                  500,000 to           225,000 to               2%              5% to 8%                    45%         56%
Moresby,               700,000              315,000
PNG

Source: World Bank Databank, Secretariat of the Pacific Community Data, National Census Data, UN-Habitat Urban Profiles, and
Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in Urban Informal
Settlements World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program (2014)
Note: The figure for estimated settlement population and the population growth rates were taken a range of resources (e.g., the
latest census). The figures are from 2008 or later, depending on the source. Figures assume current growth rates remain constant
for the next ten years.
a
    Due to data limitations, the growth rate for Suva is for peri-urban areas (rather than just settlements).
b
  These figures are calculated by multiplying the city population growth rate to the city population in 2013, less the population of the
settlements. The settlement population growth rate is applied to the settlements. These calculations assume the current growth rate
for the city and settlement for the next ten years. When there is a range of population growth rates, the average of the growth rates
is used.



Not only is there growth in the total number of people or proportion living in settlements, but
also the number of settlements e.g. Port Moresby has around 99 settlements; the Greater Suva
Area has more than 100. Keeping up with where these settlements are and their leadership
status is difficult and registers of settlements are generally not kept. Settlement growth
crosses administrative boundaries, from formal cities into peri-urban and rural districts. The
associated need to coordinate services across jurisdictions and agencies makes strategic
planning, funding and investment difficult. Inconsistently enforced or interpreted land tenure
laws, missing records, and lengthy dispute processes further complicate planning efforts, as
does disagreement about the number, names and boundaries of settlements. These factors
particularly undermine the utilities’ ability to develop and execute long-term investment and
expansion plans given the capital-intensive nature of utilities. Only WAF monitors service
provision to settlements and number of settlers. For others, data still need to be collected on
settlement numbers and populations for planning purposes.

Informal settlements are difficult to serve due to geographic and technical barriers

Informal settlements are technically more difficult to serve than formal areas. Settlements
tend to be located on steep slopes or in flood prone areas with high water tables, making
the settlements less attractive for formal development. The geography of the settlements is
described in more detail in Section 4.1 of this report.




                                                                                                                                       5
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Even where settlements are located in non-marginal land, they tend to have developed prior
to installation of drainage, roads, and other basic infrastructure. Many settlements lie outside
existing utility service boundaries and away from existing water mains or sewer lines. These
technical factors further complicate and increase the expense of extending WASH service
provision to cover these areas.

The four study countries have different economic circumstances

The economic circumstances in each of the four study countries vary significantly, which affects
the ability of the Government to provide services. As shown in Table 2.2, the Fijian economy is
much stronger and more diversified than other countries in the region. As a result, Fiji residents
and the Fiji Government are less financially vulnerable relative to other Melanesian countries.
Higher household incomes improve residents’ relative ability to pay for household-level WASH
infrastructure and services from both informal and formal service providers. The increased ability
to invest in and subsidize improved WASH services can create a virtuous cycle, minimizing the
costs and health burdens associated with missing or poorly delivered services. This allows
residents to invest more time in productive activities.

Table 2.2:	     Economic Statistics

                    GDP (US$)         GDP Per       Annual GDP        Major national industries
                    from 2013        Capita (US$)   Growth (%)
                                        2013           2013

Solomon                $1.10             $1,954        3.0%      Services, agriculture, fishing, forestry
Islands                billion

Fiji                   $3.86             $4,375        4.6%        Forestry, minerals, fishing, retail,
                       billion                                      finance, tourism, construction,
                                                                             manufacturing

Vanuatu                $0.83             $3,277        2.2%      Agriculture, forestry, fishing, tourism
                       billion

PNG                   $15.29             $2,088        5.4%      Natural resource extraction, services
                      billion

Source: World Bank Databank, Fiji Budget Address


Settlements do not have basic infrastructure such as drainage, roads, and housing, which
harms public health

The four cities do not yet have adequate resources to provide complementary basic infrastructure
services to rapidly growing settlement populations. Cities inadequately invest in basic services
like drainage and solid waste management (depicted in Figure 2.1).

The lack of complementary infrastructure services exacerbates negative health impacts
of missing WASH services, particularly in densely populated areas such as the inner city
settlement of Segani (Konedobu), depicted in Figure 2.2 below. For example, many settlements
do not empty their pit toilets, causing the toilets to overflow. The associated environmental and
public health problems are compounded in settlements without drainage because these face
flooding problems.



6
                                                              Regional Statistics and Context of Settlement Growth




Figure 2.1: 	 Poor Solid Waste Management and Drainage in Lord Howe Settlement,
              Honiara




Figure 2.2: 	 Segani (Konedobu) Settlement has High Population Density




Source: Social Research Findings and Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in Urban
Informal Settlements, World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program (2014). Photo by Penny Dutton.




                                                                                                                         7
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




The lack of adequate water and sanitation services causes and compounds negative public
health outcomes. These health problems extend beyond the boundaries of the settlement,
and, as one official from the Ministry of Health in Solomon Islands stated, “diseases have no
boundaries.” However, there is little quality data about health in the settlements. Table 2.3
contains country-wide health statistics that reflect the relative quality of life among the countries’
poorest residents.

Table 2.3:	      Health Statistics

                             Mortality rates for              Life Expectancy            Incidence rate of diarrheal
                          children under five (per           (years) as of 2012              diseases (per 1000
                         1000 live birth) as of 2012                                       population) as of 2002

 Solomon Islands                        30                            67.5                              977

 Fiji                                   24                            69.7                              772

 Vanuatu                                17                            71.4                              892

 PNG                                    61                            62.3                              881

 Source: WHO Country Profiles, World Bank Databank, and WHO and SOPAC. 2008. Sanitation, Hygiene, and Drinking Water in the
 Pacific Island Countries: Converting Commitment into Action. World Health Organization.



Figure 2.3: 	 Women and Children Collecting Water in PNG




Source: Social Research Findings and Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in Urban
Informal Settlements, World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program (2014). Photo by Penny Dutton.


Women and children are particularly vulnerable to the negative health impacts of poor
service provision

When families lack access to an adequate supply of water, women and children are the most
likely to bear the economic and financial burden of seeking alternative water supply sources
(this is described in more detail in Section 4.2). Figure 2.3 depicts women and children from
PNG collecting water at a community tap. Women in poor households are the least able to



8
                                                  Regional Statistics and Context of Settlement Growth




cope with the lost income from illnesses and are often responsible for caring for ill household
members. In the four Melanesian countries women are primarily responsible for household
activities such as washing, food preparation, and bathing children.

Political and cultural factors affect countries’ abilities to deliver basic services

In addition, other political and cultural factors reflect and intensify a country’s ability to deliver
basic services to growing urban populations.

In the Solomon Islands some officials view settlements as temporary and believe access
to services encourages permanency and settlement growth. Policies, exemplified by the
government’s response to flooded settlements in 2014, are that settlers should be encouraged
to go return to their rural homes. Similarly in Papua New Guinea, forced evictions from some Port
Moresby settlements have occurred in the past and there is an attitude by some in government
that settlers are trouble makers and should go back to their village. Despite the unfeasibility of
this response – many settlers are second or third generation and would have difficulty adapting
to or being accepted back into village life – these view are a constraint to expanding services
in settlements.

By contrast, Fiji’s national Government has a progressive policy perspective to dealing with the
challenges of urbanization, and sees settlers as important contributors to society. As a result,
Fiji’s government agencies have made available more financial resources to improve conditions
in the settlements relative to the other countries in the study.

Cultural diversity of settlements is also a deterrent to service provision. The Solomon Islands
is made up of 90 islands with over 70 unique languages. The country has experienced
long-standing and recent ethnic violence, and tensions remain divisive within the city and in
Government, impairing efforts to proactively plan for growth and development.

PNG has the largest portion of its urban population living in settlements. Its population is also
diverse, with 800 known spoken languages.

In Honiara, Port Moresby and Port Vila, heterogeneous settlements are home to many different
community clusters based on island or village of origin. Often these groups are in competition
with each other, and in some cases in violent conflict.

In Vanuatu the governance structure of the settlements depends on the type of land tenure, but
most settlements have a chief system that is affiliated with leadership in the home islands. In Port
Moresby local government councillors are responsible for settlement areas but representation
is not always effective and clan leaders hold sway.

Delivering settlement services requires the involvement of formal local leaders, as well as
negotiating with many different clan leaders. This need for intense community engagement plus
the violent conditions in some settlements is a challenge to participatory community approaches,
and complicate efforts by the Government, utility, and civil society to improve service delivery.
The cultural complexity of many settlements adds to the reluctance of government and service
providers.


                                                                                                    9
Chapter 3	
Cross-Country Water and
Sanitation Analysis




This section looks across capital cities in the four study countries to provide a quick snapshot
of estimated access using Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) data for urban areas. It then
reviews primary water and sanitation service providers in each city, with a focus on utilities and
the costs of services. Finally, the section reviews government and utility programs designed to
be pro-poor or to reach settlement residents specifically, and section provides an analysis of
the water and sanitation service levels in the settlements of each study country capital.



3.1	 Formally Reported Urban Water and Sanitation
     Access Rates
JMP data give a hardware-oriented count of people’s access to improved or unimproved water
supply or sanitation facilities.

Variation in reported access across countries reflects actual differences in service access, but
may also reflect differences in how each country defines its “urban” population. For example,
countries may report access in peri-urban settlements that lie beyond formal city limits with
rural access data. Based on interviews, literature, and observations within each country, JMP
figures appear to overestimate actual access. In all cases, informal settlements in urban or
peri-urban areas will have much lower actual access rates than the general urban populations.

Water access

Table 3.1 presents JMP data on urban water access for each country. This assessment accounts
for access to water but does not consider quality or quantity dimensions, such as how often
water is supplied or the quality at point-of-collection or point-of-use.



10
                                                                         Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Table 3.1:	         Urban Water access Estimates from JMP Data 2012

                                                               Solomon                Fiji   Vanuatu     Papua New
                                                                Islands                                    Guinea

                                                              Urban (%)        Urban (%)     Urban (%)   Urban (%)

    Piped onto premises: point of use located at                   61                 96        51          55
    the household, providing piped water

    Other improved source: public taps,                            32                  4        47          33
    standpipes, tube wells, boreholes, or protected
    wells, springs or collected rainwater

    Unimproved: unprotected dug well or spring,                     7                  0        2           12
    carted tank or drum, raw surface water, bottled
    water, surface water

    Source: WHO/UNICEF (2014) Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation 2014 Update




Fiji stands out as a clear leader in reaching urban households with piped, treated water services
(with 95% access reported). All other utilities appear to struggle to connect even formal
urban households with piped water; expanding service to difficult-to-reach settlements would
predictably be a lower priority for utilities striving to meet cost-recovery obligations. To meet
water supply access there is a substantial infrastructure investment backlog, with the need
to invest in new production, treatment, transmission, distribution and storage and institutional
support to improve the efficiency of operations. The infrastructure backlog is a limitation even
in formal urban areas, and partly explains the reluctance to invest and prioritize limited funds
for informal areas. A recent study in PNG by the World Bank estimated that to meet 2030
access targets for improved water supply in urban areas, US$8 million is needed to be spent on
infrastructure every year until 2030, with a further US$2 million on operations and maintenance.2

Actual rates of access in informal settlements vary significantly across the countries. Settlement
residents in Fiji and PNG benefit from more proactive utility outreach and services than those
in Vanuatu and Solomon Islands (this is discussed later in this section). Residents without
access to piped water on-site or within the community typically access water from open wells,
boreholes, collected rainwater, or surface water sources.

Sanitation access

Table 3.2 presents JMP data on urban sanitation access. Fiji and Solomon Islands appear
to lead the region in access to urban sanitation facilities. The JMP sanitation assessment
considers waste containment hardware (toilets, pits, and tanks), but not conveyance and
treatment services. As such, it does not account for the fate of human waste after use.

Based on the rapid assessments made for this report, these JMP data appear to illustrate an
overly optimistic situation for urban areas inclusive and exclusive of peri-urban settlements
(though data accuracy likely varies significantly by country). In comparison to the water access



2
 World Bank WSP (2013), Water Supply and Sanitation in Papua New Guinea—Turning Finance into Services for the
Future.


                                                                                                                 11
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




data, sanitation access data may be overestimated because some peri-urban settlements are
likely classified as part of rural areas. Based on literature, interviews, and observations for this
report, access to sanitation facilities in settlements would likely indicate a uniformly unimproved
situation for nearly all settlement residents across all countries.

Settlement residents in all four study countries tend to rely on shared and unimproved facilities,
such as hanging toilets that are “straight-piped” to drains, streams or pit latrines that tend to fill
and flood regularly. These toilets often lack a sanitary slab. Waste removal, conveyance and
treatment are effectively absent in effectively all settlements with very few exceptions.

Table 3.2:	       Urban Sanitation access Estimates from JMP Data 2012

                                                                  Solomon                Fiji           Vanuatu         Papua New
                                                                   Islands                                                Guinea

                                                                  Urban (%)         Urban (%)          Urban (%)         Urban (%)

Improved facilities : human excreta
                          a
                                                                       81                 92                65                 56
hygienically separated from human contact
(e.g. sewers, composting, septic, VIP)

Shared facilities: two or more households                             N/A                 4                 33                 9
share a single facility

Other unimproved: bucket or hanging                                    10                 4                  2                 31
latrines; no sanitary platform, no effective
waste containment

Open defecation: no facilities                                          9                 0                  0                 4

Source: WHO/UNICEF (2014) Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation 2014 Update
Note: Solomon Islands data for “improved facilities” includes figures for “shared facilities.” Statistics separating the shared and
improved facilities are unavailable.
a
 WHO, and UNICEF. “Improved and Unimproved Water and Sanitation Facilities Categories.” WHO / UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme. Accessed February 18, 2015. http://www.wssinfo.org/definitions-methods/watsan-categories/.




3.2	 Service Providers and Associated Service
     Costs
This section describes the main water and sanitation service provider in each main city. Then,
it describes the associated formal and informal service delivery costs to informal settlements.

How a utility interprets its service mandate and legal requirements strongly influences the
extent they will provide services to informal settlements

An important starting place for understanding service provision in settlements is to evaluate
utilities’ purview and facilities available to provide sanitation and water services city-wide. If a
utility’s purview is limited to providing only piped sanitation services (for instance sewers), it is
unlikely utilities will be able to serve settlements with sanitation services in the short or medium-
term, if ever. Additionally, if utilities are required to incorporate land tenure requirements into
connection or service conditions, they are unlikely to address settlement needs meaningfully.




12
                                                                           Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Other service providers

Other actors—users, NGOs, municipalities, private service providers—occasionally provide ad
hoc water or sanitation services. These efforts are discussed in the sections below.

Table 3.3 presents on overview of utility service mandates across the four study countries.
Water Authority of Fiji (WAF) is the only utility providing water services extensively to settlement
customers and the only utility in the four countries to operate both sludge and wastewater
facilities.

Table 3.3:	      Overview of Utility Services

                   Geographic              Services             Purview for            Service to              Wastewater
                   Area Served             Provided             Piped and               informal               or Sludge
                                            (Water/             Non-Piped             settlements?             Treatment
                                          Sanitation)           Sanitation?                                    Facilities?

Solomon             Urban areas            Water and             Piped only          Water provided           No. Untreated
Islands              across the            Sanitation                                to few informal         septage sludge
(Solomon              country                                                       areas; sewerage            disposed at
Water)                                                                               only for formal           local dump;
                                                                                          areas.             sewerage piped
                                                                                                                 to coast.

Fiji               Entire country          Water and             Piped only          Water provided            Yes. FS and
(Water                                     Sanitation                                  to informal             wastewater
Authority                                                                           areas; sewerage             facilities.
of Fiji)                                                                             only for formal
                                                                                         areas.

Vanuatu               Port Vila               Water                Neither           Water provided           No. Untreated
(UNELCO)                                                                            to some informal           FS disposed
                                                                                        areas; no             at local dump;
                                                                                       sewerage in                a formal
                                                                                        Vanuatu.               facility under
                                                                                                              construction.a

PNG                Port Moresby            Water and             Piped only          Water provided               Yes/No.
(Eda Ranu)                                 Sanitation                               in some informal           Wastewater
                                                                                    areas; sewerage              treatment
                                                                                      provision only          plant/septage
                                                                                    for formal areas.          disposed at
                                                                                                               local dump.

Source: Pacific Water and Wastewater Association Benchmarking Report (2012) and interviews
a
  The Port Vila Urban Development Project (PVUDP) is in the process of building a sludge treatment plant at the Bouffa dumpsite,
where sludge is currently dumped. No clear plans have been finalized for managing or financing the plant. Although it is expected
to be operated and maintained by the Vanuatu Department of Mines, Geology, and Water Resources, or a private operator.




To put the scope of utility access in context, basic operational data for each country are
provided in Table 3.4.

Because informal settlements cross administrative boundaries and are growing rapidly (that is,
they often straddle a line between urban and peri-urban) having flexible service area boundaries
enables the utility to serve settlement communities more efficiently. WAF’s mandate to provide




                                                                                                                                13
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




services is nationwide. It is not restricted by administrative boundaries, but rather by limited
financing and organizational capacity for network expansion. This is also reflected in the broad
mandate of Water PNG.

In contrast, Solomon Water, UNELCO, and Eda Ranu have strictly defined service areas that
largely correspond to city boundaries. Changes to the service area boundaries of these utilities
appear to be dictated by political or economic motivations, rather than based on assessment
of residents’ need or strategic growth plans. This disadvantages informal settlements, which
often have little political or economic voice. For example, Solomon Water recently expanded
its service area to incorporate the airport and a new housing division, but large and growing
peri-urban settlements continue to fall outside of the utility’s service area despite tremendous
need for service.

In some cases, service area boundaries may not be an important obstacle to serving settlements;
rather, utility requirements for formal land tenure documents as a precondition for accessing
services pose a bigger challenge. This is discussed further in this section.

Although utilities have different purviews and legal restrictions on providing services to
formal areas, there is greater variation in how utilities serve informal settlements. Settlement
engagement efforts appear to also be influenced by a utility’s overall capacity for innovative
programming, and a utility’s general attitude about the settlement residents (for example, are
settlers perceived to be associated with illegal breakages and low bill payment rates, or are
settlers perceived to be a growing customer base and service to them an important part of the
utility’s mission?). These issues are interlinked. For example, how utilities address land tenure
requirements in their connection criteria, pro-poor outreach, pricing and payment policies,
and hardware options can affect settlement residents’ ability to access and retain formal utility
services.

Table 3.4:	     National Water Supply and Sanitation Access by Utilities

              Population      GNI Per          No. of utility                 Population Covered by utilities
              (,000) 2013      Capita          connections
                             (US$) 2013
                                            Water     Sewerage       Water        % of         sewerage        % of
                                                                                population                   population

Solomon          561.0         $1,272       8,062         916        56,511         10%          6,412           1%
Islands

Fiji             858.0         $4,293      141,025      28,204      609,938         71%         132,559         15%

Vanuatu          264.7         $4,606       7,308         N/A        30,869         12%             0            0%

PNG             7,059.7        $2,898       94,715      17,618      739,571         10%         154,177          2%

Source: Pacific Water and Wastewater Association Benchmarking Report (2013). Note: PNG includes Eda Ranu and Water PNG




14
                                                                      Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Response to challenge of providing formal water services to settlements

The utilities in this study demonstrate a range of water service delivery responses to the growing
settlement challenge. The settlement growth rates alone are overwhelming for many utilities
given that most have not yet been able to service all formal areas with functional distribution
infrastructure. In many cases, utilities struggle to provide their current customer base with
service given limited staff, water supplies, infrastructure, and high electricity costs. In addition
to the added numbers of potential customers, utilities are faced with finding new technical
and outreach modes for these communities, legal restrictions related to tenure, and often
administrative boundary issues as noted above.



  Box 3.1: 	Community Taps to Circumvent Land Tenure Requirements in Port
               Moresby

  In order to provide water to settlers with uncertain land tenure, Eda Ranu installs community taps
  in some communities under a Community Service Obligation (CSO). CSOs seem to be issued on
  a case-by-case basis. Community eligibility and CSO terms are unclear. Taps are installed based
  on a Memoranda of Understanding between Eda Ranu and a community organization within each
  settlement. Community leaders or organizations are responsible for managing the water point,
  collecting funds from residents, and paying the utility; the transfer of funds from households to the
  utility does not consistently happen. Eda Ranu hopes to gain some revenue and avoid some network
  damage by formalizing water points given high rates of illegal line breakages and the associated
  water wastage and contamination.

  Figure 3.1:	 Community Taps in Port Moresby




  Source: Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in Urban
  Informal Settlements World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program (2014), Photo: Penny Dutton




                                                                                                                       15
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Eda Ranu and Solomon Water are both experimenting with initiatives to improve service to
settlements and both list land tenure documentation as a necessary condition for approving
household water connections. It is unclear whether this is an internally or externally imposed
connection criteria. Eda Ranu is attempting to provide services through community standpipes
instead of household connections, as described in Box 3.1. Eda Ranu also experimented with
a pilot project for prepaid water meters, but this was cancelled due to technical issues with
the meters and payment cards. The option of private providers or on-site water vendors was
also explored by Eda Ranu, including studying private vendor systems in Manila, however this
approach has since been abandoned due to challenges with community acceptance of the
approach.

Solomon Water is just starting to review its outreach efforts to settlements. A small number of
isolated attempts were made to extend water to a peri-urban settlement by engaging informal
settlement leaders to on-sell water to community members on per-bucket basis. This effort was
largely unsuccessful because connected households either could not collect from users or
did not remit payment to Solomon Water. Solomon Water is hoping to design a better outreach
program based on an improved internal understanding of the different determinants of
communities’ willingness and ability to pay for services. The utility hopes to design interventions
that deliver services and generate revenue.

New data on non-revenue water (NRW) losses recently indicated that illegal line breakages
in settlements played a very small role in the utility’s NRW problems (80% were leakages,
only 10% were illegal connections). According to the internal investigation, some settlement
communities, however, were finding ways to tap into water illegally, and NRW was very high in
these areas. These data and the possibility of other settlements replicating the illegal breakage
example increased the utility board’s willingness to engage settlements more proactively as
potential customers.3

WAF has an established alternative institutional and hardware approach to serving settlement
customers in Suva. This approach, as described in Box 3.2, allows WAF to sidestep land
tenure requirements, shifting the responsibility of community-based illegal breakages more to
customers, and to reduce staff meter reading time and risks.

In PNG, the Government can require the utility to provide water to communities by introducing
a CSO and subsidies. SW supplies two communities (Auki and Tulagi) with water under CSOs,
and both of which were issued on a case-by-case basis, neither of which are settlements. The
exact terms of the CSOs are unknown. This stop-gap arrangement may be counter-productive
in the long-term if utilities opt to only serve settlements with CSOs, rather than innovating to
improve service delivery to all settlements.




3
    Interview with SW


16
                                                              Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




    Box 3.2: 	 Reaching Settlement Residents as Customers in Fiji

    WAF places customer meters at the edge of a settlement rather than at the customers’ household.
    The household then installs distribution piping from the meter. This reduces WAF’s meter-reading
    costs and infrastructure risk and places more responsibility on the household and community to
    monitor water theft. However, households use PVC pipes to transport water between the meter and
    their home; these pipes are vulnerable to damage, contaminating water at the point-of-use.

    WAF has also established a clear arrangement for circumventing land tenure requirements for water
    connections. WAF allows customers to submit government-issued identification credentials and can
    provide “temporary water connections” with formal permission from the Department of Housing and/
    or the landowners.


    Figure 3.2:	 Water Meters at the Edge of a Settlement in Suva




Sanitation service provision is largely ignored in the settlements

Most Melanesian cities have only partial access by sewer networks if any,4 and any utility
investments to expand sewerage networks tend to prioritize formal customers rather than
extending access to informal areas. Municipalities may provide non-networked sanitation
services, but generally leave such services to one-off projects by NGOs and the private market.
In settlements, this means sanitation hardware is informal, inappropriately designed, and not
functioning to provide meaningful public health or environmental protections. Effectively, almost
100% of residents’ waste is discharged within or nearby the settlement communities, posing
clear health risks to those communities and the capital cities broadly (as discussed further in
Section 3.4).



4
 SW estimates 5 to 10% access in Honiara, WAF estimates 98% sewerage access in urban areas, Vanuatu has no
piped sewerage at all, and Eda Ranu estimates 49% access in the National Capital District.



                                                                                                             17
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




In comparison to water service provision, utilities appear to largely ignore sanitation service
provision. For instance, no government or utility entity in Vanuatu is required to provide sanitation
services to any customer segment in the city. No formal sewers exist, and septic sludge is not
treated and is typically dumped in drains, streams, or at Port Vila’s Bouffa dump site.

In Honiara, Solomon Water provides piped sewerage to a small portion of the central city, but
has not expanded its network for decades and has no plans to do so in the future. SW has no
wastewater or sludge treatment facilities. Piped sewage is discharged directly into coastal
outfalls. Collected septage is currently disposed of at the local dump or illegally dumped
elsewhere. Honiara City Council (HCC) attempts to meet some demand by managing a vacuum
truck and providing a septage dump site at the local solid waste dump. HCC also produces
and sells toilet and sanitation platform hardware for low income consumers including settlement
residents. World Vision is currently a major buyer and helps to distribute products to settlement
customers (described in more detail in Box 3.3). Private septage collectors reportedly operate
in the city as well, but may or may not use the dump for disposal and likely only serve middle
or higher income households or businesses.

  Box 3.3: 	 Honiara City Council and World Vision Help Extend Sanitation Products
             to Settlement Residents

  In the Solomon Islands, Honiara City Council (HCC) manufactures low-cost fiberglass latrine slabs
  and toilet pedestals and sells them to the public. These products often sell out, indicating high
  demand, and HCC is able to sell them above cost, making a small profit. Settlement households
  can afford these products, but often cannot pay to transport them. A World Vision project to install
  toilets in settlements works with providers to build entrepreneurship and skills. World Vision does not
  subsidize toilet construction (except for households with special needs), but it does subsidize the
  cost of transporting construction products, including the HCC slabs and pedestals. This generates
  additional demand for the HCC program.

  Figure 3.3:	 Latrine Slabs for Sale Behind HCC Building




18
                                                                       Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




In Port Moresby, Eda Ranu provides some formal areas with piped sewerage services but takes
no responsibility for non-networked sanitation. Septage sludge collected by private vacuum
truck operators is disposed of in open areas, at the local solid waste dumpsite, or illegally
into Eda Ranu sewer manholes. The utility reportedly would accept sludge at its wastewater
facilities for a fee, but this does not happen in practice. The National Capital District Commission
(NCDC) in Port Moresby plans to trial a decentralized community-scale septic tank in a non-
networked settlement area. It is unclear if this is an isolated project or if NCDC is considering
taking up sanitation service provision more strategically or substantially.

Figure 3.4:	 Interior of a Typical Dry Pit Toilet in PNG




Source: Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in Urban
Informal Settlements World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program (2014), Photo: Penny Dutton



Where authorization exists to provide sanitation services and investments are being made
in network extensions, utilities are unlikely to extend infrastructure to high risk, challenging
settlement communities given remaining demand in lower risk urban communities. None of
the utility’s strategic plans require or set meaningful settlement-related sanitation goals. Even
WAF—which leads the region in sewered sanitation access—has extremely low targets for
improving sewerage services (increasing access in Suva from 40 to 45% by 2017). No targets
exist for improving non-networked sanitation services in the city, less so in settlements. Similarly,
SW’s strategic plan for Honiara does not include any goals for improving sanitation services for
settlements or otherwise.




                                                                                                                         19
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




3.2.1	 Paying for water and sanitation

Where utilities are able to serve settlement households, many households will struggle to pay
for connections and utility services. Governments at all levels may step in with subsidies on
a case-by-case basis. Some utilities have established pro-poor pricing initiatives to address
this challenge more comprehensively. These pro-poor strategies address issues of ability and
willingness to pay for services within settlements. Most of this effort is oriented toward water
services since sanitation services are rarely provided by utilities.

The policies and programs to facilitate service delivery to informal settlements are summarized
in Table 3.5.

Table 3.5:	        Utilities’ Settlement Access and Pro-poor Policies

                         Do utilities require legal                 Are there pro-poor                     Regularly-funded
                         land tenure to provide a               initiatives to help pay for              subsidies for the poor?
                               connection?                               services?a

Solomon
                                                                   Over-due bill payment
Islands
                                        Yes                       plan in lieu of automatic                            None
(Solomon
                                                                      disconnections
Water)

                                                                   Over-due bill payment
                             No. Department                                                                     Subsidized tariffs
                                                                             plan
                             of Housing and/                                                                    50L of free water
                                                                  Low-income customers
Fiji (WAF)                  or landowners can                                                                 per person per day
                                                                   qualify for a bill waiver
                         approve temporary water                                                             if household income
                                                                  Connection fees can be
                                connections                                                                       <US$15,000
                                                                    paid by instalments

                                                                                                          Article 29 Water Special
Vanuatu                                                            Over-due bill payment
                                        Yes                                                               Fund, though currently
(UNELCO)                                                                   plan
                                                                                                                   unused

                                                                  Over-due bill payment
                         Yes, but Government has                             plan
PNG                                                                                                      Government subsidies on
                        obligated some services to               Bulk tariffs at community
(Eda Ranu)                                                                                                a case-by-case basis
                            settlements by CSO                  standpipes, case-by-case


a
  All the utilities offer increasing block tariffs. This tariff structure is often considered a way to protect the poor because it charges
lower rates to users who use less water (who are often low-income). However, this tariff structure actually disadvantages settlers
because they usually share water taps, quickly pricing them to the most expensive tier.
Source: Utility websites and interviews



Other than overdue bill payment plans, Solomon Water and UNELCO do not offer pro-poor
initiatives to help pay for services, nor does any stakeholder in Solomon Islands or Vanuatu
regularly fund subsidies for the poor. However, as described previously, SW recently received
a small amount of funding to explore settlement service delivery modes including more
appropriate pricing options. The project started shortly before the consultancy interview, so
details were not available. The utility seemed to be willing to consider partnering with groups
like World Vision that have experience and expertise working in the settlements.

In Vanuatu, the “Water Special Fund” has been set-up to help low income households access
water but has not been used yet. This is described in more detail in Box 3.4.



20
                                                            Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




  Box 3.4: 	 Fund to Help Low Income Households Access Water in Vanuatu

  In Port Vila, one vatu from every cubic meter of water sold goes into the “Water Special Fund,” which
  was set up by Article 29 from the Contract for the Management and Operation of the Water Supply
  Service in Port Vila. The Fund “contributes to the construction of new water connections for the
  benefit of low income earners” and “under take other works… to ensure and preserve [water supply
  sources].” This fund is held by UNELCO and can be directed by the Government. According to the
  Utility Regulatory Authority, the fund can legally be used to help settlement residents’ access water
  via private or communal standpipes; however, the fund has only been used to maintain water supply
  sources so far, and has not been used to help low-income households yet.


Both Fiji and PNG have pro-poor pricing and programming designed to engage and retain
poor water customers, including settlement households. The utilities in these countries are also
tailoring their outreach efforts, bill payment plans, and connection fees to better engage this
customer segment.

WAF offers the lowest water tariffs in the region (described in Table 3.5). These tariffs are highly
subsidized, but WAF is in discussions with the Government of Fiji to adjust its tariff schedules
to reduce dependency on government transfers and to cross-subsidize low residential tariffs
from other market segments. WAF also plans to provide “poor” households (earning less than
FJ$30,000 [US$15,000] per year) up to 91,250 liters of free water. WAF allows connection
charges to be paid in instalments (with 60% upfront, and the remaining balance paid over
the rest of the year). WAF also makes payment easy through a variety of methods such as by
mobile phone, banks or in person.

Meanwhile, Eda Ranu is trying to improve payment rates in the settlements by engaging each
community’s Water Committee. The utility is considering offering incentive payments to the
Water Committees to ensure payments are made fully and on-time. Eda Ranu has also worked
with communities to replace illegal connections with legal community connections (although
no information is available on the success or sustainability of this initiative). However research
in Port Moresby suggests paying water bills to water utilities is the preferred payment method
as the money is seen as going straight to the service provider as a direct payment for the
service. While a few households were comfortable paying the water committee, partly due to
their presence in the community, many were not and expressed a strong distrust of the water
committee’s ability to manage the finances honestly and without misuse – a conclusion arrived
at from past experience.

In some cases, Eda Ranu has also reduced the fees that informal settlements have to pay
for water and helped them to develop payment plans for outstanding bills. These subsidized
connections yield more revenue than the status quo of illegal or turned off connections, and may
establish a precedent for charging higher tariffs in the future once the population becomes used
to using and paying for formal services. Once familiarity with paying for water is established
there is also scope to increase charges as service levels improve for example, moving from
standpipes to household connections.

Furthermore, only Eda Ranu offers a bulk tariff for connections to shared water points. In the
other countries, increasing block pricing structures tend to perversely penalize the poorest, as



                                                                                                      21
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




a single connection that is shared by multiple households quickly moves the water tariffs to the
highest, most expensive level. Communal, shared water taps from Blacksands Settlement in
Vanuatu which attract the highest tariff rate are depicted in Figure 3.5.

Figure 3.5: 	 Shared Water Taps in Blacksands Settlement in Vanuatu




Table 3.6: 	 Typical Water and Sanitation Tariffs for Connected Households

                                                                                                                        Water and
                          Average Monthly                                                           Water Tariffs
                                                   Water Tariff for         Sewage Tariff                            Sewerage Tariffs
                             Settlement                                                            as Percentage
                                                    7,500 Liters           for 7,500 Liters                          as a Percentage
                             Household                                                             of Household
                                                       (USD)                    (USD)                                 of Household
                           Income (USD)                                                               Incomea
                                                                                                                         Incomeb

Honiara, SI
(Solomon                          $83                  $21.70c                 $12.24d                   27%                 41%
Water)

Suva, Fiji
                            $293 to $456                $2.45e                  $1.50f                   <1%                  1%
(WAF)

Port Vila,
Vanuatu                          $103g                 $24.13h                    N/A                    23%                 23%
(UNELCO)

Port Moresby,
PNG                              $455                   $7.78i                  $2.84j                   <2%                  2%
(Eda Ranu)

Source: Utility websites, interviews, and Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water
Supply, and Hygiene in Urban Informal Settlements by Penny Dutton, World Bank—Water and Sanitation Program (2014)
Notes: The water and sewerage tariffs as percentage of household income calculation is theoretical, as water and sewerage
services are not always provided to settlement households.
a
    Assuming a five-person household consuming 50L per person per day (about 7,500 liters of water).
b
    Assuming 7,500 liters of water and wastewater.
c
    This figure includes the US$6.31 base charge (which covers water and wastewater), plus the tariff of USD$0.79 per 1,000 liters.
d
 This figure includes the US$6.31 base charge (which covers water and wastewater), plus the US$0.41 charge per 1,000 liters. If a
household has a water and sewage connection, it would only pay the base charge of US$6.31 once per month.
e
    This figure includes the US$0.75 fire charge (flat rate), plus the tariff of US$0.076 per 1,000 liters.
f
 This figure includes the US$0.75 fire charge (flat rate), plus the tariff of US$0.10 per 1,000 liters. . If a household has a water and
sewage connection, it would only pay the base charge of US$0.75 once per month.
g
  This is the average monthly household income for the lowest decile in urban Vanuatu. (See: Table 2-3 http://www.vnso.gov.vu/
index.php/component/advlisting/?view=download&fileId=2006).
h
  This figure includes the US$7.79 quarterly base charge (for a 15 mm meter, which is typical for domestic consumers), plus the
tariff of US$0.62 per 1,000 liters.
i
 This figure includes the US$1.94 monthly charge, plus the US$0.39 per 1,000 liter tariff. It does not include the US$23.28 annual
fee.
j
 This figure includes the US$1.94 monthly charge, plus the US$0.12 per 1,000 liter tariff. It does not include the US$23.28 annual
fee.



22
                                                       Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Table 3.6 indicates households’ relative ability to pay for formal, monthly water and sewerage
services. The table calculates the cost of 7,500 liters of water (50 liters per person per day
for a family of five) and calculates the cost as a percentage of household income (excluding
connection fees). It also calculates the cost of sewerage for 7,500 liters, and the cost of both
water and sewerage as a percentage of household income. Solomon Water and UNELCO
water services appear to be both the highest priced and the least affordable to settlement
households. In contrast, WAF and Eda Ranu have heavily subsidized water tariffs and other
targeted subsidy programs for the poor.

In practice, many settlement households face additional barriers to connecting to utility-
supplied water. As an alternative, they tend to rely on water from surface supplies, rainwater
catchment (as shown in Figure 3.6), or shallow wells that are more likely to be contaminated.

Figure 3.6:	 Rainwater Catchment Container in Blacksands Settlement in Vanuatu




Households may buy water by the unit from private vendors at even greater expense. The
way water is resold and the consequent charge varies significantly between settlements both
within and across the countries. In Burns Creek settlement in Solomon Islands, around 360
households rely on water from two formal water connections. The households who monitor
these connections charge SB$5 [US$0.65] for a wheelbarrow-load of filled water containers. In
Blacksands Tongariki in Vanuatu, settlers were observed re-selling water from UNELCO. One
drum of water was sold for VT100 [US$10].




                                                                                              23
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Figure 3.7:	 Drum of Purchased Water in Port Vila




Meanwhile, in PNG, researchers observed Segani settlement households paying K10 [US$3.84]
per month from a community managed public tap stand. This effectively leads to a cost of
between K3.79 to K100 [US$1.53 to US$40.39] per 1,000 liter that is significantly higher than
Eda Ranu’s rate of K1 [US$0.38] per 1,000 liters (for the first 15,000 liters per month).

Table 3.7 helps us to understand one-off costs for water and sewerage connections and the
cost to desludge a septic tank. Costs of installing fixed hardware like pit latrines or septic tanks
should be available soon from forthcoming research.5

Table 3.7:	             Cost of Connection Fees and Desludging

                                   Water Connection Fee            Sewage Connection Fee                  Price to Desludge a
                                          (USD)                            (USD)                           Septic Tank (USD)

    Honiara, SI
                                           $125 to $450a                         N/Ab                          About $65
    (Solomon Water)

    Suva, Fiji
                                      $150 to over $500c                   $185 to $235                        About $150
    (WAF)

    Port Vila, Vanuatu                     $94 to $780
                                                                                 N/A                           About $200
    (UNELCO)                               (Estimated)

    Port Moresby, PNG
                                               $383                             $388                           About $450
    (Eda Ranu)

    Source: Interviews, utility websites
    a
        SW website cites the $125.98 fee, but interviews indicated connection fees could be as high as $450.
    b
        SW has no plans to expand its network, and has not for decades.
    c
      It costs US$10.97 for application fee. It costs about US$140 to connect to an existing meter, about US$170 to US$200 to connect
    to a mainline on the same side of the street, and over US$500 if the connection must cross the road to access a mainline.




5
  Live and Learn Environmental Education has a multi-year grant to improve sanitation product and service markets
for urban areas in the four study countries. The first phase of that research included a sanitation marketing survey
that evaluated private sector sanitation product and service prices. The report is anticipated by mid-2015.


24
                                                                              Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Across all the study countries, water and sewerage connection fees are high relative to the
income of most settlement households. In Vanuatu and Fiji, the connection fee depends on the
location of the household (for example, whether the connection will have to cross a road). Some
of the connection fees published on utility websites do not correspond with the connection fees
cited during interviews. This discrepancy could be due to hidden formal or informal costs. WAF
is the only utility that explicitly offers payment plans for connection fees.

Desludging fees are also prohibitively high for most low-income households, which partially
explain why many households do not appropriately maintain their toilet systems. Desludging
companies from each city quoted a range of prices, which were largely dependent on the
location of the household. The price listed was for a typical home in the city (that is, formal or
informal households in urban areas), and is the average of the given range.



3.3	 Summary of Water Supply in Settlements
This section looks at water supply access and services in settlements using the IRC Service
Level framework to convey the level of services residents use, rather than just the infrastructure
available to them.6 Service-level indicators capture user-oriented factors like accessibility, water
quality, crowding, and other dimensions described in Table 3.8.

Table 3.8:	          Approach to IRC Factors

                            Accessibility                       Quality                     Quantity               Reliability

                         People spend less                                              At least 60 liters        Continuous
                                                      High levels of treatment,
    High                than 30 minutes per                                              per capita per          (24/7) service
                                                         good quality water
                        day accessing water                                                   day                 on-demand

                         Peoples spend at                Some treatment,                At least 40 liters        Service the
    Intermediate        most 30 minutes per          acceptable quality water            per capita per          majority of the
                        day accessing water          from an improved source                  day                    time

                                                      Untreated, acceptable
                          People spend at            quality water from a point         At least 20 liters
                                                                                                               Frequent service
    Basic               most 30 minutes per           source, including wells,           per capita per
                                                                                                                  shortages
                        day accessing water            boreholes, or gravity                  day
                                                              systems

                                                          Untreated, poor                                           Service
                         People spend over                                                 Less than 20
    Sub-                                               quality water from an                                     shortages the
                         30 minutes per day                                             liters per capita
    standard                                          unimproved or insecure                                     majority of the
                          accessing water                                                    per day
                                                               source                                                 time

                         Water sources are
                                                          Poor quality water               Less than 20          No service the
                           very distant and
    No-Service                                         from an unimproved or            liters per capita        majority of the
                         time-consuming to
                                                       insecure source, if any           per day, if any             time
                               access

    Source: Potter, Alana, Mekala Snehalatha, Charles Batchelor, Andre Uandela, Arjen Naafs, Catarina Fonseca, and Patrick Moriarty.
    2015. Assessing Sanitation Service Levels. IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre.
    Note: Sub-standard services are considered an improvement over no-service, but fail to meet the basic standard on one or more
    criteria.




6
 Potter, Alana, Mekala Snehalatha, Charles Batchelor, Andre Uandela, Arjen Naafs, Catarina Fonseca, and Patrick
Moriarty. 2015. Assessing Sanitation Service Levels. IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre.


                                                                                                                                    25
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




While service to settlements is highly variable, Table 3.9 represents our best estimation of
the overall situation in both urban and peri-urban settlements based on data, reports, and
interviews.

Table 3.9:	   Water Supply Service Level Rating for Informal Settlements

                                         Honiara,                                     Port Moresby,
                                                                         Port Vila,
               Factor                    Solomon         Suva, Fiji                    Papua New
                                                                         Vanuatu
                                          Islands                                        Guinea

Access: Based on minutes per
                                        No-Service      Intermediate       Basic      Sub-standard
round trip; number of users per day

Quality: Based on regular testing
meeting national norms and user         No-Service         Basic           Basic      Sub-standard
perception of quality

Quantity: Liters per capita per day    Sub-standard     Intermediate        N/A       Sub-standard

Reliability: Considered improved if
                                       Sub-standard        Basic           Basic      Sub-standard
works most or all of the time

Overall Rating                                          Intermediate/
                                        No-Service                         Basic      Sub-standard
                                                            Basic


In urban areas of Honiara, non-tenured residents may share piped water with neighbors if they
are unable to secure household connections. In peri-urban settlements, however, residents
appear to rely almost exclusively on shallow wells (near the home, shown in Figure 3.8) and
surface water (farther from the home). From the in-country visit, wells seem to be lined with two to
three 50-gallon drums with stone bottoms. Households share wells, but prefer to have their own
well as soon as they can afford the drums. Wells reportedly produce adequate water for most of
the year. In the driest seasons, women collect from a nearby river that is contaminated. The river
is used year-round for laundry, bathing, and defecation. Interviewees stated that many wells are
at risk from being contaminated because they are located close to hand-dug pit latrines. These
wells were insecurely covered by a sheet of metal. According to resident interviews and World
Vision staff, boiling or other forms of water treatment is not commonly practiced.

Many settlements in the Greater Suva Area of Fiji, by comparison, seem to have access to
piped utility water that ran “most” of the time within or next to homes. In these settlements,
storage containers (which are needed due to intermittent service) or broken PVC distribution
lines may compromise the quality of utility water. In newly-established peri-urban areas,
settlements cannot connect to WAF services if they are too far away from an existing main,
causing settlers to resort to springs and collected rainwater. WAF views these communities as
potential customers; consequently, residents are more likely to get formalized services soon
relative to peri-urban residents in the other countries.




26
                                                                   Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Figure 3.8:	 Shallow Well Lined with Drums in Burns Creek near Honiara




In Port Vila, some settlements with land tenure benefit from shared standpipes. Standpipes
require women and children to hand-carry water and often pay for water on a per-container
basis. Long queues and intermittent service are common.7 Settlers complement UNELCO water
regularly with rainwater or shallow wells, which is consistently low quality due to unsafe storage
containers and missing sanitation services. Likewise, piped utility water is likely contaminated
at the point-of-use due to household collection/storage container contamination (as depicted in
Figure 3.9, a fridge was used as a makeshift water storage container in Blacksands Settlement
in Vanuatu). Water treatment at the point-of-use is reportedly rarely practiced.

Figure 3.9:	 Makeshift Water Storage Container from Blacksands Settlement in
             Vanuatu




7
    Wan Smolbag. Port Vila Urban Development Project, KAP Research Report. Port Vila, Vanuatu, 2014.


                                                                                                          27
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Port Moresby settlements are perhaps most extensively served by utility water, though much
of it seems to be with illegal connections resulting in non-revenue water for the utility or
standpipes. Residents (primarily women and children) usually complement their collection of
utility water from standpipes with rainwater or surface water due to long waits at standpipes
and interrupted service. Non-piped water is used for bathing, dishwashing, and laundry. Water
quality is consistently low at point-of-use due to poor network integrity from illegal connections,
intermittent water flow, and from contaminated collection/storage containers.



3.4	 Summary of Sanitation in Settlements
The IRC Service Level framework is used here to evaluate sanitation. While the JMP data
presented in Section 3.1 evaluate whether or not a resident has access to a toilet, the IRC Service
Level framework incorporates the level of service the user has at that toilet. The IRC Service
Level framework assesses factors like crowding, cleanliness, and ease of access (for example
is it locked at nights or difficult to access for children or disabled residents). The framework also
includes indicators related to quality and safety of waste containment and disposal.

IRC proposes a four-parameter assessment tool to evaluate service sanitation service levels
covering accessibility, use, reliability, and environmental protection. This report adds a fifth
parameter to capture hygiene. The rating approach used for four parameters is described in
Table 3.10. Hygiene is generally rated based on whether hand-washing stations appeared to be
visible, functional and used at or near toilets.

Table 3.10:	 Approach to IRC Factors

                                                                                         Environmental
                  Accessibility                Use                 Reliability                                    Hygiene
                                                                                           Protection
                                                               Regular or routine
                   Each family                                                           Non problematic
                                                               O&M (including pit                               Hand washing
                dwelling has one or          Facilities                                   environmental
                                                               emptying) service                                  place with
                 more toilets in the        used by all                                    impact/safe
Improved         compound; easy             household
                                                               requiring minimal
                                                                                           disposal and
                                                                                                               constant supply
                                                               effort; evidence of                               of water and
                access for all family        members                                      re-use of safe
                                                              care and cleaning of                                   soap
                     dwellings                                                             by-products
                                                                       toilet

                      Cement or                                 Unreliable O&M
                    impermeable                                   (including pit
                                             Facilities                                  Non problematic
                   slab at national                           emptying) requiring                               Hand washing
                                          used by some                                    environmental
Basic               norm distance
                                            household
                                                               high-level of user
                                                                                           impact/safe
                                                                                                               place with water
                  from households                              effort; evidence of                                (irregular)
                                            members                                          disposal
                 (per household or                            care and cleaning of
                       shared)                                         toilet

                  Platform without
                 impermeable slab                                                           Significant
Limited          separating faeces                              No O&M (e.g., pit         environmental
                     from users                                 emptying) taking             pollution,
                                              No or                                                               No hand
                                                                  place, and no             increasing
                                         insufficient use                                                       washing place
                   No separation                              evidence of cleaning        with increased
No-              between user and                              or care for the toilet       population
Service           feces, e.g. open                                                            density
                     defecation

Source: Potter, Alana, Mekala Snehalatha, Charles Batchelor, Andre Uandela, Arjen Naafs, Catarina Fonseca, and Patrick Moriarty.
2015. Assessing Sanitation Service Levels. IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre.
Note: The study team developed the hygiene parameter and respective service levels for this report.



28
                                                         Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Across all study countries, sanitation services in settlements tend to be uniformly limited or
missing. The assessment in Table 3.11 represents our best estimation of the overall situation in
both urban and peri-urban settlements based on data, reports, observations, and interviews.

Table 3.11:	 Sanitation Service Level Rating for Settlements

                                  Honiara,                                          Port Moresby,
                                                                     Port Vila,
            Factor                Solomon           Suva, Fiji                       Papua New
                                                                     Vanuatu
                                   Islands                                             Guinea

Access: Number of toilets
per household. Distance from       Limited            Basic           Limited          Limited
household to toilet

Use: Safe access to facilities
                                                    Improved
at all times for all members of     Basic                             Limited          Limited
                                                     / Basic
a household

Reliability: Superstructures
and substructures are              Limited            Basic           Limited         No-Service
maintained, operating

Environmental Protection:
Non-sewered toilets at least
15 meters from water sources;     No-Service       No-Service       No-Service        No-Service
waste safely disposed of or
re-used

Hygiene: Hand-washing
                                  No-Service          Basic            Basic          No-Service
facilities

Overall Rating                     Limited            Basic           Limited         No-Service


In the three settlements visited by the assessment team in Honiara, there appeared to be
many shared toilets within a reasonable proximity. These toilets were often shared by multiple
households, and some had improved user interface such as a cement base or even a fiberglass
pedestal commode. These tend to be hand-dug pits that fill up quickly due to high water tables.
Pits are covered when full, and toilets are re-dug when space permits (this happens more often
in peri-urban settlements than urban settlements). Figure 3.11 depicts a cluster of pit toilets, two
of which are full and abandoned and one of which is working. Some toilets were unimproved
hanging toilets. No hand-washing stations were visible, which is likely due to the lack of water.

Toilet facilities in the Greater Suva Area are often shared by families living within the same
household, but not by other households in the community. Relative to other study countries,
residents had greater financial means to improve and maintain superstructures, and have
access to piped water to facilitate pour flush toilets and hand washing. Waste, however,
is consistently handled unsafely, either with straight pipes to nearby streams or to shallow
underground containment structures with inadequate storage or drainage. Hanging toilets are
not uncommon. In settlements with regular flooding and standing water, toilet facilities are often
elevated and may be frightening or unsafe for children.




                                                                                                 29
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Figure 3.10:	Cluster of Functioning and Closed Pit Toilets in Burns Creek near
             Honiara




Note: The photo on the left depicts a cluster of pit toilets. Two of these are full and abandoned, and one is functional. The functional pit
toilet is enclosed by tin in the background. The interior of this pit toilet is shown on the right. One appears to be under construction in
the foreground. The white wall is a private toilet with septic system. These toilets are between 15 and 20 meters from a shallow well.




   Box 3.5:	 ADB Collaborates with NGOs to Upgrade Settlements

   The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is currently funding the Port Vila Urban Development Project
   (PVUDP).

   One activity of the PVUDP is to install multi-purpose, multi-user (MPMU) sanitation facilities (including
   toilets, washing, and bathing facilities) in several informal settlements. ADB engaged Wan Smolbag (a
   domestic NGO) and World Vision to undertake community consultations to decide which settlements
   should receive MPMU facilities. The ADB selected communities based on need and willingness of
   the constituents to contribute to the capital cost and maintenance of facilities. Informal settlements
   with known land tenure conflicts were not considered.

   Implementation is scheduled for 2015. For some communities, PVUDP will refurbish existing MPMU
   facilities; it is unknown who originally built these existing facilities. In other communities, PVUDP will
   build new facilities or provide materials to communities so they can construct their own semi-private
   facilities. World Vision will help these communities to establish management strategies. No formal
   city authority is expected to be involved moving forward.

    Figure 3.11:	          Current Toilet Facilities in Blacksands Settlement




30
                                                               Cross-Country Water and Sanitation Analysis




Port Vila settlement communities use community-managed toilet blocks more often than other
study countries. The Port Vila Urban Development Project (PVUDP) is one notable project that
plans to build multi-user, multi-purpose toilet blocks in the settlements in Port Vila. The PVUDP
is described in more detail in Box 3.5, and is an example of how donors can collaborate with
NGOs and other stakeholders to advocate for the settlements and include them in the urban
agenda.

Other than the PVUDP, there are no other sanitation projects focussed on informal settlements
currently in progress. According to the PVUDP Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice (KAP) report,
most informal settlement households rely on pit or long-drop toilets (known locally as “bush
toilets”), septic tanks, or openly defecate. Few settlement households have their own “improved”
toilets, ventilated improved pit (VIP) toilets, or water-sealed toilets. A little over half of settlement
households surveyed (54%) found it difficult to use community toilets because of wait times,
and 63% of respondents said the facilities are not maintained and unclean.8 Children, disabled
people, and sometimes adults resort to open defecation because community toilets are dirty,
closed, or physically difficult to access.9,10 Waste is consistently unmanaged.

In Port Moresby, when available, toilets tend to be close to homes and shared with multiple
families. Based on a recent WSP-World Bank Group study, the vast majority (95%) of toilets
are 50 meters or less from the household, and about half of those were less than ten meters
away.11 Still, many people report resorting to open defecation because of fear or disgust of
poor toilet conditions or general inaccessibility. About 8% of households reportedly practiced
open defecation according to a survey of settlements in Wewak and Port Moresby.12 Within
households, children, elderly, and the disabled more frequently resorted to open defecation.
Open defecation exposes women and children, which is reported to make them vulnerable to
violence or abuse.13

Pit toilets in Port Moresby settlements are generally covered over when full. Open-bottom
and/or unlined pits and hanging toilets discharge waste into the open environment or into
groundwater; in low lying areas, waste flows into communities during flooding or heavy rains.
Hand-washing facilities are not available at toilets and hand-washing after defecation is not
reportedly practiced otherwise.




8
  Wan Smolbag. Port Vila Urban Development Project, KAP Research Report. Port Vila, Vanuatu, 2014.
9
  Interview with PVUDP Management Team
10
   Observation during site visit
11
   Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in
Urban Informal Settlements by Penny Dutton, World Bank--Water and Sanitation Program (2014)
12
   Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in
Urban Informal Settlements by Penny Dutton, World Bank--Water and Sanitation Program (2014)
13
   Social Research Findings And Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in
Urban Informal Settlements by Penny Dutton, World Bank--Water and Sanitation Program (2014)


                                                                                                          31
Chapter 4	
Key Findings and
Recommendations in
Melanesian Settlements



While settlement communities and their respective service levels differ across the region, all
informal settlements in Melanesia face significant shortfalls in the provision of WASH services.
The reasons for this are multi-faceted and complex; there are country- and city-specific legal,
institutional, financial, and cultural barriers.

This section describes key findings and provides high-level recommendations that stakeholders
can use as a starting point to develop a next-steps action agenda.



4.1	 Reasons for Inadequate WASH Service Delivery
     in Informal Settlements
This section summarizes the main common features that lead to inadequate WASH services in
Melanesia’s WASH sector, which are used to target the recommendations made in Section 4.2.



1. 	The political motivation to ensure adequate WASH service access in informal
    settlements is weak and, in some cases, implicitly adverse

     •	 There is little actionable research about the scale and nature of the challenge in
        settlements in each country, particularly as it relates to the economic and public health
        of capital cities. Trend data describing population growth, service access, health,
        and incomes in settlement are needed, but existing data are weak or non-existent.
        Government decision makers do not consistently make (or highlight) the connection




32
                                     Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




      between WASH services in settlements and urban public/environmental health. This is
      despite the fact that missing WASH services could have significant public health and
      environmental consequences in densely populated urban areas, unless service levels
      are improved quickly.

    •	 Settlement residents do not effectively express their demand for improved WASH
       services. Settlement residents do not have an active voice in Government to advocate
       for improved water and sanitation. Many settlers are recent arrivals and do not have
       local voting rights or representation given their informal residence. Settlements also
       tend to be outside of or straddling administrative units, so the target of any advocacy
       efforts is unclear or fragmented. Residents are often financially insecure and do not
       have the time or resources to engage in advocating for community improvements.
       Residents are likely to prioritize sending any spare financial resources to their home
       villages, rather than upgrading the living conditions within insecure settlements that are
       considered temporary residences.

    •	 There is little advocacy for settlement improvements among NGOs and civil society
       organizations. Few NGOs or civic organizations actively improve or advocate for WASH
       services in informal settlements in the study countries, with the exception of Solomon
       Islands (where World Vision, UNICEF, and LLEE are all actively engaged). External
       parties like international donors inconsistently advocate for service improvements to
       urban settlements. Donors also have a history of prioritizing WASH investments either
       in rural areas or for large-scale piped infrastructure works in formal urban areas that
       do not tend to benefit poor communities. Development partners appear to prioritize
       improving formal urban environments and major infrastructure, under the assumption
       that informal and formal areas of the city are disconnected, or that work in formal
       areas will eventually be “completed” at which point work in settlements should begin.

      A strong national advocate can play a powerful role in improving the situation in the
      settlements. In Fiji, People’s Community Network (PCN), a national NGO, has persistently
      pushed its advocacy message, described in more detail in Box 4.1.



   National targets, policy environments, and financial or organizational
2. 	
   capacity are not in place to support meaningful service provision to
   settlements now or in the future

    •	 National targets and monitoring methods exclude or inadequately incorporate
       settlement needs and growth. Utility performance and nationally-reported JMP data
       clearly exclude service provision to peri-urban areas. National-level performance
       targets for urban development appear to be based on formal city boundaries and
       disregard how quickly urban landscapes are changing and growing. This detracts from
       decision makers’ and planners’ ability to assess existing situations accurately and to
       plan accordingly.




                                                                                             33
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




  Box 4.1:	 Strong National Advocates Can Collaborate with the Government to
             Improve WASH in Informal Settlements

  In Fiji, PCN is a national NGO that has been able to successfully demand services on behalf of the
  settlements. PCN has played a strong role in getting the Government of Fiji to be more proactive and
  supportive about integrating the settlements into formal areas. This has led to projects like Lagilagi,
  a joint project with PCN and Department of Housing to move settlers from Jittu Estates off vulnerable
  lands and into low-cost housing (depicted in Figure 4.1).

  The joint work between PCN and the Government of Fiji is a useful example of how a strong national
  advocate could facilitate collaborative efforts among stakeholders to improve WASH conditions in
  settlements.

  Figure 4.1:	 Lagilagi Housing for Settlers




34
                                  Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




•	 The wantok system discourages systematic, fair provision of water and sanitation
   services. The wantok (translated literally as “one-talk”) system is prevalent at all
   levels of Government in Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and PNG. The wantok system is
   an unwritten, entrenched patronage system, where residents who speak the same
   language care “look out” for one another. The wantok system favors certain groups.
   For instance, residents may receive favors from politicians from the same wantok, while
   residents without wantok connections may be disadvantaged. The system undermines
   efficient political and economic processes and hinders systematic provision of services.
   The system prevails even at very local community levels of organization and appears
   to create of culture of dependence that undermines individuals’ or households’ sense
   of agency and responsibility.

•	 Utilities are not obliged to and are sometimes restricted from serving settlements.
   Utilities are typically the primary providers of water and sanitation services in urban areas.
   Utilities may be restricted from or not obligated to serve communities without formal land
   tenure or those located outside formal, but often out of date, service area boundaries.

  Where utilities are responsible for sanitation services, there are effectively no activities
  or investments extended to settlements because of an almost universal exclusive
  focus on expanding traditional piped sewer systems. This narrow focus disadvantages
  informal settlements, many of which are likely to be best served through non-piped
  solutions.

•	 Utilities tend to lack the financial and technical capacity or revenue motivation to
   extend equitable services to urban settlements. Utilities strive to (and are sometimes
   required to) cover costs. Settlement residents are perceived to be low-paying customers
   who contribute to non-revenue water problems. Little or no research exists to support
   the testing or application of more appropriate, effective service delivery models
   (institutional or technical). Utilities also tend to under-invest in public good aspects of
   service delivery (such as waste treatment and disposal), and do not extend services to
   the most challenging communities unless well-designed equity measures are built into
   performance monitoring and payments.

•	 Where utilities are not required to provide sanitation services, no alternative
   authority steps in to fill the void. Some authorities in the region have expressed
   interest in developing a comprehensive national sanitation policy and want
   an agency to be clearly responsible. For instance, several stakeholders in
   Vanuatu expressed frustration at the lack of collaboration on strategic plans
   to improve sanitation in the country and the need for a sanitation policy.

  NGOs and municipal authorities may attempt to fill gaps in an ad hoc manner. Projects
  in non-networked urban and peri-urban settlement communities are often isolated pilot
  projects or promote behavior change without addressing the missing community scale
  infrastructure and services required to enable behavior change or public good outcomes.




                                                                                             35
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




        In the absence of guidelines, incentives or enforcement, private markets for sanitation
        services remain underdeveloped. The limited products and services provided do
        generate household-level benefits. However, this does not ensure equitable or socially
        optimal service provision because sanitation products and waste removal services are
        out-of-reach for low-income households.



   The characteristics of rapidly growing informal settlements complicate
3. 	
   effective WASH service delivery, and increase the cost of installing
   appropriate infrastructure at a household level retroactively

     •	 Settlement households are financially insecure, often mobile, and face tenuous
        relationships with landlords. These characteristics undermine households’ ability
        and inclination to demand property improvements or services from landowners, land
        managers, or community representatives.

     •	 Settlers may be unaccustomed to receiving and paying for water or sanitation
        services via direct utility relationships. While many settlers have ability-to-pay
        constraints, some settlers have the ability to pay but are not willing to pay utility
        bills. Residents may perceive water to be a free commodity, as it was in their rural
        communities. They may expect local leaders to provide water as a “favor” as seems
        to be common in Solomon Islands. Intermediaries may illegally provide utility water to
        communities where residents are unable to establish direct customer relationships with
        the utility.

     •	 Settlements lack important complementary infrastructure (such organized
        streets, drains, housing, roads etc.) and basic services (solid waste collection, flood
        management, etc). These facilities are often required to protect functional water and
        sanitation infrastructure assets in a cost-effective manner with minimal land impacts.
        The services delivered from these assets should be coordinated.

     •	 Settlements are often established on low-value and marginal land like steep
        slopes or coastal and riparian flood plains. These areas tend to have high water
        tables and are prone to natural hazards and traditional infrastructure systems tend
        to be inappropriate. As a result, they are technically challenging to serve and many
        utilities do not yet have the technical capacities in-house to deal with these features.
        Hazards are also increasing with climate change and natural system degradation. For
        instance, settlers in the Wailea settlement outside of Suva stated that seasonal floods
        rise higher each year, now regularly entering homes due to mangrove degradation and
        increasing storm surges.

     •	 Settlement WASH problems reflect larger challenges associated with the absence
        of regional planning and strategic growth plans and implementation efforts.
        Without integrated, regional investment plans that reflect growth, Governments will
        remain unable to protect settlers in hazard zones, ensure growing populations have a
        place to live, and invest in the right level of basic services in the right places. Evicting



36
                                         Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




       settlers is not a long-term solution because evicted settlers quickly resettle, as was
       the case in Solomon Islands (described in more detail in Box 4.2). Low-income urban
       housing is already exceedingly under supplied and rural urban migration appears to
       be increasing.



 Box 4.2:	 Evicting Settlers Does Not Work and is Not a Permanent Solution

 In Solomon Islands, authorities tried to evict settlers near the Matanika River. Authorities were unable
 to enforce these evictions, and settlers returned to the same area to rebuild. These homes were
 rebuilt after the recent floods and are depicted in Figure 4.2. Authorities mistakenly believe that
 withholding WASH services discourage settlement formation.

 Figure 4.2:	 Re-building Homes along the Matanika River in Honiara after the
              Floods




   No Government, utility, or private sector entity is incentivized to test the
4. 	
   technical and service delivery innovations needed to address the challenges
   in settlement communities, particularly for sanitation service delivery

    •	 Internationally-identified solutions should be adapted to local contexts and tested
       in each country. Some technical and institutional progress is being made internationally
       to address WASH in settlements. These successes must be identified and adapted
       to local situations. However, this requires resources and incentives that are currently
       inadequately provided through conventional service tariffs. Many benefits are likely to
       accrue through public health and environmental improvements, which are not directly
       factored into utility tariffs in most countries.




                                                                                                        37
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




     •	 NGOs develop projects to test innovations without active collaborative partners
        in Government. Efforts to this end are extremely limited in Melanesia, particularly
        in sanitation. The impact from these efforts is further limited if NGOs are unable to
        plan and implement projects in collaboration with a government entity responsible for
        implementing services in settlements in the long run. This may be because no clear
        Government or utility partner exists, no entity is willing to partner with the NGO, or the
        NGO prefers to work independently. Regardless of the reason, an important opportunity
        is lost to build up institutional capacity and to monitor, evaluate, document, and scale-
        up promising initiatives.

     •	 Stakeholders interpret their responsibilities to deliver sewerage services separate
        from a responsibility to ensure adequate and safe sanitation (regardless of what
        technology is used to deliver that outcome). This reduces planners’ ability to design
        systems that integrate a portfolio of sanitation solutions to solve diverse situations
        in urban areas. This also inappropriately signals that all non-sewered options are
        “temporary fixes,” undermining businesses’, households’ and governments’ incentives
        to invest in sustainable alternative solutions.



5. 	Settlement residents resort to poor quality and/or expensive alternatives,
    too often at the expense of their own health and a utility’s assets

     •	 Women and children bear the greatest cost of underprovided WASH services.
        Women and children tend to be responsible for fetching water when it is not supplied
        near their home—often involving long hours and many trips. For example in Port Moresby
        some women were spending three hours every day collecting water from standpipes
        or illegal connections – not always due to long distances getting to a water point but
        from low pressure and queues at taps. This is a large loss of time which could be better
        spent in productive work. Carrying 20-30kg loads of water each trip (sometimes three
        trips per day) is also detrimental to women’s health and wellbeing. Some women in
        settlements have been doing this daily for 15 to 20 years. Sometimes women must
        collect water at night and they feel unsafe making the journey when it is dark. There
        are many cases of rape, violence, and harassment of women when collecting water
        or defecating in early mornings or at night. Women and children in settlements are
        unlikely to have formal employment where they can access alternative services during
        the day. Women are most responsible for caring for sick family members including
        those affected by waterborne diseases. Consequently the time when water sources
        and toilets are needed close to home for washing and toileting they are not and the
        burden for women is increased. In all four countries women have a lower status than
        men and lack public representation at all levels. For example only 4% of local councillor
        positions were held by women in Vanuatu and nearly all settlement leaders are men,
        with no female representatives in parliament.

     •	 Many settlers are paying for informal WASH goods and services through alternative
        providers, which is a lost revenue opportunity for utilities. As informal populations
        grow, the need for water services grows accordingly. Informal entrepreneurs fill gaps in



38
                                                 Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




          the market if formal services are not offered. Increasing reliance on these community-
          scale entrepreneurs creates further public health risks. Utilities are often unable to
          mobilize resources for long-term cost-avoidance strategies (for example to address
          challenges that might undermine the long-term viability of their investments) or to
          innovate their service delivery approach to reach residents in unserved settlements.
          Regulatory mandates for improving service in settlements and coordinated public
          investments—either through subsidies, financing, or both—are required to strengthen
          utilities and promote equity, public health, and positive environmental outcomes.

       •	 In the absence of adequate services from regulated formal providers—utilities
          or vendors otherwise—households cope using ad hoc, often unsafe practices.
          Households must transport and store water when service is not consistent or convenient.
          Informal storage systems and low quality shared connections contaminate utility water
          at the point-of-use due to mould and bacteria, as depicted in Figure 4.3. When utility
          water is not available or adequate, surface water sources and accessible ground water
          supplies are used. These tend to be contaminated by poor management practices and
          by missing or inappropriate sanitation systems.

       •	 Complementary infrastructure, especially wastewater, is missing or underprovided.
          When utilities or informal providers address the immediate water demands of a
          community in an unplanned manner, complementary services like graywater or
          blackwater drainage and treatment are not installed. This detracts from the potential
          health gains achievable from clean water supply by exacerbating other disease risks
          such as increasing standing water for disease vectors like mosquitos and spreading
          fecal pathogens.

Figure 4.3: 	 Household Informal Collection Points and Collection Containers in
              PNG




Source: Social Research Findings and Recommendations, Papua New Guinea: Sanitation, Water Supply, and Hygiene in Urban
Informal Settlements. World Bank. Water and Sanitation Program (2014), Photo: Penny Dutton




                                                                                                                         39
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




4.2	 International Experience
Many of the issues experienced in the four Melanesian countries are similar to issues faced in
other peri-urban and informal settlements in Africa, South America, Central and Southeast Asia.
Lessons learned from these settings are relevant to the Pacific.

The following examples typify the rich international experience that exists in this subsector:

Mozambique: Improved service delivery in formal and informal urban areas: The World
Bank Group has been supporting water sector investments through a series of projects that
have had both institutional and infrastructure activities embedded. Investments have been
planned in an integrated manner, considering water resource and technical requirements,
financial sustainability and institutional models for operations. A national water utility was
created with a flexible geographical mandate to overcome the issue of settlements crossing
jurisdictional boundaries. Land tenure documentation is not a requirement for connection and
service provision. Support to create a commercial/business oriented culture has resulted in
settlement residents being viewed as potential new customers, rather than an obligation or
burden. Support to the Central Government level to ensure that expansion of water supply
services is a key Government priority has resulted in this regularly included in the Government’s
national development plans and key objectives/targets are established in national policy. A
trial of targeted subsidies for low-income households to reduce the connection fee barrier has
been very successful, and institutionalized by the regulator, which has reduced the household
connection costs. The utility has a policy of increasing household connections, and slowly
removing standpipes in peri-urban settlements that have been difficult to manage through
community management. Increasing the household connection density reduces the amount
of illegal tapping and benefits the household. Data have shown that the amount of sharing
(individual household connections) has been declining significantly as connection density has
increased. This also reduces the risk of these customers being charged more due to high
consumption under a block tariff. Experience has also shown that some assumptions around
ability of settlers to pay were incorrect: low income households have generally understated/
under declared household incomes, and actual payment records for low–income households
compared to other customers found that the low-income households have respect for the
connection and are not the main contributors to the utility’s collection challenges. The utility
also has spent considerable efforts making it easier to pay, including payment offices in close
proximity to the settlements and establishing systems for people to pay on weekly or bi-weekly
basis (e.g. using mobile phone credit), rather than end of the month payments, which can be
problematic. The utility has experienced vandalism of assets including damaged water meters,
and taps being stolen. This can be a complicated problem and requires social/educational
programs and political intervention.

Benin, Rwanda and Haiti water supply: Positive results in Africa (Rwanda, Benin) and
more recently in Haiti were obtained after delegating operation and basic maintenance
to locally created and trained operators for water supply systems. These operators can be




40
                                       Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




entrepreneurial individuals from the community that aim to cover O&M costs, connect new
clients (either household connections or public standpipes/kiosks) and generate extra revenue
for themselves. Some of them can manage more than one system and live from that, others
manage a system and complement this with other sources of revenue. In this model:

     •	 Network expansion and investments in infrastructure are the responsibility of the utility,
        as is monitoring of the operators’ performance. Users’ associations are created to
        represent the user’s interest and close the “accountability loop”;

     •	 The operator signs a contract with the utility for service delegation and individual
        contracts with users and collects payments based on the volume of water consumed. The
        model replaced community-managed systems after years of financially unsustainable
        service, the infrastructure deteriorating due to lack funds for maintenance;

     •	 In Africa and Haiti, local entrepreneurs were preferred to firms from the bigger cities,
        because of their existing connection with the community (trust is easier to establish)
        and also because firms from outside the communities, sometimes utilities saw little
        economic opportunity in operating these smaller water supply systems.

A learning from Haiti and Benin was that governments and utilities need to understand as a
first step the limits and opportunities of the innovative solutions already in place or recently
developed either by utilities, NGOs or the communities themselves. In places where they work,
support them and their implementers by providing training and encouraging entrepreneurial
locals to participate, while monitoring the quality and sustainability of service provision. In
places where they do not work or are unsustainable, encourage the switch to other solutions
based on adaptations of international examples. There may not be one solution and different
management models may exist in parallel.

Zambia Copperbelt vandalism reduction in Low Income Communities: The Nkana Water
and Sewerage Company has dealt with its water theft and vandalism and theft of meters,
pipes, and manhole covers through an integrated approach, This approach involves: improving
customer and utility relations by developing an association with the Ministry of Health through
a shared sanitation program; organizing visits for community leaders to sewerage and water
treatment works to help them understand the utility’s work and the challenges that it faces;
and investing in community engagement; increasing the community’s sense of ownership by
introducing the requirement for each household to make a financial contribution to construction
costs; strengthening law enforcement to ensure perpetrators are held to account. This includes
working with police to help them to understand the law in this area, and the training of prosecutors
within the utility.

Kenya: Delivering water and sanitation services in informal settlements: The Nairobi City
Water and Sewerage Company is servicing informal settlements through: bulk water to ‘kiosks’;
house connections; sanitation blocks; and sewerage connections – working in partnership with
NGOs.




                                                                                                 41
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Lessons learned include:
    •	 Community involvement and participation opens the door to success
    •	 A sense of ownership by the community ensures sustainability
    •	 Partnerships make implementation easy through synergies
    •	 The results of reducing illegal connections and unaccounted for water are increased
       revenue
    •	 Buy-in from employees is needed to provide pro-poor services.

South Africa: eThekwini utility community ablution blocks (shared facilities): This example
points to creating affordable and clean shared facilities (as a first step towards another solution)
in peri-urban areas. This example could alleviate some of the challenges described in Melanesia
such as rental arrangements, financial insecurity, and mobility, however community ablution
blocks need to consider ethnic relationships in settlements and security for women. See http://
www.susana.org/en/resources/case-studies/details/792.



4.3	 Recommendations for Improving WASH
     Services to Informal Settlements
Finding solutions to the service shortfalls identified in this report is challenging. Solutions need to
respond to the particular circumstances found in each settlement, but need to be implemented
with relatively limited financial and technical resources.

The recommendations presented focus on institutional changes (rather than specific technical
solutions). These recommendations aim to motivate further discussion on a next steps agenda.

Central Government authorities should establish clear national mandates for service
delivery, clarify the organizational authority and their obligations to implement services,
and set clear service level targets for settlements

Each study country should start by establishing clear national mandates for service delivery,
along with performance incentives and resources to achieve specific targets for service delivery.
Targets for WASH service provision in urban areas should explicitly incorporate improvements
to the services delivered in informal settlements. Targets must be based on research and data
that reflect the current access rates in settlements, their rate of growth, and the particular
challenges of providing WASH services in these communities.

Targets should emphasize WASH outcomes (access, cost and environment), while also
incorporating process indicators like stakeholder engagement (specifically achieving
meaningful engagement with women and children). Equity and public health indicators should
also be made explicit.

Regulatory and monitoring authorities should be distinguished from the agency responsible
for implementing WASH improvement programs. The authorities responsible for achieving
targets and those responsible for monitoring performance and progress need to be identified
and funded to ensure that evaluation efforts are meaningful and can inform future decisions.



42
                                      Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




Organizations responsible for achieving outcomes may or may not be the exclusive executing
agencies. Public-private partnerships and coordinated regional planning and implementation
should be considered among the options.

Incorporate settlements into existing or emerging sector investment plans, based on
actionable research

A stakeholder-driven research program is needed to help funders, regulators and implementers
better reach unserved or underserved communities with both water supply and sanitation
services. A focus should be on developing, testing and implementing service delivery strategies
for high risk areas that are difficult to reach with existing technologies and service delivery
models. Researched strategies should be designed to address the immediacy of need as
well as the long-term nature of the challenge, moving away from stop-gap solutions for non-
networked and informally settled communities. Sanitation research should result in a financially
viable and actionable list of post-containment waste management options including reuse.

Research should identify and vet emerging technology options and opportunities for public
private partnerships around for products and service delivery. This research should explicitly
evaluate strategies for their ability to achieve public-good outcomes within settlements.

Research should also identify and vet financial tools that could be used to fund service delivery
to unserved and disadvantaged customer segments and communities. CSOs and tariff
structures that allow for cross-subsidies among customer segments are two tools to consider.
Building demand for sanitation services in coordination with developing a stronger supply chain
for settlement-oriented goods and services may require financial tools like advance purchase
agreements and targeted consumer subsidies for pre-qualified products and services.

Utilities and settlement residents should collaborate to identify a list of barriers to improving
WASH services. Action research can help stakeholders identify workarounds for known
obstacles like land tenure requirements (for example WAF’s edge of settlement meter solution),
and intermediaries who unreliably remit collected water fees to utility providers (for example
moving to mobile phone-based billing and payment).

National Governments should require and fund the implementation of agencies’ short, medium,
and long-term investment plans for reaching settlements.

Performance monitoring and evaluation should be associated with payment-based
performance incentives

Tremendous innovation is required to meet the new and constantly growing and evolving
WASH needs of settlement communities. Many cities around the world are developing practical
approaches to address similar challenges. Incentives are missing for service providers in
Melanesia to plan for and respond to that pace of change—particularly in sanitation—with
situation-appropriate options. Outcome-oriented performance incentives can both resource
and motivate implementers to identify and invest in the best technologies and capacity building
opportunities to achieve established performance targets.



                                                                                             43
Unsettled: Water and Sanitation in Urban Settlement Communities of the Pacific




Revenue incentives may already exist for some utilities simply based on the size and growth
rate of settlements. However, this revenue opportunity could become a liability if infrastructure
is damaged or non-revenue water losses increase. Donors and utility boards should support
service providers to model the potential risks and benefits (for example increased revenue,
costs avoided and system-wide pressure improvements) of different settlement service delivery
scenarios in the medium and long-term.

Utilities in other regions have established divisions charged with developing and implementing
service provision schemes for underserved communities. Utilities in study countries should
consider this approach. Performance incentives within the utility could also be used to improve
performance of such programs toward established service delivery and tariff collection targets.

Technical assistance to support recommendations

There is considerable scope for development partners to constructively support settlement
inclusion through the provision of technical assistance and analysis in key areas that may not
be a current priority for government and which would ordinarily be outside the operating scope
of utilities. These areas include:

     •	 further analysis on quantify the costs and define economic benefits associated with
        investments in improved water and sanitation services;

     •	 advocacy to government using evidence from analysis and previous international
        experience;

     •	 policy development for WASH services to settlements and the development of sanitation
        and water supply guidelines for services including the role of subsidies;

     •	 strategic planning for city water supply and sanitation services;

     •	 private sector engagement both for water supply (operations, maintenance,
        management) and sanitation (including the development of affordable sanitation
        products for settlements);

     •	 technical research and piloting of viable options to support low cost water supply and
        sanitation for settlements including non-piped water solutions;

     •	 facilitating peer-to-peer learning and networking on improving commercial management
        of utilities and increasing viability for reaching settlements. Existing networks such as
        PWWA could also be strengthened.

     •	 developing behavior change communication materials based on research for sanitation
        and hygiene; and improving customer information and engagement for water supply.




44
                                     Key Findings and Recommendations in Melanesian Settlements




Explore innovative financing mechanisms to encourage alternative service provision
solutions

As part of investment programs, development partners can negotiate the inclusion of settlement
areas within service areas or select pilot settlements for action research.

Financing options such as Output-Based Aid should be explored for water supply. Under an
OBA scheme the service provider bears the performance risk—this means that service providers
pre-finance the outputs before being reimbursed by the OBA subsidy upon independent
verification that pre-agreed outputs have been delivered. In the water sector these outputs are
generally working connections, often demonstrated through billing or collections records.

For sanitation, the option of household micro credit paired with a sanitation markets initiative
may seem viable.




                                                                                            45
The Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) is multi-development partner coordination, research and technical
facility which supports infrastructure development in the Pacific. PRIF Members include: Asian Development Bank
(ADB), Australian Development of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), the European Union and European Investment
Bank (EU/EIB), Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
(NZMFAT), and the World Bank Group.
