November 2015                          101097




                The World Bank Group
Summary Findings
    Withdrawal from Correspondent Banking - Where, Why, and What to Do About it
    Report on the G20 Survey On De-Risking Activities in the Remittance Market
November 2015


Acknowledgments

This report was prepared by the Finance and Markets Global Practice of the World Bank Group.


© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank Group
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank Group. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group, its
Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank Group does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
any judgment on the part of The World Bank Group concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank Group encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial
purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the:
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org




                                        The World Bank Group
Fact-Finding Summary from De-Risking Surveys
                                                                                                           3


                                      De-risking: Fact-finding Summary

At the request of the G20 and the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and with the support of the Committee on
Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), the World Bank Group has led fact-finding work on de-risking –
the phenomenon of financial institutions terminating or restricting business relationships with clients or
categories of clients to avoid, rather than manage, risk.

This analytical work has focused on two areas – restriction or termination of correspondent banking
relationships (CBRs) (i.e. the provision of banking services by one bank to another) and account closures of
money transfer operators (MTOs). Two reports reflecting the findings, analysis and related recommendations
have been prepared and shared with the G20. Results of both reports show that de-risking is happening, though
it hits specific countries, regions and financial services in varying degrees.

This paper will briefly summarize the key findings of both reports, as well as recommendations from these fact-
finding efforts. The two complete reports are annexed to this summary. Annex 1 is the report entitled
“Withdrawal from Correspondent Banking: Where, Why, and What to Do about It.? Annex 2 is the “Report on
the G20 Survey on De-risking Activities in the Remittance Market.?


Key Findings – Withdrawal from Correspondent Banking: Where, Why, and What to Do about It

Roughly half the banking authorities and slightly more local/regional banks indicated a decline in CBRs. For
large international banks the figures are significantly higher at 75 percent. The differences might be explicable
in that a great majority of the large international banks were surveyed precisely because there had been mention
of those institutions having terminated, albeit to varying degrees, their foreign correspondent banking
relationships. The Caribbean seems to be the region most severely affected. The United States is most often
mentioned as being home to correspondent banks that are withdrawing from foreign CBRs.

The products and services identified as being most affected by the withdrawal of correspondent banking
relationships are: check clearing, clearing and settlement, cash-management services, international wire
transfers and for banking authorities and local/regional banks also trade finance. In terms of client segments
most significantly impacted, over 69 percent of the banking authorities responding to the survey indicated that
money transfer operators and other remittance companies are most impacted, followed by small and medium
domestic banks (44 percent) and small and medium exporters (26 percent). Respondents also specified other
types of clients/client segments that were affected including retail customers, international business companies,
and e-gaming/gambling.

The ability of financial institutions in affected jurisdictions to find alternative correspondent banks varied, but
the majority indicated they were able to find replacements. Of the 46 banking authorities who responded to this
question – 23 authorities indicated that their banks had found replacements and 8 indicated that they had found
alternative means. Thirteen banking authorities indicated that they had been unable to find replacements.

The surveys also sought to obtain information from banking authorities and large banks on the extent to which
they considered there to be an obligation to conduct due diligence on the customer’s customer(s) (often referred
to as “KYCC? for “Know Your Customer’s Customer?) - in this case the customer(s) of the respondent bank.
Large banks noted that although KYCC is not, in most countries, an obligation that can be found in the law,
banks do conduct due diligence on the customer’s customer as a matter of pra ctice in certain cases – just to be


                                               The World Bank Group
Fact-Finding Summary from De-Risking Surveys
                                                                                                          4


on the safe side. However, it is not always possible to identify an underlying transaction – specifically when
individual transfers are batched into one transfer, such as the case for remittances for instance, when the bank
does one transfer that aggregates a number of smaller individual transfers.

The drivers of the decline in foreign CBRs can be divided into two groups: one category of causes that are more
business related, explaining the decision to terminate a foreign CBR in purely economic terms, and another
category of causes more regulatory and risk related, explaining the decision to sever ties with certain actors
based on the level of ML/FT risk of the counterpart deemed unmanageable, concerns that one might fall foul of
AML/CFT, international/regional sanctions or other legislation or regulations. The two are related – since
higher risk can result in greater cost. While local/regional banks put more of an emphasis on the
economic/business rationale for the decline, banking authorities and large banks emphasized both regulatory
AML/CFT and business-related concerns.


Key Findings – Report on the G20 Survey on De-risking Activities in the Remittance Market

Data collected indicate that account closures for money transfer operators (MTOs) have become more
pronounced over the last few years in some countries, including Australia, Canada, Germany, France, Italy,
Mexico, the UK, and the US. The trend impacts more MTOs today than a few years ago; and both MTOs and
banks report an increased trend of closed and/or restricted number of accounts between 2010 and 2014. A
significant portion of MTOs declared that the MTO principal (28 percent of the respondents) or its agents (45
percent of respondents) can no longer access banking services. Of that smaller group of MTO principals without
access, 75 percent are maintaining their presence in the market by using alternative channels to clear and settle
the amounts at international level; the other 25 percent of MTO principal respondents are currently unable to
operate regularly through bank channels.

The banks’ responses point to four main drivers for MTO account closure: (1) profitability, (2) pressure from
other actors (correspondent bank or law enforcement), (3) lack of confidence in the MTOs’ procedures, and (4)
reputational risk. The MTO responses point to four main drivers for account closure, as provided to them by the
banks: (1) fear of regulatory scrutiny, (2) reputational risk, (3) profitability, and (4) fear of losing access to
correspondent banking relationships. While these responses do not perfectly align, they are mutually reinforcing
on most points. One area where it is clear there are differing views is the effectiveness of supervision of the
MTO sector. Eighty-five percent of the governments that responded stated they believe banks can rely on
adequate supervision of the MTO sector in order to inform their risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining
accounts for MTO customers and 88 percent of MTO respondents agreed that their sector was sufficiently
supervised. In contrast, only 52 percent of bank respondents judged that the MTO sector is sufficiently
supervised and only 48 percent of bank respondents felt that they can rely on the supervision of the MTO sector
to inform risk-based decisions on opening/maintaining accounts for MTO customers.

In this sample, according to the answers received from the governments, there are very few MTOs (principals or
agents) that have been fined, suspended, sanctioned or received some other enforcement action for an
AML/CFT-related violation between 2012 and 2014, however, the number has increased over time. Only two of
the responding governments indicated that a bank operating in their country has been fined, suspended,
sanctioned or has received some other enforcement action for an AML/CFT-related violation associated with
their relationship with MTOs. In addition, 78 percent of MTO respondents indicated no record of sanctions or
other enforcement actions related to AML/CFT.



                                               The World Bank Group
Fact-Finding Summary from De-Risking Surveys
                                                                                                             5


Recommendations

The withdrawal from foreign CBRs and the closure of MTO accounts are complex and manifold phenomena.
Some of the drivers are not susceptible to policy tweaks. A bank is completely justified not doing business
because of business rationale, compliance costs or excessive risk. There are risks that should not be taken – and
no policy intervention should try to dictate otherwise.

The issue to consider is whether in other cases, particularly where applicable rules or facts and circumstances
are unclear, but there is in principle a business and risk-related rationale for engagement, there is something that
authorities or the banks themselves could do to encourage the establishment of a business relationship. It is
important to emphasize that this is a joint public-private responsibility that needs to be dealt with in partnership.
Only such an approach with efforts by all actors, can help reverse the decline experienced in certain parts of the
world.

While the two reports focused on different elements of the de-risking phenomenon, the recommendations have
areas of convergence. Each annexed report contains multiple tailored recommendations. The recommendations
provided below highlight the overlap for authorities to consider.

1) Monitor the status of correspondent banking and MTO access at jurisdiction level

Though not directly addressing the drivers of de-risking, it would improve the overall ability of governments
and financial institutions to take action in an informed manner, if necessary, if countries were to more
systematically gather information on de-risking – particularly on the status of foreign CBRs.

2) Ensure the effective implementation of international standards and enhanced understanding of risk

All jurisdictions must ensure that the legal and regulatory AML/CFT framework is in place and that their
financial institutions are being effectively supervised for compliance with those obligations. For jurisdictions
that believe they are unfairly being considered high risk because of past actual or perceived AML/CFT
compliance lapses, it is especially important to demonstrate to their counterpart regulators, foreign financial
institutions and public-at-large the reforms that have been implemented so as to correct misperceptions.

Respondent banks and MTOs seeking to establish or maintain banking relationships should improve their
AML/CFT internal controls to reduce their risk profile.

National authorities and financial institutions need to make progress on the overall understanding and
architecture for risk perception, allocation, and management. There is also a need to provide more explicit
information on risks and risk management of the MTO sector in particular, notably residual risks, i.e. the
amount of risk that remains even after controls are taken in to account.

3) Ensure the implementation of a risk-based approach – by supervisors and financial institutions

Supervisors and other enforcement authorities need to take a more direct role, in particular in the areas of
proactive and effective risk-based supervision, as well as risk-based enforcement. In the course of their work,
supervisors should ensure banks follow a risk-based approach, and also ensure the effective implementation of
international AML/CFT standards. An unequivocal statement from national supervisors that there won’t be a
zero tolerance approach for failures to detect money laundering and setting out the tenets for a reasonable risk



                                               The World Bank Group
Fact-Finding Summary from De-Risking Surveys
                                                                                                            6


assessment (to the extent supervisors have not already done so) for establishing correspondent banking
relationships could provide banks with the comfort they say they are currently lacking. Supervisors should
provide clarity on the extent to which, and under which conditions, they consider there to be an obligation to
conduct due diligence on the customer’s customer(s).

4) Increase communication and information sharing

Regulators and supervisors need to increase their communication and outreach on supervisory practices, to
further contribute to more differentiated risk decision-making by banks.

With regard to correspondent banking relationships, there is a need to improve the information position of large
banks. Banks should use technical tools to limit information challenges and lower costs. The CPMI will shortly
be issuing a report on the use of enhanced technical tools to limit information challenges and the use of facilities
offered by third parties to have the relevant information promptly at one’s disposal and at much lower cost. This
report will be an important contribution to this debate and its recommendations on the use of KYC utilities and
the Legal Entity Identifier are endorsed here. Banks should also increase information exchange between
respondent and correspondent banks and between the latter and supervisory authorities. Countries should
consider how they might allow for such exchange of information without breaching data protection and privacy
rules. (Banking) authorities of respondent banks should provide information on the country risk profile and how
higher risks are being addressed.

With regard to MTOs, there is a clear need for more precise risk-based guidance to banks on the provision of
bank accounts and banking services to MTOs and their agents. It would also be beneficial for MTOs to establish
clear and transparent codes of conduct related to the implementation of legal requirements, establishing industry
minimum standards above the bar set by legislation or regulation.




                                               The World Bank Group
