A Partnership for
Saving West Africa’s
Coastal Assets




                                                           2016

               West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)   1
    Africa’s development and climate agendas are inextricably linked: If unaddressed,
    climate change and variability will jeopardize Africa’s hard-won development
    achievements and thwart its aspirations for further growth and poverty reduction.


    Erosion and coastal flooding are taking lives and reducing productivity in West
    Africa. They are the most visible evidence of the climate changes affecting the
    region’s coastal areas. The degradation and vulnerability of coastal areas is a
    cause of serious concern.




    Context
    West Africa’s coastal areas host an abundance of natural resources, on land and at sea,
    that provide vital ecosystem services and help buffer against severe weather events. These
    resources play a key role in the economic and physical resilience of coastal regions to
    existing and future challenges.

    The coastal zone is home to 31 percent of West Africa’s population—and the figure is
    expected to rise. Across Sub-Saharan Africa, urban population growth is growing at an
    annual rate of 4 percent, almost twice the worldwide average of 2.1 percent. In West Africa
    rapid urbanization and net migration to the coasts put further demand on the land, its
    resources, and the services the ecosystem provides to people.

    The coastal zone is also the source of 56 percent of West Africa’s GDP. It is home to
    major industries, including agro-industry, fisheries, offshore petroleum exploration and
    production, and tourism, as well as city and seaside residences. Poor choices about the
    location of infrastructure and groins, limited environmental governance, and human-
    induced pollution, coupled with population pressures and overexploitation of coastal
    natural resources, have led to rapid degradation of coastal ecosystems. The degradation
    manifests itself in the form of coastal erosion and flooding, depletion of fisheries, and
    disease.

    Climate change will exacerbate the environmental stresses along the coast, increasing
    the socioeconomic vulnerability of coastal populations, especially the poor, whose
    well-being and livelihoods depend on the quality and quantity of natural resources
    (figure 1). Interventions are needed at all levels of government and society to decrease
    the vulnerability of the poor in coastal West Africa.

    Spurred by erosion and flooding disasters, West African countries have started to take
    action. Acting alone at the national level is insufficient to tackle the challenges, however.
    A regional approach is needed, because preventing erosion in one country can cause ero-
    sion in its neighbors and because the financing needed to contain erosion and flooding
    is too great for individual countries to raise or manage. Countries need to work together
    in a coordinated manner, at both the policy and the technical levels, and strategically use
    available funding provided to manage priority erosion and flooding hotspots.


2   West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)
FIGURE 1  Links between environmental stresses and the vulnerability of the poor

          Environmental stresses
        interacting with increasing                                         Increasing vulnerability
           societal pressures on                                                  of the poor
             natural resources

          Environmental Stresses                                             Less secure livelihoods
   • Natural Hazard (e.g. ﬂooding, erosion)                               Due to depleted social, ﬁnancial,
   • Environmental Degradation (e.g.                                    physical, natural resources, and human
     pollution, reduction in water quality)                             assets and increased displacement of
                                                                                         people
   • Variability in Environmental resources
     (e.g. biodiversity loss, depleted of
     natural resources)
   • Climate Change (e.g. climate variability,                               Increased health risks
     extreme weather events, sea level rise)
                                                                         (e.g. Malnutrition, Cholera, Typhoid,
                                                                                  Dysentery, Dengue)

               Societal changes
   Increased pressure on the environment
   due to:                                                          Constrained economic opportunities
   • Population growth                                                 Short- and long-term impacts of erosion,
   • Land tenure and resource conﬂicts                                  ﬂooding, market shocks, sickness and
   • Urbanization                                                                other extreme events
   • Market price volatility


Source: Dow, K., 2005. Vulnerability Profile of West Africa, Stockholm: Stockholm Environment Institute.



                                           West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)                    3
    WACA: A Regional Approach to
    Coastal Development

    T
            he West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA) was established by the
            World Bank in 2015 in response to demand from countries in the region to manage
            their growing coastal erosion and flooding problems. Recognizing that multisec-
    toral investments are needed—in land management and planning, infrastructure, natural
    habitat management, and pollution management—these countries asked for technical
    assistance to determine the key factors that are increasing the vulnerability of the people,
    ecosystems, and assets along the coast, making them especially susceptible to the con-
    sequences of climate-related and man-made pressures. Countries already participating
    in the program include Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mauritania, São Tomé and Príncipe,
    Senegal, and Togo, and discussions are under way with other countries.

    WACA is designed to improve the livelihoods of coastal communities in West Africa by
    reducing the vulnerability of its coastal areas and promoting climate-resilient integrated
    coastal management. The program’s mix of technical assistance and investments will seek
    to preserve and rehabilitate the natural coastal resources essential for livelihoods; spur
    economic development and increase social welfare; and support the sustainable develop-
    ment of key growth sectors, such as agro-industry, fisheries, off-shore petroleum explora-
    tion and production, and tourism.

    WACA is also a convening platform to help countries obtain the finance and expertise
    they need to sustainably manage their coastal areas. It also serves as a forum within which
    countries and regions can share lessons learned.

    The World Bank is committed to supporting countries in low-carbon and climate-resilient
    growth and poverty reduction. As part of the 17th International Development Association
    (IDA) Replenishment, the World Bank Group committed to support a number of IDA
    countries in their efforts to prepare multisector investments plans and better manage the
    disaster risks and other effects of climate change. WACA is the vehicle for this response
    for the coastal areas of West Africa.




4   West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)
                 The Development Challenge
                 Unsustainable infrastructure development, inadequate management of natural
                 habitats and resources, and pollution are threatening the productivity of coastal
                 ecosystems in West Africa. Climate change related events such as sea-level rise,
                 land subsidence, storm surge, and coastal flooding are exacerbating the region’s
                 vulnerability.

                 How can coastal countries manage their coastal landscapes to spur economic
                 growth and reduce poverty while adapting to the effects of climate change?




             Interventions, Actions, and Themes
             Countries face difficult decisions in crafting solutions to development challenges in the
             coastal zone. Making the right choice requires decision-support tools and appropriate
             legal and institutional frameworks. Table 1 identifies some possible solutions and their
             rationales.

TABLE 1  Possible interventions for reducing risks to West Africa’s coastal areas

 Challenge    Possible intervention                                                     Rationale

 Coastal      Increasing and preserving areas with green or natural infrastructure      Natural infrastructure provides
 erosion      (mangroves, sand dunes, vegetation, coastal aggregates, coastal           ecological services that need to be
 and          forest, lagoons and coastal swamps, water plants)                         preserved. These services include water
 flooding                                                                               filtration services; habitats that serve
              Providing sustainable alternatives to activities that contribute to the   as fisheries, hatcheries, or refuges; and
              continued degradation of coastal areas (such as sand mining)              the coastal infrastructure protection that
                                                                                        anchors them.
              Identifying infrastructure solutions and mitigating their
              environmental impact

 Marine       Collecting data on the sources, volumes, and effects of marine            Marine pollution has the potential to
 pollution    pollution throughout the region in order to draft appropriate             affect the health, fisheries, and tourism
              legislation, regulation, and enforcement functions                        sectors.

              Identifying clean-up projects for oil spills, untreated wastewater        The capacity to draft regulation and
              discharge, and solid waste                                                enforce legislation needs strengthening
                                                                                        at all levels.

 Depletion    Identifying and rehabilitating natural habitats to preserve               A holistic approach to fisheries that
 of fish      productive ecosystems and increase resilience                             goes beyond the traditional fisheries
 stocks                                                                                 sector governance and value-chain is
                                                                                        needed to address the broader issues of
                                                                                        land-based pollution and habitat loss.

 Rapid        Planning for sustainable development and zoning for coastal               Forward-looking urban participatory
 urbaniza-    tourism and ecotourism                                                    planning would guide urban expansion
 tion                                                                                   while reducing sprawl and prevent
              Designing policies for the use of land and institutions to strengthen     development in environmentally
              property rights and address informal settlements                          sensitive coastal areas.

              Defining measures such as coastal protection, managed population
              relocation, and accommodation, through a process that involves
              consultations with stakeholders and respects social safeguards



                                                   West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)                         5
    WACA is built on three pillars:

    •	 strategic investment planning, including the formulation and prioritization of key
       policies and sectoral investments to foster adaptation to climate change and build
       socioeconomic resilience

    •	 knowledge, information, and capacity building, including multihazard vulnerability
       assessments in select urban areas, cost-benefit analyses of adaption options, and the
       creation of stronger national coastal areas information systems

    •	 country and regional engagement and resource mobilization, including analysis of
       stakeholders’ roles and responsibilities, political economy studies, and identification of
       funding and finance opportunities

    It will also address a number of cross-cutting themes that are central to the analytical work:

    •	 Natural accounts: Natural accounting of coastal services would build on the Wealth
       Accounting and Valuation of Ecosystems Services (WAVES) Partnership on protection
       services of coastal ecosystems, particularly mangroves and coral reefs.

    •	 Innovative financing: The monetized value of coastal services and their benefits would
       remain in the country and be reinvested locally.

    •	 Participatory risk planning and governance: Local communities would participate in
       coastal areas management and disaster prevention planning.

    •	 Social protection for vulnerable coastal communities: The program would target the
       most vulnerable people, through alternative livelihoods, social protection, and labor-
       intensive public works.



    Stakeholders
    The main stakeholders of the program are its ultimate beneficiaries: the people who live
    along the West African coast and depend on it for their livelihood and prosperity. The
    program will collaborate with national decision makers, including the ministries of finance,
    planning, economy, environment, agriculture, transport, energy, and others, as well as civil
    society. National and international academia, research institutes, and nongovernmental
    organizations will be engaged in analytical work and projects as appropriate. Subregional
    and regional organizations, private sector, and donors will provide technical and financial
    support.




6   West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)
   Partners
   WACA is based on collaborative arrangements agreed upon by donors and
   partners, including the West Africa Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), the
   Nordic Development Fund (NDF), and the multidonor Africa Climate Investment
   Readiness Partnership Trust Fund.

   •	 WAEMU funded and prepared the Regional Shoreline Monitoring Study and
      the Management Scheme for the West African coastal area. It is currently
      co-financing the West Africa Coastal Area Erosion and Adaptation project.

   •	 NDF is financing the West Africa Coastal Area Erosion and Adaptation project,
      which will operate in Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Togo. The project aims to
      enhance regional and national governance in the target countries and improve
      their knowledge of coastal erosion, flooding, and other climate change hazards.
      It will be the first building block of a future technical assistance and investment
      program in the West Africa coastal area.

   •	 The Africa Climate Investment Readiness Partnership is funding a regional
      technical assistance program on Building Climate Resilience of Coastal Areas in
      West Africa, which works with West African countries to design climate-resilient
      integrated coastal management development and investment plans, enhance
      their capacity at the national and regional levels, and improve their investment
      readiness. Participating countries are Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritania, São Tomé
      and Principe, and Togo.

   The World Bank Group is also in dialogue with other partners and donors.




The Way Forward: A Regional and
National Investment Program
WACA is the strategic foundation for the World Bank Group’s long-term engagement
in West Africa’s coastal areas. Its aim is to work with countries to create multiyear,
multicountry coastal management initiatives that will be implemented in several stages,
in collaboration with other development partners. This initiative will lead to the scaling
up of key knowledge and capacity-building activities and help prepare the design and
implementation of priority infrastructure investments.

In support of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
process, the World Bank developed the Africa Climate Business Plan, “Stepping up
Support for Africa’s Climate-Resilient and Low-Carbon Development.” WACA is part
of that plan, which proposes $1 billion in investments and technical assistance to build
coastal zone resilience.




                                  West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)        7
    West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program
    FOR MORE INFORMATION

    Benoit Bosquet
    Practice Manager
    Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice
    bbosquet@worldbank.org

    Dahlia Lotayef                              Peter Kristensen
    Lead Environmental Specialist               Lead Environmental Specialist
    Environment and Natural Resources           Environment and Natural Resources
    Global Practice                             Global Practice
    dlotayef@worldbank.org                      pkristensen@worldbank.org




                         www.worldbank.org/waca




                                                                                    2016

8   West Africa Coastal Areas Management Program (WACA)
