                         101548 v1

Toward Solutions for
Youth Employment:
A 2015 Baseline Report
Overview




            i
Acknowledgements

This report was prepared by a team under the direction of S4YE Coalition Manager Matthew
Hobson. Nicole Goldin was the lead author.

Contributing authors were Veronica Lopez, World Bank; Susana Puerto Gonzalez, International
Labor Organization; Peter Glick with Nelly Mejia and Francisco Perez-Arce,1 Rand Institute; and
Mattias Lundberg, World Bank. Contributing researchers and writers were Angela Jhanji, S4YE
Secretariat, and Maria Andersen.

Country background studies were prepared by consulting and S4YE partner researchers,
including Farzana Munshi (Bangladesh), Silvia Margarita Rubio Jovel (El Salvador), Noura Kamel,
Thomas Chidiac (Tunisia), Mariska van Gaalen, Tendai Pasipanodya, and Christina Tewes-Gradl
(Uganda).

The authors are grateful to the following peer and partner reviewers, whose thoughtful
comments and insights significantly improved the direction and content of the report: Omar
Arias, Valentina Barcucci, Roberta Gatti, Lisa H. Neuberger-Fernandez, Naill O’Higgins, Siddharth
Sharma, Damien Shiels, Heidi Strawson.

Many others have significantly contributed to the development of this report, including
Dominique Airey, Anush Bezhanyan, Raiden C. Dillard, Matthew Edwards, Philip Gunn, Sergio
Iriarte, Nader Kabbani, Delores McLaughlin, Mary Anne Mulligan, James Murray, Lekha
Ragavendran, Safa Razeghi, Jose Romero, Friederike Uta Rother, and Peter Shiras amongst
others.




1 The contribution of Peter Glick, Nelly Mejia and Francisco Perez-Arce was made possible through the generous support of the
  Pardee Initiative for Global Human Progress at the Pardee RAND Graduate School and RAND’s Center for Middle East Public Policy.


                                                                i
Table of Contents

Foreword ............................................................................................................................................   iii

   Youth Employment: A Timely and Strategic Investment .....................................................                                             1
   S4YE’s Strategic Framework and Theory of Change ............................................................                                          6
   A Baseline for Youth Employment ............................................................................................                          8
   The Contextual Baseline .............................................................................................................                 9
   The Evidence and Knowledge Baseline ...................................................................................                              15
   The Inclusion Baseline .................................................................................................................             19
   Toward Solutions for Youth Employment in the Era of Sustainable Development .....                                                                    25
Cited References...............................................................................................................................         28




                                                                              ii
Foreword                                                                           October 2015



On behalf of the Board of Directors, it gives me great pleasure to be able to introduce the first
baseline report of the Solutions for Youth Employment (S4YE) Coalition.

Only a few weeks ago at the United Nations, we witnessed a historic moment when the
international community adopted new goals and targets for achieving sustainable development,
eliminating extreme poverty, and boosting shared prosperity for the world’s population by 2030.

This is a truly exciting moment, and S4YE is delighted to be able to contribute to inspiring and
measuring progress toward meeting some of these goals through this report.

As we look around the world in 2015, a number of evolving trends are likely to have an impact
on youth employment over the next 15 years. Rising inequality, rising social unrest, and rising
levels of movement of people around the world all herald unprecedented times—and call for
unprecedented action.

And as this report shows, these are extraordinary times. We now have a record number of young
people on the planet—1.8 billion, with approximately 85 percent of them living in developing
and emerging economies and in fragile states. While roughly a third of today’s youth—most of
them women—are not in employment, education, or training (NEET), a billion more young people
will enter the job market over the next decade. We also know that the world’s young women
and girls and other groups of youth are too often at a disadvantage in getting an education and
securing a stable livelihood. And hundreds of millions of young people are on the move: seeking
better opportunities in cities or seeking refuge from conflict, war, or disaster. Indeed, the past six
months have seen the largest human movement since the 1940s, and this figure is sure to rise.

The challenge to provide employment opportunities for this number of diverse young people is
enormous, and it is easy to be overwhelmed simply by the scale.

The reward, however, can be even greater if all of the world’s youth find opportunities to realize
their potential.

Knowing this, the international community has made great promises to achieve full and
productive employment for all young people by 2030, and to substantially reduce the number
of NEETs by 2020. This is an incredible promise, and one to which our Coalition is designed to
directly contribute.

As this report shows, our current responses to youth employment issues are disproportionate
and disjointed, and all too often ill informed. Without a renewed sense of purpose and action
from us all, our good intentions outlined in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will
ultimately wither—and a generation will be lost.




                                                  iii
However, this report notes that—for the first time—we have clear evidence that investments in
youth employment pay off. This is important. The report also shows which types of interventions
are beginning to realize larger impacts. Now we need to consolidate this knowledge and increase
resources toward initiatives that show the most impact, and to intensify our learning to even
better inform our practices toward impact and scale.

Fifteen years ago, the international community raised exactly the same concerns—low evidence,
lack of clarity and confidence around interventions, low levels of investments—in other sectors,
such as financial inclusion and social protection. Through an intensive effort of investing in
evidence and using scarce resource wisely, we are now able to say confidently what, why, and
how interventions work in these areas.

We need a similar shift in the youth employment arena and a commitment to innovation and
collaboration across sectors. I believe this report is a fundamental step in helping S4YE and its
partners make this shift.

With the adoption of new global goals, S4YE will pursue its mission in an era of inclusive and
sustainable development—an era marked by bold ambition to eradicate extreme poverty,
defined by universality and a commitment to leave no one behind. And an era in which today’s
young people will become the torchbearers of this transformation and of our collective futures.

Against this backdrop, and with this baseline in hand, S4YE is recommitting itself and calling
others to action toward our goal of seeing 150 million more youth at work. We need you to work
with us too.

Arup Banerji
Chair of the Board of Directors, Solutions for Youth Employment
Senior Director, Social Protection, Labor and Jobs, World Bank




                                                 iv
   Solutions for Youth Employment (S4YE) was launched in October 2014 as a multistakeholder
   Coalition to positively disrupt the youth employment landscape. S4YE is a partnership initiated
   by the World Bank, Plan International, the International Youth Foundation (IYF), Youth Business
   International (YBI), RAND, Accenture, and the International Labour Organization (ILO) with a
   view to contributing to a world where all youth have access to work opportunities.

   The mission of S4YE is to provide leadership and catalytic action and mobilize efforts to
   significantly increase the number of young people engaged in productive work by 2030. It
   seeks to develop innovative solutions through practical research and active engagement with
   public, private and civil stakeholders, to enable solutions for all youth at scale. This inaugural
   report explores how S4YE can find and advance solutions to the challenges of getting all
   youth into productive work.


Youth Employment: A Timely and Strategic Investment
When you think of your first job, you probably remember brimming with energy and optimism.
You were likely excited about the sense of economic independence and empowerment that
came with work, and were dreaming about a bright future. Yet, as we look ahead 15 years and
see economies still struggling to recover from recession and financial collapse, we see that too
many of today’s young people will likely not have such warm reflections. At present, hundreds
of millions of young people are unable to find meaningful work that enables them to support
themselves and their families or contribute to their nation’s prosperity.

Today we have the largest youth generation in human history.2 There are 1.8 billion young people
living on the planet—with approximately 85 percent of them living in developing and emerging
economies and in fragile states. Yet the constraints and potential for young people differ
depending on who they are and where they live.

 100+                                                                                                     “Economists will tell you
                                                                                Male
                                                                                                          that countries, regions,
90–94                                                                           Female                    continents grow faster with
80–84                                                                                                     younger populations. It’s
70–74                                                                                                     a demographic edge and
                                                                                                          advantage—but only if those
60–64
                                                                                                          young people are being
50–54                                                                                                     trained. We need only to
40–44                                                                                                     look at the Middle East and
                                                                                                          North Africa to see that large
30–34
                                                                                                          numbers of young people with
20–24                                                                                                     no jobs and stifled voices can
10–14                                                                                                     fuel instability and disorder. I
                                                                                                          suggest to you that the most
  0–4
                                                                                                          urgent task facing Africa today
         6              4               2              0               2               4       6          and for decades ahead is to
                                                  Percentage                                              create opportunity for this
                                                                                                          next generation.”
FIGURE 1: Global Population Pyramid, 2015
                                                                                                                         —Barack Obama
Source: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 2015.



2 S4YE defines youth as individuals aged 15–29. This report uses the terms “youth” and “young people” interchangeably.


                                                                        1
     In many countries (especially in Africa and South Asia), youth make up nearly a third of the population.
     This creates a window of demographic opportunity similar to the dynamic that contributed to East
     Asia’s so-called miracle of rapid economic growth throughout the 1970s and ’80s.

     Yet in countries where young people make up a smaller percentage of the population than the adult
     population, they face high expectations. An aging population that needs to be supported, fewer
     employment opportunities, and reduced tax revenue raise fundamental questions for governments—
     especially about the role, nature, and utility of public policy interventions for social outcomes.

     Why Youth Unemployment Is Important
“I believe employment and      Unemployment in any form is a drag on an economy and society. It
decent work, particularly      undercuts productivity, spending, and investment, stunting national growth.
for young people, are the
backbone of development.”      It contributes to inequality and spurs social tension. Joblessness and
             —Ban Ki-moon inactivity and the failure to tap into the economic aspirations and resources
                               of young people carry an even higher price. Experience and increasing
     evidence show the significant social and economic costs of youth un- and underemployment
     and economic inactivity on individuals and families, and on present and future national and
     global prosperity and security. Without an income, millions of young people find themselves
     living in poverty. Initial low-paying jobs and delayed entry into the workforce limit lifetime
     earning potential. The inability to find gainful employment limits young people’s income and skill
     development. Unemployment at an early age can negatively affect future earnings and increase
     the likelihood of later joblessness. As prospects dwindle, many face social exclusion, or see their
     emotional, mental, or physical health deteriorate.3

     Young people account for roughly 40 percent of the world’s unemployed and are up to four
     times more likely to be unemployed than adults. The International Labour Organization projects
     that the situation will get worse in most developing and emerging regions. One-third of young
     people worldwide can be described as NEETs—not in education, employment, or training. The
     income of as many as a third of young people who are employed falls below national poverty
     lines. One in four young people in the world cannot find jobs paying more than $1.25 per day, the
     international threshold of extreme poverty.

     What can be done? Experience and evidence increasingly indicate that we already have some of
     the policy and program responses to tackle youth employment now.

     This report, Toward Solutions for Youth Employment, will focus on those supply, demand, and
     intermediation constraints that S4YE is best positioned to help mitigate or areas in which it
     can influence policy change. Moving constraints into policies and opportunities is becoming a
     pressing, but manageable, priority.

     Why Youth Employment Should Be Tackled Now
     When young people are not fully participating in the labor force or are NEETs, governments forgo
     tax revenue and incur the cost of social safety nets, unemployment benefits and insurances,
     and lost productivity. Businesses risk losing a generation of consumers. Social costs are ever

     3 ILO, 1998; Brewer et al. 2004; Mroz and Savage 2001; Bell and Blanchflower 2011; Morsy 2012.


                                                                     2
mounting as well. The Arab Spring and subsequent youth-led uprisings in many countries, along
with the rise of economic insurgency and youth extremism, demand that we explore the links
between economic participation, inequality, and community security, crime, and national fragility
through a lens focused on youth.

What we see is a generation in economic crisis.                                                   “This generation of Arab
                                                                                                  youth are so inspired and
                                                                                                  so capable. They’ve done
Why Young People Are Unemployed                                                                   the impossible politically;
                                                                                                  we need to empower
A number of factors make the jobs challenge more acute among                                      them to do the impossible
youth. Constraints to youth employment may be borne on the                                        economically.”
individual level, result from market or government failure, or be a                     —Queen Rania
symptom of a weak or unsupportive macroeconomic environment.
The financial crisis and global recession of the last decade are among the leading causes,
affecting youth more directly because they hold a disproportionate share of temporary jobs
whose contracts offer less protection. There are other obstacles as well that make it more difficult
for youth to find productive work and fully participate in the labor force. This report will show that
most of the constraints that hinder any worker will affect youth to a greater extent.

Inadequate skills and mismatches between education and skills have emerged as chief concerns.
Surveys have found that across 24 countries in Europe, between 25 percent and 45 percent
                                                                             of the employed are either
TABLE 1: Constraints to Youth Employment                                     overqualified or underqualified
                                                                             for their job; and across 27 low-
                                                               Youth Only or
      Type of Constraint                                        All Workers  and middle-income countries
                                                                             worldwide, less than half of
      Inadequate cognitive, non-cognitive and technical skills       Ya
                                                                             employees were considered well-
          Individual




      Lack of social networks                                        Ya
                                                                             matched.4 In emerging economies
      Household income                                               A       that are progressively more service-
      Psychological biases                                           Ya      based, employers find a workforce
      Distorting labor regulations                                   Ya      population that lacks necessary
 Government Failures




                                                                             skills. Elsewhere, the problem is
      Low bargaining power                                           Ya
    Markets and




                                                                             that many of the unemployed are
      Lack of information about where the jobs are                   Ya
                                                                             highly educated but the market
      Employers lack information about workers                       Ya      demands different competencies or
      Lack of access to capital                                      Ya      more technical or vocational skills.
                       Constraints to business creation and job creation       Ya
                                                                                      Additional factors include a
                       Economic slowdown                                       Ya
          Macro




                                                                                      significant gain in life expectancy
                       Age cohort-size                                         Y
                                                                                      around the world since the new
                       Conflict and violence                                   Ya     millennium—with Africa posting the
Notes: Y=constraint affects only youth; Ya=affects all workers, but youth more than   largest gains, 6 percent since 2000
others; A=affects all workers.                                                        (after increasing only 2 percent over
Source: Adapted from Robalino et al. 2013.                                            the preceding decade).5 Not only


4 ILO. 2014. Sparreboom and Staneva.
5 United Nations World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision.


                                                                           3
      are people living longer, but they are working longer—and without new job creation, there are
      not enough jobs to absorb young entrants to the workforce.

      Moreover, certain segments of the youth population see their prospects limited by additional
      constraints. Young women, young people who live in fragile or conflict-affected environments,
      young people moving to urban areas and living in slums, rural poor, and disabled youth are all
      challenged in unique ways that, unless better understood and addressed, will guarantee that
      global targets relating to shared prosperity and inclusion cannot be realized. A dedicated focus
      on the constraints, opportunities, and knowledge related to these groups of youth will allow for a
      more nuanced and representative response.

      How Young People and Others Are Responding
“I am convinced more than            Increasingly, youth are seeking control of their economic fates with high
ever that any society that           rates of entrepreneurship—though business survival and growth remains
does not succeed in tapping
into the energy and creativity       a challenge for far too many. Today’s young people are ready and willing
of its youth will be left behind.”   (but not necessarily able) to put their ingenuity and resources to work for
                   —Kofi Annan       themselves and their communities.

      Policy makers are increasingly recognizing that systemwide interventions (such as stimulus
      and stabilization packages, education interventions, infrastructure, and so on) do not deliver
      help to young people with sufficient speed or certainty. They are finding, instead, that specific
      vulnerabilities related to youth employment can be dealt with through micropolicy interventions
      with quicker results, and recognizing that public policy should be used to intervene where market
      failures lead to poor social outcomes for young people. Some solutions to the youth employment
      challenge, especially microinterventions aimed at the household unit or individuals, show such
      promise that they demand and justify the greater level of attention accorded to them in recent
      years.

      These realities have brought an invigorated sense of urgency to the youth employment challenge.
      The public and private sectors share a new awareness that getting the global economy on track,
      creating new prosperity, and eliminating extreme poverty will not happen if the downward
      trajectories of youth are not reversed.

      This heightened concern is being met with new national and global commitments to address
      government failures and other environmental or institutional constraints. Nongovernmental,
      corporate and civil society actors are displaying new activism to improve individual capacities
      and help mitigate information and other private sector-oriented market constraints. New targets
      related to youth employment in the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals6 (SDGs)
      reflect this recognition and desire for change: today’s youth will not be able to escape poverty by
      2030 or reach their full potential, if they do not have a means of employment.

      Nonetheless, despite increasing investments in policy and program initiatives and a strengthened
      call to action, the needle on youth employment has to date not moved far or fast enough, and it
      will not budge without a more dedicated and strategic focus.


      6 Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 2015. United Nations.


                                                                       4
Youth Employment in the Sustainable Development Goals

Goal 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all

4.3 By 2030, ensure equal access for all women and men to affordable and quality technical,
vocational and tertiary education, including university

4.4 By 2030, substantially increase the number of youth and adults who have relevant skills,
including technical and vocational skills, for employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship

Goal 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all

8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and
men, including for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of
equal value

8.6 By 2020, substantially reduce the proportion of youth not in employment, education or
training

8.b By 2020, develop and operationalize a global strategy for youth employment and
implement the Global Jobs Pact of the International Labour Organization
S4YE’s Strategic Framework and Theory of Change
S4YE7 was launched in October 2014 as a multistakeholder Coalition to positively disrupt
the youth employment landscape. S4YE is a partnership initiated by the World Bank, Plan
International, the International Youth Foundation (IYF), Youth Business International (YBI), RAND,
Accenture, and the International Labour Organization (ILO) with a view to contributing to a world
where all youth have access to work opportunities.

The mission of S4YE is to provide leadership and catalytic action and mobilize efforts to significantly
increase the number of young people engaged in productive work by 2030. It seeks to develop
innovative solutions through practical research and active engagement with public, private, and civil
society stakeholders to enable solutions for all youth at scale. S4YE combines a pragmatic approach
to identifying solutions for youth employment with an evidence-based advocacy platform. S4YE’s
strategic approach is to link stakeholders from all sectors together, learn more consistently from
each other and from high-quality evidence, and leverage each others’ actions, knowledge, and
resources to increase the number of young people engaged in productive work.

S4YE’s strategic framework                FIGURE 2: S4YE’s Strategic Framework
for action indicates                                                                         IMPACT
how a dedicated and                                                  Access to productive work for 150 million youth by 2030
strategic focus on youth
                                                                                        APPROACH
employment can be
achieved in practice. The
illustration shows how the
S4YE Coalition intends                                      Link                              Learn                             Leverage

to achieve the intended                                                            OUTCOMES 2030
impact.                                           Foster global and regional       Evidence-based use of existing      More and better resources
                                                   coordination to increase         and additional resources for       aligned to scaling up proven
                                                         local impact                   youth employment                     demonstrations



                                                                                   PRIORITIES 2020


                                               Build Partnerships          Expand Robust           Increase Resources        Accelerate Innovation
                                                                           Evidence Base              for Programs


                                                                                  FRONTIER AREAS


                                               Digital Age Impact               Skills Gap            Entrepreneurship              Quality Jobs
                                                                                                      & Self Employment


                                                                                        ENABLERS


                                                    Access to      Youth         Quality       Data       Technology      Shared        Local
                                                    Networks    Participation   Assurance                                Ambition      Projects


7 For more information on the S4YE Coalition, please visit: http://www.s4ye.org.

                                                                    6
                                                                                                                       Productive
                                                                     Job Search                                        work
                                                                    & Acquisition                                      outcomes
                    Government inﬂuencing youth                                                                        for youth:
                                                                                             Enterprise
                    employment:                                                             Development                Self-esteem
                    Policies, Institutions, Laws,                                                                      Portable
                    Access to Resources,                                                                               Skills & Jobs
                    Infrastructure                                                                                     Quality Jobs
                                                                                                Business Growth        Sustainable
                                                                                                  & Expansion          Jobs

  Underlying                                                                  Job
  determinants                                                             Retention
  on entry to                                  Identifying Skills
  the youth                                     Gaps, Remedial
  labor market:                                   Basic Skills

   Education
   Gender                                                                              Nongovernmental Sectors
   Culture                                       Training                              inﬂuencing youth employment:
                                                                                                          p    ent:
   Access                                        & Skills                              Economic Growth, Firms,
   Soft Skills                                 Development                             Investments, Demand for Labor
   Aspirations
   Social Capital



FIGURE 3: S4YE Pathways to Youth Employment
Source: S4YE Strategic Plan 2015–2020.




              S4YE’s theory of change, Pathways to Youth Employment, represents the Coalition’s current
              conceptual thinking on how to provide young people with pathways to economic opportunities
              and employment—and how all stakeholders can work to achieve youth employment at scale. The
              Framework portrays a youth’s journey into productive work. It depicts how underlying conditions
              combine with government and nongovernmental forces and interventions to shape the young
              person’s trajectory. In doing so, it provides an analytical road map to the report. The Framework
              is not intended to be static: while it is both tested and validated throughout the report, it may
              change over time with shifting dynamics and new knowledge.




                                                                               7
A Baseline for Youth Employment
The report is intended to set a baseline for youth employment trends, research and analysis,
actions, and knowledge in line with S4YE’s agenda and comparative advantage. The report
sheds light on the areas that S4YE is best positioned to influence, acknowledging that youth
employment will also be a function of broader demand and growth dynamics that public and
private actors should assess and address. Although a comprehensive analysis of job creation
is beyond the scope of the report, it focuses on the areas of action that S4YE’s partners can
implement and influence to affect youth explicitly.

This report explores the state of play specific to youth employment in 2015 through a three-part
quantitative and analytical baseline, examining context, evidence and knowledge, and inclusion.

•   Because S4YE wants to be able to track progress against a set of youth employment
    indicators in line with new global targets, and against representative investment flows, the
    report lays down a quantitative contextual baseline.
•   Because S4YE wants policies, investments, and initiatives to be more strategic, catalytic, and
    impactful, the report sets an evidence and knowledge baseline to inform further research and
    programmatic strategy.
•   Because S4YE has a vision to advance opportunities for all youth, the report includes an initial
    inclusion baseline for understanding, monitoring, and examining inclusion by first exploring
    gender, conflict and fragility, and spatial dynamics, and considering disability while recognizing
    that other minority groups or segments of youth also have distinct needs worthy of attention.

Importantly, there are links between and among these pieces: An integral part of the inclusion
baseline will draw upon what is seen on key indicators in the contextual baseline. The evidence
baseline is stronger for supply-side interventions, in part due to investment patterns emerging in
the contextual baseline.

The global and regional baselines also draw upon and are illustrated with findings from
background research in four diverse countries—Bangladesh, El Salvador, Tunisia, and Uganda—
to highlight complexities and to help bring macro dynamics and youth employment issues into
closer focus.

S4YE will revisit these baselines periodically—every five years—to benchmark progress and
knowledge over time and to inform its Framework, approach, and priorities.




                                                  8
The Contextual Baseline

   Highlights

   •    Nearly 85 percent of the world’s young people live in lower-income countries and fragile
        states.
   •    Over the next decade, a billion more young people will enter the job market.
   •    Youth are up to four times as likely as adults to be unemployed.*
   •    In 2014, across the globe, about 500 million youth were unemployed, underemployed,
        or working insecure jobs.*
   •    Roughly a third of youth worldwide—621 million—are classified as NEETs, not in
        employment, education or training.*8
   •    In education, boys and young men generally post higher attendance levels across ages
        and regions, except in advanced economies where girls and young women are more
        likely to be attending school. The difference between the sexes is more pronounced in
        the Middle East and North Africa.
   •    Young people are less likely than older workers to find employment in the formal sector,
        where pay and benefits are generally higher and more reliable. A large share of the
        youth population is employed in vulnerable work, often in the informal sector. Young
        women, especially, post very high levels of vulnerable work.
   •    Young adults between 25 and 34 display the highest early-stage entrepreneurial activity
        worldwide, but access to credit is a problem for young entrepreneurs.9
   •    Unemployment levels are up to 10% higher for young women than young men.*
   •    In developing countries, 89% of new work is in the informal sector.
   •    Data on youth cohorts are a premium and are rarely disaggregated within the ‘youth’
        category.*
   *These are baseline facts that S4YE will work to influence over the life of the Coalition.




Youth, by S4YE’s definition (ages 15–29), make up roughly a quarter of the world’s population,
and in many countries, especially in Africa and South Asia, young people make up nearly a third
of the population. Not only do nations in the developing world share high age-dependency
ratios (the ratio of dependents [people younger than 15 or older than 64] to the working-
age population [those aged 15–64]), but they also have large populations under age 15. This
guarantees significant numbers of new entrants to these labor markets over the lifetime of S4YE
(2015–2030).

Countries with high numbers of young people could benefit from a “demographic dividend,” but
only if strategic labor market and other policies and investments in human capital of children and
youth allow for the productive absorption of the growing number of workers. Over the next decade,

8 World Bank, 2013.
9 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. 2015.


                                                                    9
FIGURE 4: Many Countries Have Favorable Age-Dependency Ratios
Source: World Development Indicators, 2010–2014.




FIGURE 5: Many Countries Have Economic Opportunities Because of Their Youth
Source: World Development Indicators, 2010–2014.


                                                   10
a billion more young people will enter the job market—and only 40 percent are expected to be able
to enter jobs that currently exist. The global economy will need to create 600 million jobs over the
next 10 years: that’s 5 million jobs each month simply to keep employment rates constant.10

                22
                20
                18
                16
                14
                12
                10
                    0
                        2008   2009    2010    2011     2012    2013    2014*     2015*    2016*    2017*     2018*


                                SSA ϭ Sub-Saharan Africa                        EAP ϭ East Asia Pacific
                                MNA ϭ Middle East North Africa                  HIC ϭ High-Income Countries
                                ECA ϭ Eastern Europe and Central Asia           SAR ϭ South Asia Region
                                LAC ϭ Latin America and Caribbean

FIGURE 6: Persistent High Youth Unemployment Worldwide
Source: ILO 2015.



The employment situation for a majority of the world’s youth is grim. Unsurprisingly, the
baseline of youth employment outcomes across key employment indicators is low, including
those in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Since the 2007–2008 financial crisis, youth
unemployment and underemployment has reached an apex, and projections indicate the
situation is likely to worsen in many low-income countries. Reflecting a weak baseline for SDG
target 8.5, about 500 million youth were unemployed, inactive, underemployed, or working in
insecure jobs in 2014. Labor force participation data show youth are more economically inactive
than adults, by 14 to 22 percent on average.

30%                                              Across all regions, youth are at least twice as likely
20%                                              as adults to be unemployed, with the biggest gap
10%                                              between youth and non-youth employment in
 0%                                              East Asia, where youth are four times as likely to
         EAP      ECA  LAC   MNA      SAR   SSA
                                                 be unemployed. Unemployment levels among
           Youth: Male   Youth: Female    Adults youth are generally higher for young women than
FIGURE 7: Youth Up to 4x More Likely             young men. The difference is most notable in the
than Adults to Be Unemployed                     Middle East and North Africa, where young female
Source: ILO 2015.
                                                 unemployment is 27 percent for young women and
                                                 17 percent for young men. Looking at spatial data,
rural youth tend to lag behind urban youth on education, but urban youth lag behind rural youth
on employment, though the figures vary by region.




10 World Bank World Development Report. 2013.


                                                                 11
In addition, roughly 621 million                                         60

young people worldwide are NEETs.                                        40
It will be challenging to substantially
                                                                         20
reduce that number (especially
for young women) and meet SDG                                             0
                                                                               EAP       ECA     LAC       MNA        SAR      SSA     OECD
target 8.6.
                                                                                                       Males     Females

Despite improvement in education             FIGURE 8: One Third of All Youth Are Not in
levels, young people—especially              Employment, Education or Training (NEETs)
young women—are working primarily            Sources: WDR 2013.
in the informal sector and in insecure
or self-employment. Agriculture remains the dominant source of youth employment (57 percent
of 15- to 19-year-olds), and a large proportion of youth worldwide are employed in informal, low-
productive, vulnerable (measured by proxy as self-employment) work, with the highest shares
seen in sub-Saharan Africa, followed by South Asia, Middle East and North Africa. Young women,
specifically, are more likely to be in vulnerable or insecure employment; 86–88 percent of young
women are self-employed across these same regions.

However, younger adults 25–34 display the highest early stage entrepreneurial intention and
start-up activity worldwide: 1.6 times that of adults. Though youth (18–24) also display robust
start-up activity as depicted in Figure 9, they lag behind their older peers. All youth find that
access to credit from financial institutions is significantly limited.11 This complements patterns
in the baseline for sectoral participation by youth, which show increasing participation in
entrepreneurial activities in commerce and other ventures as young people age.


                                  35

                                  30
 Percentage of Adult Population




                                  25
         (18–64 years)




                                  20

                                  15

                                  10

                                  5

                                  0
                                       Africa         Asia & Oceania   Latin America &   European Union    Non-European       North America
                                                                         Caribbean                            Union

                                                18–24 years      25–35 years      35–44 years      45–54 years        55–64 years

FIGURE 9: Youth Are More Likely to Be Entrepreneurial
Source: GEM 2014.




11 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2015.


                                                                                 12
Table 2 illustrates the above global data with findings from background research in four diverse
countries—Bangladesh, El Salvador, Tunisia, and Uganda—to highlight complexities and to help
bring macro dynamics and youth employment issues into closer focus.



  TABLE 2: The Contextual Baseline in Four Focus Countries

                  In 2013, the youth unemployment rate was 10.3%, higher than the regional South
                  Asian average (9.45%), but lower than the world average (12.4%).
                  Bangladeshi youth work informally, with more than 95% of youth reporting to work
  Bangladesh      in the informal sector in 2013, of which many work as self-employed (31.7%), or in
                  unpaid family work (11.1%).
                  More than 75% of businesses leaders claimed that a scarcity of skilled young
                  workers was a challenge to hiring youth.
                  El Salvador suffers from by low education rates; 32.8% of El Salvadorian youth
                  between 15 and 18 are not attending school, and dropout rates remain high.
                  In 2013, 17.2% of young Salvadorans, or 307,106 young people, were classified as
  El Salvador
                  “NEETs”—not in employment, education or training.
                  Young Salvadoran women are more than twice as likely to be unemployed as adults;
                  and young men nearly three times.
                  The Tunisian youth unemployment rate stands at 31.2%, double the national adult
                  unemployment rate and higher than the Arab world standard, 29.3%.
                  The duration of Tunisian youth unemployment is concerning—20.1% of youth
                  report being unemployed for 1–2 years, while 37.7% of Tunisian youth have been
  Tunisia
                  without a job for more than two years.
                  Tunisia sees high dropout rates—more than 140,000 drop out of school each year;
                  in 2009, 90% completed primary school, which was higher than the Arab world
                  average (84.6%) but lower than the world average (91.6%).
                  Uganda has the youngest population, with 78% under 30, so the Ugandan young
                  labor force is rapidly growing, having more than doubled in the past decade from
                  4.2 million in 2005–2006 to an estimated 9.5 million in 2015.
  Uganda
                  While youth unemployment is low (5%), most young Ugandans are self-employed or
                  working informally.
                  Nearly half of Ugandans drop out of school before completing their education.



It is important to note the limitations and challenges in measuring and comparing performance
on indicators and youth-development outcomes, especially with regard to disparities among
youth. Comparing youth outcomes is complicated by the fact that there is variety among
countries in how they statistically define youth. Moreover, the capacity for data collection is often
weak in low-income countries. Further, data is not always collected on youth, nor necessarily
disaggregated by age cohorts to allow a youth analysis. Most comparative global datasets are
inadequately disaggregated by multiple factors to allow deeper analysis of the situation of
segments of youth to ensure inclusion. For example, data may be available for youth vs. other
age groups, and for male vs. female, but not necessarily for female youth vs. male youth, or rural
male youth vs. urban male youth. Such limitations underscore the importance of S4YE’s call to
action to improve our collective knowledge, monitoring, and data.

                                                  13
Investment Flows

Generating more and better jobs for young                 Investments in Africa Dominate
people is the ultimate aim of S4YE. There
                                                         1%
are two critical means of achieving this: by        14%
                                                                                  Sub-Saharan Africa
using existing resources more effectively        3%
                                                                                  East Asia Pacific
(through scaling up proven solutions or not                                       Global
                                                                    50%
investing in interventions where evidence on 29%                                  Latin America and
effectiveness is insufficient) and by mobilizing                                  Caribbean

new resources. So how much do we know
                                                                                  Middle East North Africa
                                                   1%                             South Asia
about how and where current resources                    2%
                                                                                  Eastern Europe and
are flowing? For illustrative purposes only,                                      Central Asia
a topline review of two of the leading                       Investments in Supply Side Dominate
international organizations’ portfolio of youth
employment projects was undertaken, using                             15%
information provided by the World Bank and the                                           Capacity Building

ILO, and adopting methodology contained in the                                           Demand
Independent Evaluation Group’s 2012 report.          52%
                                                                                                           Market Clearing
                                                                                             29%
An initial review of spending shows that much of                                                           Other
the money is being spent strategically. Half of the                               3%
                                                                                       1%
                                                                                                           Supply
youth employment portfolio is being
spent in sub-Saharan Africa, where                                   Investments in Skills/Training Dominate

statistical baseline performance on                                                           Business Growth
                                                                      2%
most indicators is low.                                                    14%
                                                                                              Capacity Building

The data further shows that investments                                                       Direct Employment

in youth employment initiatives have                48%                                       Enterprise Development:
                                                                                              Entrepreneurship
been dominated by supply-side                                                    25%
                                                                                              Enterprise Development: SME
interventions, especially those to
                                                                           4%                 Job Search and Acquisition
build skills. Investments in supply-side                            1% 3%1% 2%
                                                                                              Other
projects make up 52 percent of the total
                                                                                              Policy Advice
portfolio, compared with 29 percent on
                                                                                              Skills/Training
the demand side.

On the supply side, the majority of the portfolio (48 percent) is going toward skills and
training interventions, followed by enterprise development: entrepreneurship (4 percent).
On the demand side, a quarter of the portfolio is in direct employment interventions.

Notwithstanding the utility of this proxy baseline to understand current investments, the inability
to include a wider range of public or private donors in the analysis speaks to a need for further
transparency and diligence in foreign assistance and philanthropic reporting and sharing.
Definitions
•   Supply: The sum of the following interventions:             •    Market Clearing: Equals the job search and acquisition
    skills/training, enterprise development (specific to             intervention
    entrepreneurship)                                           •    Capacity Building: The sum of the following
•   Demand: The sum of the following interventions:                  interventions: capacity building, policy advice
    enterprise development (specific to Small and Medium        •    Other: Equals the other intervention
    Enterprises), direct employment and business growth


                                                           14
The Evidence and Knowledge Baseline

   Highlights

   The evidence proves that interventions outlined in the S4YE Pathways to Youth Employment
   can make a difference in the lives of young people.

   •         Skills training can improve youth’s employment prospects.
   •         Entrepreneurship-promotion interventions activate the highest return on productive
             work for young people, especially when combined with access to finances.*
   •         Of all interventions reviewed, those in employment services appear to deliver the lowest
             outcomes. This has implications for further experimentation and direction of new
             program resources.*
   •         Combinations of interventions are important, but we don’t know enough about them
             and certainly not enough about the multiplier effects of combinations of interventions.*
   •         There is a rich and growing base of knowledge on promising practices and innovative
             solutions, but further research and debate is needed to answer the more detailed
             questions, and to bring new questions forward.*
   *These are baseline facts that S4YE will work to influence over the life of the Coalition.




What Empirical Evidence Tells Us
Despite the generally dull picture of youth employment in 2015 painted by the contextual
baseline, there is better news in the evidence baseline: as shown in Figure 10 by the effect size in
standard mean deviation (SMD), the empirical evidence proves that labor market interventions to
advance youth employment can have impact. Empirical evidence shows that youth employment
interventions, especially those that provide skills or entrepreneurship training, or subsidize
employment, yield positive and statistically significant results on labor market outcomes for
participating youth. The effects are more visible on a number of indicators, namely probability of
employment and hours worked. At the same time, though rigorous evaluation results do prove
these investments to be worthwhile, the magnitude of the impact is modest.

       0.5

       0.4

       0.3

       0.2

       0.1

        0
                   Total            Skills Training        Entrepreneurship    Employment       Subsidized   Comprehensive
                                                              Promotion         Services        Employment
    –0.1

                                                                 Standard Mean Deviation

FIGURE 10: Interventions in Youth Employment Work
Source: Authors, based on Kluve et al. forthcoming 2015.

                                                                       15
      The baseline also affirms that creating long-lasting positive changes in labor market outcomes
      of youth seems to take more than the provision of services offered through active labor market
      measures. For example, interventions to promote entrepreneurship show the largest effects on
      employment outcomes and earnings. Similarly, access to finance has proven to be an important
      strategy in reducing barriers, but its impact is sustained only when combined with skills training.
      This proof of impact paves the way for future innovation and scaling of entrepreneurship and
      skills initiatives as S4YE Frontier Areas.

      On the demand side, interventions that combine a reduction of employer’s social security
      contributions with a reduction of the employer’s labor or wage costs also show a positive impact
      on employment.

      The effects from employment services are, on the other hand, generally weaker and deserve
      further experimentation, particularly in developing contexts where the evidence is still scant.

“We all hold the tools to       Rigorous evidence from the Adolescent Girls Initiative (AGI)12 indicates
thinking, drawing, and          that five practices are essential for higher impacts on young women.
building a brilliant future for
our youth. Let’s use them       First, outreach is needed to reach the right target audience, especially
wisely.”                        in environments where young women do not traditionally have
         —Christine Lagarde     opportunities for employment outside the home. Second, it is critical
                                to create the right incentives for the community, participants, training
      providers, and employers. Benefits such as child care, food and transport, literacy training,
      flexible schedules, and other accommodations make programs much more attractive. Third,
      programs will be effective only if they are designed with an understanding of and in response to
      the local labor market and the most promising training opportunities, including non-traditional
      jobs. This includes knowing where workers are in demand, and where self-employment will be
      more successful than traditional employment. Fourth, supplementary training in areas such as
      business and life skills can strengthen the resilience of program participants. Finally, programs
      can have catalytic impact if they help build social and financial capital by helping participants to
      open savings accounts and build financial skills, and by providing incentives to save and invest.

      The evidence for success is generally weaker in the area of promoting youth employment in
      fragile and conflict-affected states. Still, there are a few promising signs. Evidence suggests that
      higher wages and employment can reduce materially motivated crime and violence. Employment
      probably helps reduce some types of violence. Public works and employment generation can
      help modestly in terms of peace and job creation and should be examined further. Finally,
      rehabilitation programs can work for high-risk young men, resulting in their smooth entry into the
      labor market. However, there are few solutions that stand out in a review of the evidence base.
      Once again, the need for quality evidence is paramount.

      While the experimental evidence base specific to urban or rural youth employment interventions
      is still weak, available empirics do point toward the importance of a number of interventions if we



      12 For information on the AGI’s South-South learning exchanges, see http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/adolescent-girls-
         initiative; for detailed analysis of the AGI Nepal project, see Chakravarty et al. 2015; for detailed analysis on the AGI Liberia project,
         see Adoho et al. 2014; for detailed analysis on the AGI Jordan project, see Groh et al. 2012.


                                                                           16
are to provide support. These include clarity of land rights and access for rural youth; the need
for soft skills and market-relevant education and training for urban youth; and access to capital
and entrepreneurial know-how for young entrepreneurs in both rural and urban settings.

However, much more remains to be learned. Many programs are too expensive to scale up with
public funds to all those who might benefit from them. It may be, as noted earlier, that although
comprehensive programs outperform single-intervention programs, the subset of program
attributes or services that really make a difference is yet to be delineated. The next step is to look
inside these multifaceted programs with heterogeneous results to understand the impact of
each component. The evidence so far provides limited information on long-term effects of youth
employment interventions. Thus it is particularly important to assess cost-effectiveness and explore
opportunities to replicate and scale up solutions that work. Many questions remain unanswered.

What We Know—and Don’t Know
A great deal of progress has been made in recent years toward understanding the complexities
of youth employment and how to promote it, yet many important gaps remain. The baseline
review of knowledge reveals that while we do understand how best to move forward in some
areas, there is much more to learn. Similarly, as some questions are answered, more arise.

We know that labor markets are shifting, that globalization is              “These young people are, in
expanding value chains, and that employers are demanding different          a way, the greatest natural
                                                                            resource the [African]
sets of competencies and skills than today’s youth are being taught.        continent has. It is therefore
And while we know that work in much of the global economy is                essential to help them
becoming more flexible and less permanent, we do not yet know how           realize their potential.”
these trends will affect the skills that young people will need in the                      —Mo Ibrahim
new labor market, or the quality of the jobs to which they will have
access.

We know that a country needs certain fundamentals to provide successful youth transitions to
productive work. These include macroeconomic stability, a functioning infrastructure, a working
financial system, appropriate labor market and regulatory policies, and public sector capacity.
But we do not yet understand the precise institutional and policy factors that allow young people
in some countries to thrive, while others suffer. And we are just learning what institutional and
policy reforms can improve outcomes for youth in contexts of low economic growth or weak
government capacity.

Recent research helps us understand the skills that are needed for work. These include not only
technical skills, but also “soft” or behavioral skills. We have learned about the need to involve
employers closely in training to ensure that the skills being provided are relevant to the labor
market. But we do not yet know the most effective means to teach these skills or the mechanisms
to engage employers in skills development, how to validate or signal to potential employers
the skills obtained (especially in informal apprenticeships), or the most effective practices for
nontraditional mechanisms to prepare young people for work.




                                                  17
We know that youths’—and often their families’—aspirations, behaviors, and expectations
impact their educational and occupational choices, but we do not yet know the right incentives
to mitigate stigma, change youth attitudes, or encourage employers to take what is perceived as
more risk in recruiting and hiring young (usually entry-level) workers.

We have learned that many young people across the world are enthusiastic about starting their
own businesses, but they face a number of disadvantages. They lack savings, collateral for loans,
and experience, and we do not yet know how best to help their enterprises to survive and grow.
We know that entrepreneurship training benefits entrepreneurs starting up, but we do not know
if it yields definitive benefits even to youth who eventually enter wage employment. And we don’t
know whether large-scale promotion of youth entrepreneurs could have negative impacts on
markets by driving down prices and returns.

We know that employment placement services can improve and facilitate job search and improve
matches, overcoming information failures. And, while we also know that public employment
services currently tend to be underfunded and poorly utilized, we do not yet know what it means
if information on jobs (for young people) and on candidates (for employers) is lacking. We need
to learn how best to leverage the use of information technology—Internet, texting—to scale up
and improve employment services, and how to expand the networks of youth to help them learn
about opportunities.

And, while we know the demographics and statistics demand a large-scale approach, we do not
yet know how to effectively address institutional and resource constraints to youth employment
and which specific practices to employ to sustain, adopt, and scale up successful youth
employment programs, both within nations in a variety of contexts and internationally.
The Inclusion Baseline

  Highlights

  Some cohorts of youth are falling behind on key indicators and demand additional focus
  if we are to ensure that all young people have access to work opportunities that empower
  them to escape poverty and fulfill their potential.

  •    Informality, and associated insecure, unpaid, or low-wage jobs and potentially dangerous
       or exploitive work are a common dynamic across varying contexts, typically faced by
       economically excluded youth. At the same time, informality can yield creativity, spur
       innovation, and create markets of opportunity where youth may be uniquely positioned
       to thrive.*
  •    The majority of working young women are employed in the informal sector in family
       businesses or on family farms.
  •    Success in projects working with women may be attributed partially to the sequencing of
       interventions.*
  •    Young women more often need nuanced support, but young men may face distinct
       challenges that warrant further attention.
  •    Youth in cities are more likely to work in services, manufacturing, or trade (export/import).
  •    Rural youth are more likely to be engaged in agriculture and fisheries, forestry,
       handicrafts, small-scale retail (microenterprise), or cottage industry.
  •    70% of the youth in sub-Saharan Africa and south Asia live in rural areas.
  •    Youth are 40% more likely than adults to migrate to urban area.
  *These are baseline facts that S4YE will work to influence over the life of the Coalition.




While young people in lower-income countries commonly face a difficult path toward economic
empowerment, each is likely to experience different challenges—and the path is rockier for some
youth than others.

S4YE has a vision to create opportunity for all youth. This report addresses the inclusivity
dynamics that affect larger numbers of youth based on gender, conflict and fragility, and rural
or urban location. But S4YE recognizes that full inclusion means paying closer attention to other
minority and marginalized groups as well.

Informality, and associated insecure, unpaid or low wage, potentially dangerous or exploitive
work is a common dynamic across varying contexts and typically faced by economically excluded
youth. At the same time, informality can yield creativity, spur innovation, and create markets of
opportunity that youth may be uniquely positioned to fill.




                                                                   19
Gender
Young women and young men have different employment experiences, and arguably those
differences are more acute in the developing world. Young women are at an inherent
disadvantage, as they are frequently kept out of school and subsequently unemployed, are
NEETs, or are in insecure employment.

For young women, constraints such as household responsibilities, lack of access to education
and health services, social norms, and lack of public safety lead to more isolation and fewer
chances to develop the aspirations, skills, networks, and confidence needed to find productive
employment. Although countries have made great progress in advancing the education of
young women (who can outnumber men in tertiary education), young women are still at a
great disadvantage in the labor market. Young women often lack the necessary education and
skills for many jobs; as a result, they engage in low-productivity work that affords flexible time
commitments. These jobs pay less and tend not to offer benefits such as health care.

The majority of working young women are employed in the informal sector, in family businesses,
or on the family farm. These jobs have low barriers to entry, and provide great opportunities for
women who lack adequate training or the connections needed to find formal employment. Young
women often engage in unpaid work, such as domestic work and household enterprises, as well
as lower-paying informal work, all of which lack benefits. Early marriage stifles education, and many
young women must find care for their children and meet other obligations if they are to participate
in the labor force. In developing countries, between 2000 and 2010, roughly one-third of women
were married before the age of 18.13 The alternative to economic advancement—early family
formation—reduces opportunities and welfare later in life, perpetuating the cycle of vulnerability.

Successful programs to enhance livelihood opportunities for young women have also had some
success in promoting other outcomes, such as delaying childbearing. These programs are
generally comprehensive, combining life skills and technical or business skills; other evidence
suggests that life skills alone are what matter, or access to capital and physical assets. Several
projects indicate there is cause for optimism about lessons learned from interventions with
young women. For example, the ELA program14 in Uganda saw that livelihood and life-skills
training for young women resulted in positive impacts on income and health. The AGEI job-
training and placement program in Nepal had positive results, as participants were more likely to
work more hours, gain employment in various trades, and, on average, saw a significant earnings
increase. The EPAG15 program in Liberia saw that women who received business training were
twice as likely to gain employment, compared with those who received vocational training.
Success in these projects may be attributed partially to the sequencing of activities, where
financial support is provided only after the young women are motivated and have a supportive
environment to engage in an income-generating activity.

There are indications that actors need to better understand the local labor market in order to
identify the most promising training opportunities for young women, including nontraditional
jobs. This includes knowing where the young women workers will be in demand, and where
13 UNFPA 2014.
14 Bandiera et al. 2013.
15 See Adoho et al. 2014.


                                                 20
self-employment might be more successful. Building social and financial capital, by opening savings
accounts, building financial skills, and providing incentives to save and invest is critically important.

Arguably inadequate attention and research has traditionally been paid to the distinct
employment challenges faced by young men, especially in regions where they may be at a
masked disadvantage. For young men, the struggle to find productive employment is inextricably
linked to the process of establishing identity and independence. Young men also often face a
different set of livelihood challenges in the face of differing societal expectations: masculinity and
gender norms, responsibilities (often including military service), higher likelihood of engaging in
hazardous work, and more exposure to crime and violence and illicit economic activities.

In addition to living in what is often an all-around hostile and rights-abusive environment, LGBT
youth in the developing world commonly face fear, discrimination, and outright exclusion in
education, getting a job, and advancing in the workplace.

Like many of their male peers, disadvantaged young women around the world want to participate
in programs that enhance their economic empowerment. They want to overcome the barriers to
achieving their economic goals, including their lack of skills, insufficient financial and social assets,
the depredations of conflict, and social and gender norms. But evidence has shown that unless
programs are tailored to their distinct needs, they will not participate—nor will the programs
have the desired impact. Recent research has yielded a number of lessons, but much remains
unanswered, especially in terms of male deficits, needs, and interventions. In the long run, the
institutional and structural constraints, as well as norms and culture that limit young people’s
opportunities for employment will need to be addressed not only to increase their earnings, but
also to unleash their entrepreneurial potential.

Conflict-Affected and Fragile States
In general, the populations of fragile states are young, and half of the world’s youngest countries
are fragile. Globally, about 1.5 billion people live in areas that are conflict-afflicted or fragile. In
these places, youth face unique constraints. The jobs challenge in fragile and conflict states is
threefold: to prepare youth for work, to create jobs and generate work opportunities, and—
because work is more likely to be in the informal sector—to boost the productivity of activities in
which the youth are engaged.

Young people are often disproportionately affected by conflict and fragility. Conflict, especially
armed conflict, and violence lead to displacement, breakdown of systems, and weakened
infrastructure that cause many young people to miss developmental milestones, especially around
education. Roughly half the world’s out-of-school children and youth are in conflict-affected
environments. At the same time, globally, unemployed young people are at a particular risk for
turning to violence, crime, gangs, and rebel movements to compensate for the absence of voice,
self-esteem, and belonging that a job might otherwise provide. Among youth ages 10 to 29, an
estimated 200,000 homicides occur globally every year, and more than 80 percent of the cases
involve a male victim. When surveyed by the World Health Organization, 53 percent of countries
reported having a national policy or action plan to prevent youth violence.16 But although youth


16 WHO 2014.


                                                   21
unemployment and the associated feelings of exclusion or lack of value may contribute to
violence, there is no mechanistic connection between large youth populations and violence.

Without education and skills, youth have a harder time getting a job. In Libya, for example, the
ratio of employment among the total population to that among youth was about 2. That is,
young people were half as likely to be employed as someone chosen randomly from the general
population. Sometime around 2010, this ratio increased to nearly 2.5. This preceded the civil war
that began in Benghazi in February 2011.

Job creation insufficient to absorb young workers is not unique to fragile and conflict-affected
states. But in these countries, private sector investments are comparatively low and thus the
demand-side challenge is especially acute. It is important for policy makers to consider how to
encourage investments in fragile states. Governments need to identify and alleviate constraints
that drive conflict and instability, such as weak institutions regarding land rights, for example,
which are a major restraint on private investment. An even greater constraint against private
investment is lack of access to electricity: 70 percent of respondents to a survey of private sector
entities cited poor access to electricity as the main reason for not investing, compared with the
55 percent who cited political instability. Moreover, in encouraging private investment, policy
makers must often balance trade-offs between economic growth and job creation, and between
the urgent short-run needs of stabilization versus those actions and investments needed for
medium and longer-run development objectives.

Without enough private sector investment in fragile states to generate jobs, the majority of
economic activity occurs in the less productive informal sector, which is also where most youth
work. Not enough empirically evaluated interventions have succeeded in improving both the
employment opportunities and productivity of youth in fragile environments. More rigorous
research is needed.

Rural and Urban Settings
Rural and urban youth face different challenges and likely have different prospects in the world of
work. Roughly 70 percent of sub-Saharan African (particularly those in the Horn and the Sahel) and
South Asian youth live in rural regions, and half of the youth labor force works in agriculture, making
these regions the greatest proportions of rural youth, globally. At the same, these regions are also
experiencing the global trend toward rapid urbanization and migration, especially among youth.

Today, more people live in urban areas than in rural areas, with 54 percent of the world’s
population residing in urban areas in 2014. In contrast to the Americas and Europe, where
between 82 and 73 percent of the population lives in cities, Africa and Asia remain mostly rural,
with 40 and 48 percent of their populations, respectively, living in urban areas. But all regions
are expected to urbanize further over the coming decades. Africa and Asia are urbanizing faster
than the rest of the world and are projected to become 56 and 64 percent urban, respectively,
by 2050. Overall, the United Nations expects continuing population growth and urbanization to
add 2.5 billion people to the world’s urban population by 2050,17 with nearly 90 percent of the
increase concentrated in Asia and Africa.


17 United Nations World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision.


                                                                     22
From education to infrastructure, governance, and access to services and technology, youth in
different settings have varied experiences with these and other factors. In terms of education and
skills training, for example, rural youth are usually at a disadvantage compared with urban youth,
yet urban youth tend to have higher rates of un- and underemployment and likely face higher
degrees of all-around informality in their lives and work. In Ethiopia, for example, the urban youth
unemployment rate was 37 percent, while the total unemployment rate was just 8 percent.18
Similarly, cultural, ethnic, and social norms are likely to vary between communities, creating
special considerations, especially for young women, in finding economic opportunities. In Tunisia,
less than one in five rural women are employed, while nearly 40 percent of urban women have a
job. And both rural and urban youth are likely to confront distinct health and security risks that
could hinder their ability to obtain work or be successful in the workplace.

                            Rural                                    The structure of rural and urban
100%
                                                                     economies also tends to differ greatly;
                                                                     as such, youth’s opportunities will vary
                                                          Informal
 50%
                                                                     in different sectors, requiring different
                                                          Formal
                                                                     resources and rights, competencies and
  0%
         EAP         LAC     MNA       SAR       SSA
                                                                     skills. Youth in cities, for example, are more
                                                                     likely to work in services, manufacturing,
                            Urban                                    or trade (export/import). Rural youth,
100%
                                                                     on the other hand, are more likely to
                                                          Informal   be engaged in agriculture and fishery,
 50%
                                                          Formal
                                                                     forestry, handicrafts, small-scale retail
                                                                     (microenterprise), or cottage industry.
  0%
         EAP         LAC     MNA       SAR       SSA
                                                                     Though it manifests differently in urban
                                                                     vs. rural settings, informality in work is a
FIGURE 11a and 11b: Informality Dominates
in Both Rural and Urban Settings                                     dynamic shared by both urban and rural
                                                                     youth.
Source: I2D2, World Bank.

The concentration of people, business, government, and information creates distinct opportunities
for urban youth, while endless demand and rising crop and commodity prices create profitable
opportunities for rural youth to engage in agriculture. However, land scarcity and weak or lacking
land rights, are hindering youth from engaging in agriculture; and lack of access to loans and
leases also prevent youth from obtaining their own land. Even though agriculture accounts for
59 percent of total employment opportunities in Africa and 54 percent in Asia, youth are staying
away from agriculture for reasons such as lacking land rights, stigma, lack of finance, irrelevant
education, fear of market shock and aversion to risk, or inabilities to penetrate supply chains.

While there is no doubt economic dynamism afforded by the density in cities, young people may
not be poised to capitalize on innovative and inclusive potential that the concentration of people,
ideas, and commerce can bring. Although they may have better digital and entrepreneurship
opportunities, urban youth face unique challenges in underemployment, inadequate education,
crime and violence, migration, and risky work in the informal sector. In developing countries,
85 percent of new work is in the informal sector. Two of every three Africans work in the less
productive, low-wage, informal sector. Safety is a big issue for young city dwellers: A UN-Habitat

18 See Elder et. al. 2015 and Urdal and Hoelscher 2009.


                                                            23
study found that on average, worldwide, only one in four urban youth feel safe. Data show high
rates of migration of youth, with UNICEF reporting that roughly 17 percent of youth, ages 10 to
24, are migrants. Data from 29 developing countries found that youth are 40 percent more likely
than adults to migrate to urban areas. Young urban migrants are exposed to violence and health
risks, as well as high economic costs.19

While spatial dynamics in youth employment are a relatively as yet underresearched and
underevaluated area with weak empirical evidence, there are signs of promising practices. For
example, conveying land rights and ownership opportunities to rural youth can encourage them
to engage and invest in value-added agriculture. The STRYDE program in Eastern Africa and the
World Bank’s Young Rural Entrepreneurs program in Colombia both saw positive impacts on
employability of both rural and urban youth participating in business and skills-building programs
designed to meet their specific needs and immediate market demand. Similarly, there are signs
that rural-urban migration can be lessened if improvements in infrastructure, new technology,
and information systems can better connect youth to urban opportunities without incentivizing
them to migrate. One poll of youth found that 78 percent of young people were less likely to
migrate to urban areas if there were more opportunities in rural areas.

Table 3 illustrates the above with findings from background research in four diverse countries—
Bangladesh, El Salvador, Tunisia, and Uganda—to highlight complexities and to help bring youth
employment issues into closer focus.


  TABLE 3: The Inclusion Baseline in Four Focus Countries

                       80% of young women are at home and not in the labor force. Two-thirds of young
                       women are NEET, and two-thirds of school dropouts are women.
  Bangladesh
                       36% of urban youth and 42% of rural youth are NEET.
                       25% of young women who are working are employed in agriculture.
                       Inactivity rates among young men rose by 20% between 2007 and 2013. About
                       66% of young men cited studying as reason for their inactivity, while 73% of young
                       women said that domestic and household work was keeping them from jobs.
  El Salvador
                       61% live in urban areas, while 39% live in rural areas.
                       The unemployment rate among young men is lower in rural areas than in urban
                       areas; the reverse trend holds true for young women.
                       37% of young men and 38% of young women have been without work for more
                       than two years.
                       Less than one in five women (18.5%) in rural areas are employed, while 40% of
  Tunisia              urban women have jobs.
                       Two out of five rural youth are inactive, while one in three urban youth are inactive.
                       Over 80% of inactive rural youth and 57% of urban youth have not completed
                       secondary school.
                       Unemployment is higher for young women (71%) than young men (55%).
  Uganda               Unemployment in higher in rural areas (66%) than in urban areas (54%).
                       Most young employed youth work in agriculture and fishery (58%).


19 See MacArther 2014, UNHabitat 2013, Cortina et al. 2014.


                                                              24
Toward Solutions for Youth Employment
in the Era of Sustainable Development
While this report shows many interesting things, the real test of progress for the S4YE Coalition
will come in 2020 when we reassess the findings and compare how our knowledge and evidence
has been built over time.

Right now, the prospects for too many young people to be engaged in productive work are
dim. For a 15-year-old girl in Uganda, the underlying determinants that shape her future are
stacked against her—weak education completion rates, limited cultural acceptance of her as
an equal in the workplace, and restricted access to financial services. The policy environment is
not conducive to her informal enterprise formalizing and flourishing, and entrepreneurship is
constrained. There is very little predictability about the informal sector, or the agricultural basis
on which her livelihood depends. Her sources of income are vulnerable. And if this girl happens
to live in the more conflict-affected and fragile north of her country, we must assume (because
we have little available knowledge of the situation) that she will have even less ability to make
informed decisions.

Right now, the prospects for a 15-year-old Chinese boy who has just moved from a rural area
to Shanghai are equally as concerning. He has likely arrived without enough money for housing
and is forced to live in a slum on the outskirts of the city. It is likely that he doesn’t have the
requisite skills or training to get a job in the city—he probably worked in agriculture, may not
have completed secondary education, and he doesn’t have the language or ‘soft’ skills to work in
a customer service job. He resorts to unregulated informal work where he is forced to work long
hours, in an unsafe environment for little compensation—and in fear he could lose even this job
at any time. Then he does. And, unable to face his family by returning home a “failure,” he might
feel he has no other choice but to join a gang or engage in illicit activities— trafficking of people,
drugs, weapons—for money.

Despite the dire situations of this boy and girl, early signs show promise about what we can do to
maximize their chances of changing their trajectories. The challenge to us is this: Will a 15-year-
old girl in Uganda, or a 15-year-old boy in China have better opportunities and chances for a
smoother transition into employment in 2020? What does this baseline tell us about what we
can do to get this girl and boy into a position where they can make more effective and informed
decisions? And what does the baseline tell us about what the international community needs to
do to facilitate that?

Unsurprisingly, it tells us that we need to act now. We need to act fast. And we need to do more
together.

The international community has made great promises to achieve full and productive
employment for all young people by 2030, and to substantially reduce the number of NEETs
by 2020. This is an incredible challenge, but one the S4YE Coalition is designed to meet head-
on. The findings from this report indicate that if we act on proven interventions, there will be a
positive impact. This is necessary, but not sufficient. The baseline also indicates that there is a
genuine lack of quality evidence and information about what works, and why. S4YE’s raison d’être
is to build evidence to make informed strategic decisions. We know there is a lot to work with,

                                                  25
    but we need to consolidate and curate what is there to enrich the current knowledge base. The
    four country background studies affirm many patterns, but illustrate the need to continue to dig
    deeper to refine our global learning for application in varying national contexts.

    This report confirms that if we are to have a positive impact on young peoples’ lives in a timely
    and dynamic way within the span of a generation, S4YE needs to:




                                Link                   Learn                     Leverage


    •   Link public, private, and civil sectors to integrate lessons learned, identify effective solutions,
        and accelerate impact on the ground through cross-sector collaboration and innovation.
    •   Learn more and better by pursuing a compelling learning agenda, both by collecting and
        disseminating knowledge across the broad youth employment landscape, and through a
        targeted portfolio of high-impact initiatives. S4YE will generate and share open knowledge
        and data, as well as related practical insights across the globe.
    •   Leverage knowledge and partners to catalyze the promotion of public, private, and civil
        sector innovations and operations that scale up promising youth employment practices. S4YE
        needs to leverage new resources and innovative investment tools for youth employment—
        and do so swiftly to stem the tide of the 500 million unemployed young people in the world
        today. This means more resources, used more strategically, with targeted deployment. S4YE
        will promote greater transparency on resource allocations, so investments can be reoriented
        more quickly and more effectively based on robust evidence that an intervention will work.

      S4YE’s success will likely be limited unless this effort is brought forward not only for youth,
      but with youth as well. Young people know best the opportunities and challenges they face in
      entering and succeeding in the workplace or in starting a venture on their own. Surveys show
      that young people feel underserved and underprepared by most public and some private
                               education and training systems. If we involve young people and seek their
“Let us make our future now,   opinions in crafting policies and programs, the end products are likely
and let us make our dreams     to be more responsive to their needs and interests. To this end, S4YE
tomorrow’s reality.”           is committed to ensuring active and meaningful participation of young
          —Malala Yousafzai    people in all S4YE activities.

    Furthermore, S4YE is recommitting itself and looking to others to:




                    Digital Age Impact    Skills Gap         Entrepreneurship      Quality Jobs
                                                             & Self Employment



    •   Leverage improvements in technology that are empowering people to learn in new ways,
        improving training effectiveness and scalability to respond and adapt to the new employment
        trends of the digital age


                                                        26
•   Play a constructive role in ensuring that the supply side of training is fit for purpose, and
    ensure that curricula developed to teach skills meet the needs of young people and their
    future employers
•   Identify good practices in entrepreneurship development, provide additional support to
    those areas where there is a lack of evidence or partnerships, and encourage the supply of
    appropriately skilled young people who can drive growth and sustainable self-employment
    forward
•   Understand the complex mix of variables that determine the search, acquisition, and
    retention of quality jobs by young people, which are directly related to an individual’s
    aspirations and self-esteem as well as the demand for jobs from private sector actors.

Success, sustainability, and scale in all these pursuits will not be possible without collaboration
involving government and public institutions at all levels (regional, national, municipal, local) to
strengthen capacity and policies that foster an environment to enable growth and allow proven
interventions to succeed at a greater scale. S4YE stands ready to support the development of
evidence-based strategies to promote employment for all young people.

Recognizing the development and growth dividend opportunity in today’s young generation,
these baselines—context, evidence and knowledge, inclusion—signal the road ahead. Over
the next 15 years, S4YE is on a mission to increase the number of young people engaged in
productive work in a world where all youth have access to job opportunities that empower
them to escape extreme poverty, thus boosting shared prosperity worldwide. With the adoption
of new global goals, S4YE will be pursuing its mission in an era of inclusive and sustainable
development—an era marked by bold ambition to eradicate extreme poverty, defined by
universality and a commitment to leave no one behind. And an era in which today’s youth
become the torchbearers of this transformation and our collective futures.

You can find S4YE online at http://www.s4ye.org.

Together we can continue to advance solutions for youth employment.
Cited References

For complete list of references, please see the report.
Adoho, F., S. Chakravarty, D. T. J. Korkoyah, M. Lundberg, and A. Tasneem. 2014. “The impact of an
adolescent girls employment program: the EPAG project in Liberia.” Policy Research Working Paper 6832,
World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Adolescent Girls Initiative (AGI). 2015. “The Role of Skills Training for Youth Employment in Nepal: An Impact
Evaluation of the Employment Fund.” Result Series, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Bandiera, O., N. Buehren, R. Burgess, M. Goldstein, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman. 2013. “Empowering
adolescent girls in Uganda.” Africa Region Gender Practice Policy Brief 4, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Bell, D.N.F., and D.G. Blanch flower. 2011. “Young People and the Great Recession.” IZA Discussion Paper
Series 5674, Bonn, Germany. 
Brewer, Laura. 2004. “Youth at risk: the role of skills development in facilitating the transition to work.” Skills
Working Paper 19, InFocus Programme on Skills, Knowledge and Employability, International Labour Office,
Geneva, Switzerland. 
Cortina, J., P. Taran, J. Elle, and A. Raphael. 2014. “Migration and Youth: Challenges and Opportunities.”
Global Migration Group, United Nations, New York, NY.
Elder, S., Hein de Haas, M. Principi, and K. Schewel. 2015. “Youth and rural development: Evidence from
25 school-to-work transition surveys.” Work4Youth Publication Series 29, International Labour Office,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Groh, K.M., N. Krishnan, D. McKenzie,  and T. Vishwanath. 2012.  “Soft Skills or Hard Case? The impact of
training and wage subsidy programs on female youth employment in Jordan. “ Policy Research Working
Paper 6141, World Bank, Washington, DC.
ILO. 1998. World Employment Report, 1998–99. World of Work: The Magazine of ILO, International Labour
Office, Geneva, Switzerland. 
ILO. 2014. Global Employment Trends 2014. International Labour Office, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). 2012. “Youth Employment Programs: An Evaluation of World Bank and
IFC Support.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kluve, J., S. Puerto, D. Robalino, J. Romero, F. Rother, J. Stöterau, F. Weidenkaff, and M. Witte. 2015,
forthcoming. “Interventions to Improve the Labour Market Outcomes of Youth: A Systematic Review of
Training, Entrepreneurship Promotion, Employment Services, and Subsidized Employment Interventions.”
McArther, J.W. 2014. “Pushing the Employment Frontiers for Africa’s Rural and Urban Youth.” Brookings,
Institution, Washington, DC.
Morsy, H. 2012. “Scarred Generation.” Finance and Development 49 (1): 15–17. International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC. 
Mroz and Savage 2001; Bell and Blanchflower 2011; Morsy 2012.
Mroz, T.A., and T.H. Savage. 2004. “The Long-Term Effects of Youth Unemployment.” Department of
Economics, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, NC. 
Robalino, D., D. Margolis, F. Rother, D. Newhouse, and M. Lundberg. 2013. “Youth Employment: A Human
Development Agenda for the Next Decade.” Social Protection and Labor Discussion Papers, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Schott, T., P. Kew, and M. Cheraghi. 2015. “Future Potential: A GEM Perspective on Youth
Entrepreneurship.” GEM Global Youth Report, Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, London.




                                                          28
Sparreboom, T., and A. Staneva. 2014. “Is Education the Solution to Decent Work for Youth in Developing
Economies.” Work4Youth Publication Series 23 International Labour Organization, Geneva.
UNFPA 2014. “The Power of 1.8 Billion: Adolescents, Youth, and the Transformation of the Future.” The State
of the World Report 2014. UNFPA, United Nations, New York, NY.
United Nations. 2015. “World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision.” Economic and Social Affairs, United
Nations, New York, NY.
United  Nations. 2015. “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.” United
Nations, New York, NY.
UN-Habitat. 2013. “State of Urban Youth Report 2012–2013: Youth in the Prosperity of Cities.” UN-Habitat,
Nairobi.
Urdal, H., and K. Hoelscher. 2009. “Urban Youth Bulges and Social Disorder: An Empirical Study of Asian
and Sub-Saharan African Cities.” Policy Research Working Paper 5110, World Bank, Washington, DC.
WHO. 2014. “Global status report on violence prevention.” World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
World Bank. 2013. World Development Report 2013: Jobs. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
World Urbanization Prospects. 2014. “World Urbanization Prospects 2014 Revision.” United Nations, New
York, NY.




                                                    29
s4ye.org
