                                       101699
Openness in Trade and Investment:
Putting the Debate in Indonesia’s
Development Context
Executive Summary for Policy Note on
Openness, Growth, and Productivity
THE WORLD BANK OFFICE JAKARTA

Indonesia Stock Exchange Building, Tower II/12-13th Fl.
Jl. Jend. Sudirman Kav. 52-53
Jakarta 12910
Tel: (6221) 5299-3000
Fax: (6221) 5299-3111

Printed in April 2015
Cover photograph was taken by and copyright © of Hasbi Akhir. The remaining
photographs were taken by World Bank staff, Josh Estey and Ed Wray, and are copyright
© of the World Bank. All rights reserved.

Policy Note on Openness, Growth, and Productivity in Indonesia’s Development Agenda is
a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
The World Bank. The ndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
do not necessarily reect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal
status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

For further information about this document please contact Sjamsu Rahardja
(srahardja@worldbank.org)
Openness in Trade and Investment:
Putting the Debate in Indonesia’s
Development Context
Executive Summary for Policy Note on
Openness, Growth, and Productivity

Author: Sjamsu Rahardja
Executive Summary




         Acknowledgement


             This report was prepared by a team consisting Sjamsu Rahardja (task team
             leader, GTCDR), Gonzalo J. Varela (GTCDR), Fitria Fitrani (GMFDR), Leonardo
             Iacovone (GTCDR), Beata Javorcik (LCRCE), Moekti P. Soejachmoen (Mandiri
             Institute), and Victor Duggan (OECD).

             The team received valuable guidance from James A. Brumby (GGODR),
             Ndiame Diop (GMFDR), Shubham Chaudhuri (GMFDR), Sudhir Shetty
             (EAPCE), Stefan G. Koeberle (OPSOR), Tatiana Nenova (EACIF), Mona E.
             Haddad (GTCDR), and Rodrigo A. Chaves (EACIF). The team also received
             valuable materials and inputs from Enrique Blanco Armas (GMFDR),
             Enrique Aldaz-Caroll (GMFDR), Brasukra G. Sudjana (GTCDR), Maria Monica
             Wihardja (GTCDR), Peter K. Milne (GMFDR) Henry Sandee (GTCDR), M. Adhi
             Dipo (GTCDR), and Nanda Nurridzki (GTCDR). The team also thank Ashley
             Taylor (GMFDR) and Thomas Farole (GCJDR) for their comments.




ii
                                                                       Table of Contents




Table of Contents


Acknowledgement                                                        ii

Table of Contents                                                      iii

Background                                                              1

Openness, Competition, Growth and Productivity: Indonesia’s
Previous Experience and Current Context
The Crucial Relevance of Openness to Indonesia’s Development            5
Agenda

Openness to trade and investment can help Indonesia to industrialize    9
faster and diversify away from raw commodity

The Relevance of Openness to Trade and Investment in Shaping           15
Reform Agenda




                                                                                     iii
Executive Summary




         List of Figures

         Figure 1. Channels linking greater openness, productivity and growth                      7


         List of Boxes

         Box 1.     Unintended Consequences of an Import Substitution Policy                       6
         Box 2.     Coffee Sector Competitiveness: Openness to Trade is a Vital Ingredient        10
         Box 3.     Long Process to Obtain Import Approval: Case from a Food-Processing Company   12




iv
             Indonesia’s relative success in weathering the
             global nancial storm of 2007-08 brought its
             domestic demand-driven economy into the
             international spotlight. Indonesia managed
             to deliver annual GDP growth at a respectable
             rate of 4.6 percent, while the global economy
             contracted by -0.38 percent. Prudent macro
             and monetary policies certainly contributed to
             the relatively stable growth. However, unlike
             most export-oriented economies, the size of
             Indonesia’s domestic demand also contributed
             a strong cushion for growth. With a large
             domestic market—home to roughly 40 percent
             of the total 620 million population of Southeast
             Asia—and a rapidly emerging middle-class,
             these provided a strong basis for autonomous
             consumption spending. This, in turn, has attracted
             unprecedented investment since Indonesia
             emerged from the turmoil and aftermath of the
             1997 Asian nancial crisis. Real gross xed capital




Background
Executive Summary




         formation has increased signicantly and since 2013 has reached 37 percent of GDP, higher than the
         pre-Asian nancial crisis years. A recent survey by the Japanese Bank for International Cooperation
         (JBIC) of Japanese investors reveals that Indonesia ranks as the number one destination for Japanese
         investment, due to its large internal market and the potential for growth in consumer spending
         going forward.

         With a relatively young demographic structure, huge wealth on natural resources, and growing
         manufacturing and services industries, Indonesia has the potential to become one of the
         major global economies. The working age population in Indonesia will increase by 14.8 million
         over the next 6 years, reaching 189 million by 2020. Access to natural resources in agriculture and
         minerals can strengthen the basis for an expanding processing industry that prioritizes proximity
         to consumers in domestic, as well as regional, markets. Albeit less connected to the regional
         production network than most of its regional peers, manufacturing in Indonesia is starting to nd
         its feet, driven by a rapidly expanding consumer class and, to far lesser extent, an export market
         in ASEAN and beyond. At the same time, the availability of resources will attract investment into
         heavy domestic processing industries as demand increases further. Meanwhile, the services sector,
         including construction, telecoms, logistics, and tourism have also beneted from large domestic
         demand and this has contributed the creation of 17 million new jobs in the past decade. Against
         this backdrop, Indonesia has the right ingredients and the prospects going forward to continue
         expand its economy at a rapid pace.

         However, the relative success of this growth model has generated a perception among many in
         Indonesia that greater openness to the world economy is no longer needed. There is a popular
         perception that openness to trade and the presence of foreign direct investment (FDI) undermine
         Indonesia’s development. The mantra seems to be: exports are good, imports are bad. Populist
         commentators and the media often advocate a mercantilist approach to openness to the world
         economy, namely that an open economy is simply a zero-sum game and can only be good as long as
         it creates a trade surplus. There is a view that opening up the economy would lead to dependency,
         loss of opportunities for domestic companies, and loss of control over policy sovereignty. For
         example, policy debates in the agriculture sector often view international competition and foreign
         investment as threats to the development of the domestic agriculture sector. The debate on openness
         was exacerbated after imports of capital goods and raw materials caused Indonesia to post its rst
         ever account decit of 3.2 percent of GDP in 2013, which contributed to macroeconomic instability
         and capital ight.

         The prospect of full implementation of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) in 2015 has
         created tensions over whether or not Indonesia should fully implement its commitment. The
         media often reports anxiety over readiness to stand up to greater foreign competition, particularly
         from rms of neighboring countries.1 This has generated perception that foreign competitors will
         dominate Indonesia’s large domestic market and therefore more protectionist policies are needed.




         1   For example, “Indonesia ‘Not Ready’ for Asean Free-Trade Zone, Minister Says”, The Jakarta Globe (4 Jan, 2014)




2
                                                                                                                      Background




There is increasing pressure on the Government to promote industrialization by restricting
trade and limiting room for foreign investment. There seems to be a perception that government
interventions are needed to ensure Indonesia avoids over-dependence on imports or foreign
investment that would undermine its sovereignty. There is also a perception that Indonesia
should substitute imports by developing heavy industries domestically until the processing stage
to fully tap into the potential in natural resources and the size of the domestic market. To some
extent these beliefs and perceptions have translated into policy action. While aspiring to facilitate
industrialization, Law No.3/2014 on Industrial Affairs contains provisions that could potentially
lead to interventionist regulations.2 On trade, Indonesia now ranks top among those countries
imposing non-tariff measures (NTMs), higher than all the other ASEAN countries. Since 2011, there
have been at least three ministerial decrees subjecting imports to NTMs, such as requirements for
recommendation letters from sub-national governments, pre-shipment inspections, and special
permits. The restrictions on exports of unprocessed minerals is another example of policies to direct
outputs to facilitate investment in domestic processing. Meanwhile, the reform agenda to further
liberalize economic sectors for FDI is being increasingly challenged by new sectoral restrictions
limiting foreign ownership.

The risk is that such policies will create real economy-wide costs that undermine development
progress. Facilitating import substitution to targeted industries may involve protection or subsidies
that are politically difcult to withdraw, divert scarce resources, and are often costly to administer.
Although Indonesia may have latent comparative advantage to develop targeted industries, there
are still gaps between basic requirements and existing conditions in infrastructure, agglomeration,
the regulatory environment, and skills capacity, to allow industry in Indonesia to be competitive.
Instead, trade restrictions and import substitution will have negative externalities to growth in
other industries, through limiting access to intermediate inputs and foreign technology. Imposing
restrictions on imports also imposes a tax on the ability of rms to export through changes in
relative prices that shift existing resources to import-competing sectors and away from other
sectors, including export-oriented sectors. In this situation, import substitution is likely to be
welfare-reducing and also undermine productivity.

The issue is not necessary whether the Indonesian economy is too open or too closed, but how
to use openness in trade and investment to boost competitiveness and productivity growth.
Indonesia can only fully tap its potential if it implements policies focus on addressing challenges to
improving efciency in supply responses. These require major investments in infrastructure, skills
development, and a better regulatory environment. Openness in trade and investment can help
inuence the outcomes of supply response through at least two channels. First, evidence suggests
that there are positive externalities from engaging in open trade and investment, namely efciency
gains from more competition and technology spillovers. Firms will have the exibility to access the
right resources to compete both domestically and globally. Second, openness also provides rms
with an opportunity to explore or specialize in tasks where they are competitive and bring more
value-added.



2   See for example, Nehru, Vikram (2013) “Survey of Recent Developments”, Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies,
    49:2, 139-166.




                                                                                                                              3
Executive Summary




         As part of the policy dialogue on Indonesia’s development, the World Bank is producing the
         following series of policy notes on selected topics on openness, growth and competition in
         Indonesia:

            1. The relevance of openness, growth and competition for Indonesia’s development;
            2. The existing knowledge on the role of opening up to FDI on growth and productivity in
               Indonesia;
            3. The role of imported intermediate inputs in facilitating productivity growth and product
               diversication;
            4. The state of Indonesia’s participation in the global and regional supply chains; and
            5. The impact of liberalization in the services industries on productivity in the manufacturing
               sector.
         These notes are intended to stimulate evidence-based dialogue on the role of openness, productivity,
         and growth in Indonesia’s development context by bringing to the discussion analysis of Indonesia’s
         own data and the perspective from other countries.




4
                          The reemergence of a debate on the degree
                          of openness of the Indonesian economy
                          seems to coincide with new dynamics over
                          industrial policy. Similar to the other ASEAN-5
                          countries—Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines
                          and Malaysia—Indonesia started with an import-
                          substitution industrial strategy in the 1960s. Since
                          then, Indonesia has promoted and protected
                          heavy industries such as cement, chemicals,
                          fertilizer, petroleum, and steel, which are mostly
                          run by state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The policy
                          was intended to provide the basis for downstream
                          industrial development within the country and
                          to manage demand for foreign exchange for
                          imports. The practice continued into the 1980s
                          as the Government deemed certain industries,
                          such as aircraft, automotive, and wheat our,
                          as strategic, and preserved them for SOEs and
                          selected private-sector players.

                          Historically the success of industrial policy
                          in Indonesia only occurred when the policy
                          switched from one of import substitution to one
                          of export promotion. Share of manufacturing




Openness, Competition, Growth and Productivity:
Indonesia’s Previous Experience and Current
Context
The Crucial Relevance of Openness
to Indonesia’s Development Agenda
Executive Summary




         GDP did not change much during period of import substitution in the 1970s and early 1980s. While
         import substitution helped established the presence of heavy industries in Indonesia, control
         and protection over those industries created a drag for Indonesia’s effort to diversify its economy
         from the oil sector after the collapse of the global crude price in the early 1980s. Opening up the
         economy and simplifying regulations promoted growth of footloose manufacturing industries,
         such as garments, toys, and footwear. The industrialization process following that switch in policy
         was notable: the share of manufacturing industry value-added to GDP increased from 13 percent
         in 1983 to 21 percent in 1993. In 1995, manufacturing sector absorbed almost 13 percent of total
         employment compared to 7 percent in 1987. Tariff reductions from 1990-2001 suggested that a
         10-percentage point fall in input tariffs led to a productivity gain of 12 percent of via learning,
         higher quality and a variety of other effects.3

         Against a backdrop of the renewed interest in such an industrial policy, it is important to put
         the debate into the current context, while being mindful of the possible adverse impacts of
         promoting bad policies. Trade restrictions and other interventions in unprocessed minerals, steel
         and electronics, are some of the examples of the renewed interest in promoting industrialization
         in these sectors, by substituting imports with products made in Indonesia. While Indonesia now
         has a large and growing domestic market to attract investment, industrial policy that promotes bad
         policy practices needs to be avoided (Box 1 provides an example from Indonesia’s own experience).

         Box 1. Unintended Consequences of an Import Substitution Policy

             Import substitution that takes the form of protecting upstream industries from foreign
             competition is basically a tax on downstream processing that uses those protected inputs.
             In this case, the Indonesian economy will lose efciency as a result of articially higher costs
             for consumers and producers.

             An import substitution strategy also usually leads to rent-seeking. Several cases of
             protectionist industrial policy in the past revealed the high risk of rent-seeking and the
             high level of corruption associated with such policies. Recent cases, such as promoting self-
             sufciency in beef, suggest that good intentions only led to corruption, rent-seeking, and
             depriving Indonesian consumers access to an important source of protein. In his 1984 paper
             prominent Indonesian economist Thee Kian Wie (1935-2014) wrote that: “Import-substituting
             industrialization, if pushed ahead behind highly protectionist walls, is economically inefcient.
             It leads to serious distortions in the economy which are extremely difcult to correct once
             they are built into the economic structure of a country. For not only are physical structures
             or complexes of production established, but more importantly from the political economy
             view point, vested interests favoring the status quo which are supported by political power
             holders become practically impossible to dislodge, even when the high economic costs of these
             arrangements become evident.”5
         4



         3    Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings, 2007. “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Productivity: Evidence from
              Indonesia”, American Economic Review, 97(5): 1611-1638
         4    Thee, Kian Wie, 1984. “Japanese Direct Investment in Indonesian Manufacturing” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic
              Studies, 20:2, 90-106.




6
            Openness, Competition, Growth and Productivity: Indonesia’s Previous Experience and Current Context
                                              The Crucial Relevance of Openness to Indonesia’s Development Agenda




These experiences motivate the policy note on “Openness, Growth, and Productivity in
Indonesia’s Development Agenda”. This note highlights the following aspects of openness, growth,
and productivity in Indonesia’s current development context:

   Integration into the global marketplace provides opportunities for Indonesia through various
     channels: greater investment, efciency gains, and transfer of knowledge for Indonesian
     businesses and workers (Figure 1).
   Investments and productivity growth are needed for Indonesia to grow faster and more
     inclusively. Investment remains important in providing job opportunities for millions of
     Indonesians entering job market, while improvements in productivity would facilitate more
     opportunities for high-quality jobs.
   Episodes of sustained growth across countries suggest that virtually all countries that grew
     rapidly did so by rapidly expanding their exports and imports rather than by substitution of
     imports with domestic production.
   Deep reforms are needed to ensure Indonesian businesses and workers can gain the most
     from greater integration to the global marketplace

Figure 1. Channels linking greater openness, productivity and growth
                                       • Increases the scope of returns to
                                         physical capital accumulation
                   Physical            • Attracts FDI
                    Capital
                 Accumulation
                                                                                      Greater
                                             • Knowledge diffusion
                                               through migration                     Economic
                           Human Capital                                             Openness
      Growth               Accumulation


                                          • Attracts FDI, leading to knowledge
                                            spillovers
                                          • Gives access to world stock of
                     Productivity           efciency-enhancing knowledge
                    improvement           • Induces better resource allocation via
                                            increased competition
                                          • Creates incentives for virtuous macro
                                            policies




                                                                                                               7
Executive Summary




         The policy tote on Trade integration, FDI and Productivity presents evidences from recent
         policy researches that arguing that engaging in an open trade and investment regime have
         brought productivity gains that are a key factor in sustaining increases in income per-capita.
         Key highlights from this note are:

             Evidence from Indonesia that suggests foreign-owned plants have become increasingly
               important, generating a signicant share of exports and overall output, as well as being more
               productive and more export intensive than domestic plants, and spending more on R&D
               and training. Using Indonesia’s census of medium and large manufacturers, this policy note
               reveals that foreign-owned plants are 39 percent more productive than their non-foreign
               owned counterparts.
             FDI also has positive impacts on rms in the same sector, through competition and
               demonstration effects, and in upstream sectors, as suppliers to foreign-owned plants improve
               the quality of their own products to meet their clients more exacting needs.
             Evidence also suggests a positive impact from import competition in improving allocative
               efciency across manufacturing plants, which is a key element in driving productivity in the
               manufacturing sector.




8
                   An important channel to facilitate industrialization
                   is by allowing rms to source inputs efciently
                   at world prices. Allowing rms to source input
                   efciently at world prices helps them to increase
                   productivity and unlock the potential to develop new
                   products. Openness to international competition
                   provides competitive pressures for domestic rms
                   producing intermediate products to innovate and
                   operate more efciently. Recent experience of
                   countries in East Asia also suggests that allowing rms
                   to source intermediate products and components
                   from international markets allows rms in those
                   countries to focus on production tasks that they are
                   truly competitive. This model known as global or
                   regional supply chains can help to shorten the time
                   for a country to facilitate industrialization compared
                   with adopting a strategy for developing a full
                   industrial spectrum from upstream to downstream. 5

                   5   Baldwin, Richard. 2011. “Trade and industrialisation after
                       globalisation’s 2nd unbundling: How building and joining a
                       supply chain are different and why it matters”. NBER Working
                       Paper 17716.




Openness to trade and investment
can help Indonesia to industrialize
faster and diversify away from raw
commodity
Executive Summary




         The policy note on The Role of Imported Intermediate Inputs in the Indonesian Economy
         highlights the role of openness to trade in driving up productivity and product diversication
         in Indonesia’s manufacturing. This note provides statistical evidence on the impact of access to
         intermediate imports to productivity and product diversication from an Indonesian census of
         medium and large manufacturers. Key ndings from this note are:

             Growth of intermediates imports generally matches growth of Indonesia’s GDP, implying a
               relatively stable reliance on imported inputs.
             Users of imported inputs in Indonesia are exceptional performers: they grow faster in terms
               of output, value-added and employment, they are more productive, and they pay higher
               wages.
             Increased availability of imported inputs has contributed to improved product quality in
               Indonesian manufacturing. A larger share of imported inputs in total inputs, as well as lower
               tariffs on inputs, is associated with a higher probability of producing high-quality goods.
             Firms’ product diversication processes have been boosted by lower tariffs on inputs, and by
               increased usage of imported versions.

         The relevance of imported intermediate inputs also applies to the agro-industry where
         Indonesia has major opportunities. Allowing processors in the agro-industry to access imported
         intermediary inputs can help increase their competitiveness and standing in the global market
         place. Box 2 below provides an interesting example from Indonesia’s coffee sector where access
         to imported coffee can help Indonesia’s coffee processors to respond to high demand for coffee
         worldwide.

         Box 2. Coffee Sector Competitiveness: Openness to Trade is a Vital Ingredient

           Indonesia is the third-largest coffee producer in the world, with about 750,000 tonnes produced
           in 2013, ranking behind Brazil and Vietnam. However, coffee contributes less than 1 percent to
           Indonesia’s total exports. There are almost 2 million coffee farm households across Indonesia,
           but coffee is just one small part of a diversied farm livelihood. Productivity is also low at only
           700 kg/ha and, while Indonesia produces both Robusta and Arabica coffee, it is not good at
           producing specialty coffees that require specic topography, at elevations of more than 900
           meters.

           Indonesian coffee producers are being encouraged to shift their focus from producing high
           volumes to producing better quality and higher value coffee. Indonesia’s Arabica coffee is
           generally sold at a premium, while Robusta coffee is sold at a discount to world prices. But,
           improving production quality requires investment in inputs (seedlings, clones, plantlets), skills
           (grafting and replanting), and processing (post-harvest, defect count, beverage processing).




10
                                                              Openness to trade and investment can help Indonesia to industrialize
                                                                                   faster and diversify away from raw commodity




    Growth of coffee processing in Indonesia, mainly roasting, at 8 to 9 percent annually, is already
    growing faster than the world average, at around 2 percent per year. Indonesian beverage
    rms are also producing a range of products for the domestic market, such as green beans,
    packaged beans, sachets, ready-to-drink bottles, and also across different product types, such
    as traditional, gourmet, and specialty coffees. Indonesian coffee producers are experimenting
    with different marketing initiatives, including branding, product differentiation, geographic
    indicators, and trade-marks. These are all necessary in a market with numerous geographic
    origins and varieties. The challenge in the future is to simplify the varieties from a single
    geographic origin, and then to improve the quality of existing varieties.

    But how should the Indonesian coffee sector respond to higher demand worldwide for better
    quality coffee? There are many possible responses to this question. But there is one upon which
    there is general agreement across the sector: protective trade policies will not help Indonesian
    coffee producers or farmers. Export duties could potentially distort prices, decrease farm gate
    prices, and be subject to WTO rulings. Most importantly, for Indonesian coffee to be processed
    into a high-quality nal retail product, it needs to be blended with other imported coffee beans
    also of very high quality.7 This means that imported high-quality coffee is a vital intermediary
    input in the high-end Indonesian coffee business. As such, import tariffs aimed at “protecting”
    the high-quality domestic coffee market would almost certainly end up hurting those coffee
    exporters who rely on high-quality imported coffee to make their top quality blends for export.
    Therefore, any import or export restrictions could adversely affect prices fetched by Indonesian
    coffee producers, and ultimately their competitiveness, both domestically and internationally.
6

The policy note on Maximizing Opportunities from Global Supply Chains: Agenda for Reform,
discusses what Indonesia can do to increase its participation in, and the benets from, global
or regional supply chains. Important features that emerged from international supply chains are
the important role of a competitive services sector to link different production tasks and efcient
and reliable freight logistics to facilitate in-and-out movement of goods in the production process
within and across borders. Key highlights of this note are:

     Infrastructure and freight logistics are the most important determinant of whether Asian
       countries participate in global supply chains. Improvements in infrastructure and operational
       efciencies at airports and seaports are key factors in facilitating integration of Indonesian
       rms with international supply chains. For example, accessibility of Tanjung Priok port,
       which is the main international gateway in Indonesia, to Indonesia’s largest industrial area in
       Greater Jakarta is relatively poor by comparison to accessibility of Port Klang of Malaysia or
       Leam Chabang of Thailand from largest industrial area in each of these respective country
     Improvement in trade facilitation (process of clearing exports and imports) is a cornerstone
       of logistics competitiveness that would allow Indonesian rms to join international supply
       chains. Indonesian rms are hampered from doing so unless trade facilitation in Indonesia
       allows them to operate on a level playing eld with their peers in ASEAN.

6    Except for coffees sold as single origin speciality coffees such as Aceh Gayo or Bali Kintamani




                                                                                                                              11
Executive Summary




             Another important factor is uncertainties around the business environment, including
               towards FDI. Lack of condence in the business environment discourages international
               companies from expanding in, or relocating to, Indonesia, either as an export base or to
               source intermediate products from Indonesian companies.

         Increasing delays due to longer dwell times, coupled with several policies adding to the
         uncertainties in import clearance, all serve to undermine the competitiveness of rms in
         Indonesia to export. Delays and long processes in obtaining import permits add additional costs.
         Policies such as pre-shipment inspection and non-automatic import recommendation letter are
         also contributing to long pre-customs clearance processes and have led high container dwell time
         in Tanjung Priok. Box 3 presents a case study from an international food-processing company in
         Indonesia that has to cope with a long process to obtain import approvals for each shipment of its
         intermediate inputs. Such a long process can undermine Indonesia’s competitiveness as a basis for
         production, supplying domestic and export markets.

         Box 3. Long Process to Obtain Import Approval: Case from a Food-Processing Company

           A multinational company (MNC) in food processing industry imports fresh cheese to be
           converted into processed cheese. About 70 percent of production is sold in the domestic
           market, mainly to bakeries. Despite being a regulator importer, this MNC experiences serious
           obstacles in obtaining import permits/licensing. In early 2013, the dwell time for its refrigerated
           containers carrying fresh cheese rose to 53 days because an import permit was incomplete,
           preventing it from removing its containers from Tanjung Priok. Consequently, extra port
           (demurrage) charges meant that the purchase price of the cheese rose, while the company also
           lost out on production.

           In order to understand how this could happen, let’s look at how this MNC’s import licensing
           process. Four permits are needed to import fresh cheese: (i) a Registered Importer Permit
           (Importer Terdaftar); (ii) an Import Approval (PI, Persetujuan Impor); (iii) an Import Certicate
           (Surat Keterangan Impor); and (iv) a Quarantine Permit (Karantina Hewan).

           The Import Approval (PI) is considered the most difcult to obtain due to difculties in
           obtaining supporting documents, specically recommendation letters from the Ministry of
           Agriculture (MoA) and the National Agency of Drug and Food Control (BPOM). The PI is only
           valid for six months. However, based on this MNC’s experience, 4 to 5 months are needed to
           obtain a PI, meaning that this importer should start renewing the PI 6 weeks after obtaining
           it for the same commodity and the same country of origin. The PI is issued by the Ministry of
           Trade.




12
                                                         Openness to trade and investment can help Indonesia to industrialize
                                                                              faster and diversify away from raw commodity




Obtaining a Recommendation Letter from the MoA: The prerequisite for applying to the MoA
for a recommendation letter is to obtain pre-recommendation letters from local governments,
including: (i) Livestock Services, District Agricultural Ofce; (ii) Livestock Services, Provincial
Agricultural Ofce; and (iii) Integrated Provincial Licensing Bodies (BPPT). Importers should
apply for each pre-recommendation letter sequentially. Hence, it takes 10 to 14 weeks to
obtain all three letters from the three ofces. The importer should then bring them to the MoA
to apply for a ‘nal’ recommendation letter, which can add a further 4 to 8 weeks. A further
complication is that when applying for a pre-recommendation letter, the importer should
supply detailed information on volumes and specic ports of entry. This can be impractical
due to the dynamics of business operations. Also, actual imports impact the quota allocated
by local governments for the next import application. It is difcult for an importer to obtain a
larger quota if the previous import realization was less than planned.

Obtaining a Recommendation Letter from BPOM: This MNC’s experience shows that no clear
or consistent rules exist for obtaining the recommendation letter from BPOM. BPOM ofcials
may ask for new supporting documents when the importer applies and different treatment of
importers may occur, especially if other importers offer inducements to expedite the process.
This letter can take up to 2 weeks to obtain.

In the case of this MNC, it needs to renew 37 separate licenses every 6 months, while the lead
time for import-license renewal is 4 to 5 months.

Obtaining Import Approval (PI) for an animal product: The schematic below illustrates the
steps, the frequency of renewal, and time required to nish the steps ino order to obtain an
Import Approval (PI).




Submit               Submit           Submit             Submit             Submit             Submit
application to       application      application        application        application to     application to
District Livestock   to Provincial    to integrated      to Ministry of     BPOM               Ministry of Trade
Services             Livestock        provincial         Agriculture         • Renew every      • Renew every
 • Renew every       Services         licensing bodies    • Renew every        6 months           6 months
   6 months           • Renew every   (BPPT)                6 months         • Leadtime 2       • Leadtime 2
 • Leadtime 1-2          6 months      • Renew every      • Leadtime 1         weeks              weeks
   months             • Leadtime 1        6 months          month
                         month         • Leadtime 2




                                                                                                                         13
Executive Summary




         The relevance of competitive sector for Indonesia’s manufacturing is presented in the policy
         note on Liberalization the Impact of Relaxing Service Sector FDI Restrictions on Productivity
         in Indonesian Manufacturing. This policy note argues that more competition and participation
         by foreign rms in services can improve performance of the sector and lead to economy-wide
         benets in terms of enabling manufacturers to improve their performance. This note reviews the
         international evidence available and presents new evidence on Indonesia regarding the positive
         spillovers that the easing of restrictions has had on productivity of domestic manufacturing rms.
         The economic impact of these spillovers is sizable. In fact, spillovers from service sector reform
         account for about 8 percent of the observed increase in Indonesian manufacturing productivity
         over the period 1997-2009.




14
                 Indonesia has beneted signicantly from the degree
                 that it has integrated with the global economy, but it has
                 far more to gain. Evidence from Indonesia and elsewhere
                 suggests that trade and FDI can improve productivity
                 and boost both the quantity and quality of exports.
                 Unfettered access to more, better, and cheaper inputs,
                 including imports, helps to maximize the productivity
                 of domestic and foreign-owned rms alike. Ultimately,
                 openness to trade and FDI can be mutually reinforcing
                 drivers of national competitiveness. Encouraging FDI
                 through beefed-up investment promotion, introducing
                 supplier development programs to help domestic rms
                 to supply multinationals, and maintaining an open
                 stance towards imported inputs, can help Indonesia
                 move up the value chain and secure sustainable, long-
                 term economic development.




The Relevance of Openness to Trade
and Investment in Shaping Reform
Agenda
Executive Summary




         Previous strategy to use open trade and investment policies to pursue exports has become less
         popular as interest pendulum shifts towards domestic market. Indonesia had used this strategy
         to push for sweeping reforms in the 1980s to reduce transaction costs for private sector that helped
         rapid expansion of the manufacturing sector and manufacturing exports in the 1990s.7 However,
         this view has become less popular today because the domestic market is perceived as being more
         important than the export market.

         However, maintaining an open trade and investment regime remains valid even when business
         interests are shifting more towards tapping opportunities from the growing domestic market.
         Evidence presented in theses different policy notes suggests that:

              Openness affects growth through capital accumulation that ow from FDI, knowledge
                spillovers, higher productivity through technological diffusion, and competition that also
                leads to better resource allocation. All of these are relevant for Indonesia if it hopes to develop
                a strong and dynamic domestic market (Policy Notes 1 and 2).
              Allowing rms to access imported intermediaries and allowing more FDI in services will help
                Indonesia diversify its economy away from raw commodities into processing and increased
                participation in international supply chains (Policy Notes 3, 4, and 5).
              Deep reforms and better infrastructure are needed to allow more efcient functioning of
                markets for domestic industries (Policy Note 1). Such requirements are important to ensure
                that domestic industries have better, or at least even, playing elds against competitors. They
                are also important in ensuring that domestic industries and individuals can benet most
                from interaction with foreign counterparts, such as in technological exchange and spillovers.

         Nevertheless, there is also a need for collective action and a shared responsibility from
         stakeholders to ensure that open trade and investment bring sustainable growth and shared
         prosperity to Indonesia. First, the Government needs to ensure the delivery of public goods (in
         education, health and infrastructure), proper functioning of markets (nancial, labor, and inputs)
         and more conducive regulatory environment that facilitates growth of private enterprises.
         Strengthening social protection program, such as workers’ insurance and unemployment programs,
         and ensuring delivery of public goods in education, health, housing, and transportation would ease
         adjustment costs borne by rms and workers from increased competition. Second, Indonesian
         private sector should continue to strengthen their governance and management to gain from open
         trade and investment. Private sector associations should also consider improving their capacity to
         engage in evidence-based policy dialogues with government counterparts to ensure that policies
         are not creating distortions instead bringing positive economy-wide impacts. Third, Indonesian’s
         academic community needs to step up to the plate in informing the debate and policy dialogue
         through high-quality policy research on openness, growth and productivity in Indonesia.




         7   See, for example, Soesastro, Hadi. M , 1989, “The Political Economy of Deregulation in Indonesia”, Asian Survey, Vol 29.
             No. 9, pp 853-869, and Basri, M. Chatib and M.Hadi Soesastro, 2005, “The Political Economy of Trade in Indonesia”, CSIS
             Working Paper Series no. 092




16
