101750
The Political Economy of
Decision-making in Forestry:
USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
FOR


﻿Acknowledgements
This report was written by Nalin Kishor (Task Team Leader and Sr. Nat. Res. Economist, Environment and Natural Resources
Global Practice (GENDR)), Selene Castillo (Natural Resources Analyst, GENDR) and Nga Phuong Nguyen (Junior
Professional Associate, GENDR), with significant contributions from Ken Rosenbaum. Eva Schiffer helped organize the
hand-on practitioners' workshop. The peer reviewers were Andrew Mitchell and Stefanie Sieber. VeronicaJarrin provided
operational support since the inception of this activity. The work was done underthe overall guidance of Valerie Hickey,
Practice Manager, GENDR.
The finalization of the report benefitted hugely from suggestions and comments from a large number of people from
different parts of the World Bank Group. While they are too numerous to mention here, the Team would like to thank all
of them, without holding them responsible for any errors and shortcomings of this report.
Financial support for the project was provided by PROFOR (Program on Forests).
Disclaimer
All omissions and inaccuracies in this document are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed do not
necessarily represent those of the institutions involved, nor do they necessarily represent official policies of PROFOR or
the World Bank.
Suggested Citation
Kishor, Nalin, Selene Castillo and Nga Phuong Nguyen, 2015. The Political Economy of Decision-making in Forestry: Using
Evidence and Analysis for Reform. Program on Forests (PROFOR). Washington DC.
For a full list of publications please contact:
Program on Forests (PROFOR)
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
profor@worldbank.org
www.profor.info/knowledge
PROFOR is a multi-donor partnership supported by the European Commission, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the World Bank Group.
U          El            M         E H           *                   D EI 6


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements                                                                                    2
Executive Summary                                                                                   5
Chapter 1. The Political Economy Challenge and its Relevance to the Forest Sector                   7
Political economy challenges in the forest sector                                                8
Chapter 2: Political Economy Analysis (PEA) and PEA Frameworks                                      11
Political economy analysis                                                                      11
Political Economy Frameworks in Common Use                                                      12
DFID's country level analysis                                                                13
ODI's sector level analysis                                                                  15
Political Economy of Policy Reform (PEPR)                                                    17
Problem-Driven Governance and Political Economy Analysis (PGPEA)                             19
The Strategic Governance and Corruption Analysis (SGACA)                                    22
Power Analysis (Sida)                                                                        24
Chapter 3. Stakeholder- centered PEA approaches                                                    27
The Agent Based Stakeholder Model (ABSM)                                                        27
Net-Map Analysis                                                                                30
Box 3.2: Lesson learned from a hands-on Net-Map workshop                                        37
Chapter 4. In practical terms...                                                                   40
Chapter 5. Concluding Observations and Recommendations                                             44
ANNEX A: Political economy factors influencing forest sector reforms in Africa: Evidence from six country case studies  46
ANNEX B: Application of the Net-Map Approach to the Health Sector                                   51
Malawi Knowledge for Health impact assessment project                                           51
ANNEX C: Two Additional Net-Map Examples Constructed During a Practitioners Workshop at the World Bank  54
Who influences the sustainable management of Mount M Area in the Philippines?                   54
Who influences benefit sharing in forests under REDD+ in the Democratic Republic of Congo (Bandundu Province)?  56
Bibliography                                                                                       59


﻿4        THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                     5
Executive Summary
Broadly speaking, the effort to end unsustainable forest management has had a modest track record. Mismanagement,
deforestation, degradation, and illegal logging continue to be significant problems.
Failure to weigh political economy considerations has contributed to the lack of success. From a technical standpoint,
analysts may diagnose the problems correctly and provide the best advice on necessary reforms. However, successful
implementation of reforms depends upon providing the right incentives to change the behavior of the entire spectrum of
stakeholders impacted by reforms, and thisis where a careful consideration of political economy issues can be important.
Examples from forestry described in this report amply demonstrate this. Stakeholder and interest groups, institutions
(rules) and existing organizations and agencies responsible for forest management, interact in complex ways to determine
how the forest resource is managed and how the associated returns are distributed. When stakeholders' power and influence
is uneven, institutions are weak (or deliberately weakened by the same vested interests), and organizations are inefficient
and corrupt, the result is resource plunder, institutional erosion and breakdown of the rule of law, and concentration of
wealth in a few hands. Any efforts at reform will be met by resistance by those who see themselves as likely to lose and
support from those likely to gain. A systematic political economy analysis can help gain insights into the functioning of this
complex interaction and better equip practitioners to craft a successful reform process.
Investigations into political economy matters have almost universally emphasized three features as fundamental, and
their study as critical, to developing a deeper understanding of any political economy system. These are--institutions,
organizations (or organizational structures), and stakeholders. These form the focus of attention throughout this report.
To advance an understanding of political economy situation, development practitioners have been using political
economy analysis (PEA). A PEA broadly is "concerned with the interaction of political and economic processes in a
society; the distribution of power and wealth between different groups and individuals; and the processes that create,
sustain and transform these relationships over time".
A PEA can perform several important roles at different stages in a forest sector project. At the beginning of a project, a
PEA can illuminate the existing obstacles and needs for reform, helping to shape project planning. As part of the project
itself, a PEA can catalyze changes in the political economy by informing stakeholders about each other's roles, interests,
and powers. At the end of the project, it can show whetherthe project has led to reforms in the political economy situation
that might create a longer-term, self-sustaining propensity towards sustainable resource use. If a PEA has been done at
the beginning of a project, then in conjunction with a PEA at the end, it could perform a useful monitoring role.
The report describes eight "front-runner" PEA approaches that have emerged over the last few years. These approaches
include DFID's Drivers of Change (pg. 14), ODI's sector level analysis (pg. 17), The World Bank Group's Political Economy
of Policy Reform (pg. 20) and Problem-driven Governance and Political Economy Analysis (pg. 22), Strategic Governance
and Corruption Analysis (pg. 26), SIDA's Power analysis (pg. 29), the Agent-Based Stakeholder Model (pg. 33), and
Net-Map (pg. 37). Most of these are supported by donors and development agencies and only one has a track record of
application to forestry issues. Nevertheless, based on our analysis, all are capable of being applied to address political
economy challenges in forestry.


﻿6       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Based on the experiences available from these approaches, this report attempts to provide initial guidance for selecting
that PEA approach which would best suit the needs of a would-be userin forestry. This report proposes that this selection
could be based on the strength of the approaches to deliver on 4 desirable characteristics (customized to the forestry
sector), as follows':
* Practicality. This means that they do not require more time, resources, or capacity than the project can provide. Their
outputs should be easy to understand.
*  Relevance. The results they provide will be useful to the project. Usually, that means that they will help in project
planning, implementation, or monitoring.
*  Robustness. They produce results that are credible. They produce results that are replicable, particularly if the PEA is
to be used to monitor project impact.
*  Adaptability. They are compatible with the country context and can be applied at the desired geographic scale. They
can weigh actors and influences from other sectors that affect forests, such as agriculture, mining, or transportation.
However, the report also recognizes the possibility that more than one approach may be needed to validate results and
strengthen confidence in the findings.
Preparing a PEA, in and of itself, does not suddenly bring political economy considerations into projects. What a PEA does
is make the weighing of political economy factors less subjective, more rational, and more evidence-based. PEA gathers
information-quantitative and/or qualitative-and organizes it within a framework that project leaders, supporters, and
other stakeholders can use to advance the objectives of the project. In that way, thoughtful use of PEA will increase the
chance that a forest-sector project will bring about lasting change.
The application of available PEA tools to the forest sector is extremely limited-indeed only one of those discussed in this
paper - NetMap - has a track-record of application to forestry. Yet experience from other sectors suggests that a PEA can
point the route to getting long-lasting impacts in the sector. Thus, the main recommendation of this report is to build up
the evidence base on how a PEA for the forest sector contributes to better outcomes for the sector. Promoting the use of
available PEA tools (customized to the needs of forestry) should be undertaken at a corporate level. This will ensure a body
of learning which would allow implementation of political economy analyses which are high-impact and cost-effective.
1. Chapter 4 of this report provides a detailed list of attributes under each of these four broad desirable characteristics, that a practitioner might wish to consider.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                     7
Chapter 1. The Political Economy Challenge
and its Relevance to the Forest Sector
Introduction and Objective
The use of the phrase, "political economy" originates in Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations and is also found in the
writings of David Ricardo and Karl Marx. What is presently understood as "economics" was - at that time - termed
"political economy". This was understood to mean "conditions of production organization in nation-states" (Acemoglu
and Robinson, 2012, Beuran, Raballand and Kapoor, 2011). Venerable scholars such as Smith, Ricardo, Mills, Rosseau,
Ruskin and de Tocqueville, took a consistently holistic view of the interaction between economics (technical means of
production) and politics (relationships of production) in their debates on wealth, prosperity, and international trade, and
explanations of development outcomes. However, subsequently, "economics" and "political science" developed along
parallel tracks, constraining us from fully exploring their interactions and joint contribution to incomes, livelihoods and
to economic development more generally.
This "parallel-tracking", of politics and economics, has proven to be costly from a development perspective. It has been
found repeatedly that while technical specialists may diagnose development problems correctly and provide the best
technical advice on the necessary reforms, success or failure goes beyond the purely technical-fix, to designing the right
incentives to change the behavior of the entire spectrum of stakeholders. Hout and Schakel talk about the need for a better
understanding of political realitiesin order to diagnose the causes of the "lack of political will", that is so often invoked to
explain the disappointing results of development cooperation activities (Hout and Schakel, 2014). Acemogulu and Robinson
have focused the investigative spotlight on the interplay between economics and politics, particularly as a way to understand
the motivations and interests of stakeholders and more fundamentally to understand why some nations fail to develop while
others have been phenomenally successful (Acemogulu and Robinson, 2012). Luttrell et al. (2014), in a careful study of
climate change and forestry in Indonesia, conclude that, "a deeper understanding of the political context, including the
tradition, regimes and institutions....., is a prerequisite for.... empowering the constituencies of change needed to carry
through reforms". (Luttrell et al. 2014). Political economy analysis has become a central concern for practitioners interested
in ensuring the success of development reforms, be it at the broad macro level or at the level of a sector.
For the forestry sector too, when stakeholders' power and influence is uneven, vested interests get to control the
resource, and institutions are weak (or deliberately weakened by the same vested interests) the result is resource
plunder, institutional erosion and breakdown of the rule of law and concentration of wealth in a few hands. (In the next
section of this chapter, specific examples from forestry will illustrate these challenges clearly). If we are to come to grips
with the fundamentals determining sustainable forest management, there is a need to develop a good understanding of
stakeholder interests and the complex balance of power relationships, via political economy analysis.
Thus, the major objective of this report is to offer preliminary guidance to conduct a practical political economy analysis
for the forest sector. The report provides this guidance by considering eight "front-runner" political economy analysis
approaches that have emerged over the last few years. In principle all are capable of being applied to address political
economy challenges in forestry and the report develops a set of criteria, geared to political economy considerations for
forestry, which would assist a practitionerin selecting among the available approaches.


﻿(j      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Political economy challenges in the forest sector
While natural resources have played an important role in creating wealth and powering development, recent research
shows an inverse correlation between the abundance of natural resources and growth and development. This has been
true of many of the economiesin Latin America, Africa and the Arab world-regions characterized by high levels of natural
resources endowments, be they minerals, oil or timber.
The inverse correlation between endowment and wealth creation-dubbed as the natural resource curse hypothesis-has
been the subject of intense study and has yielded valuable insights into political economy issues, particularly the role
of institutions (Sachs and Warner 1997, Robinson et al. 2007). Natural resource abundance has been associated with
predatory political regimes which win and maintain political support through the capture and earmarking of natural
resource rents, to the almost complete neglect of wealth creation and its equitable distribution (Auty 2003, Deacon
2010). Natural resource wealth and resource rent windfalls have the power to alter the political climate in a country
(particularly if it starts from a weak institutional base) towards a rent-seeking culture and a patron-client system of
governance (Karl 1997). Natural resources, such as forests, become "lootable" and susceptible to large-scale theft,
generating the money to fuel corruption, finance terrorism and political unrest, social conflicts, personal gains, and
to generate undesirable power to, not only circumvent, but to undercut and shackle the rule of law (Harwell, Farah and
Blundell 2011, Magrath et. al 2007).
In the case of forests, the findings from a study, which considers the history of forest reform processes in six African
economies--Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia and Uganda-provides instructive insights on the interplay
between politics and economics (i.e., political economy considerations) (Alumai et al. 2012). Specifically, the study
proposes a set of seven underlying factors as creating a climate conducive for forest governance reforms and their
implementation. These factors are: (i) Strengthen the political will for action and a leadership role for the State;
(ii) Create partnerships, form coalitions and promote participatory processes; (iii) Ensure availability and access to
information; (iv) Promote transparency and accountability in the implementation of reforms; (v) Identify and promote
"ambassadors for change"; (vi) Harness international initiatives to motivate national reforms; and, (vii) Ensure
availability of resources (human, financial, etc.) adequate to the needs of reform. The importance of these factors is
assessed through scoring by experts, of each these factors by analyzing narrative- based historical accounts of the
reform processes. All seven factors influence sector reform, to varying degrees. Within this overall picture, "political
will" matters hugely to the success of efforts to improve forest governance; this is followed by the momentum generated
by "harnessing international initiatives", "partnerships and stakeholder involvement", and adequacy of resources. (For
details on this study, see Annex A, and Alumai et al. 2012).
The importance influence of political economy issues for the forestry sector is further illustrated by the following
examples.
"Influential families" and illegal logging in Madagascar: In the forest sector a surge in illegal logging of precious
timber-rosewood-- in the context of the 2009 political crisis has led to a severe loss of Madagascar's natural capital
and potential government revenues as well as significant environmental damage in protected areas (World Bank 2010).
Persistent illegal logging over the past decade reflects state capture by influential timber trading elites from the Sava
region. The decline of the vanilla industry, a critical mainstay of regional elites, opened the door to the establishment
of rosewood market activity on the back of the vanilla market, making the forestry sector an important source of rents
for some traders also involved in the vanilla trade. Expanding and accelerating rosewood exports offered an immediate
rent-seeking opportunity for the transition government.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      9
There is evidence for the capture of both the central and local executive and the judiciary by private interests. Over the
past decade, the Malagasy government has made significant efforts to prohibit logging in protected areas and the trade
with precious timber. Yet, frequent exceptions to the interdiction of raw precious wood exports in contradiction to earlier
and higher order regulation indicate the Sava families' influence on central decision-makers. While enforcement agents
and customs have demonstrated some capacity for containing illegal logging, yet, enforcement to date has focused on
the village-level farmers rather than operators higher up the supply chain. Both powerfull y-connected families and
the local communities can make more from illegal logging - local communities in the Sava region partially depend
on trafficking of precious wood for their livelihood. The political clout of timber trading elites more than counters the
advocacy by academics and environmentalists who advance conservation. The analysis highlights that permanently
stopping rosewood exports in response to international pressure, while curbing the powerful Sava families, could thus
come at a high political and economic cost for the government.
Interest-Group control of wood energy in Tanzania: Uneven distribution of wealth and accessibility to forest resources,
rampant corruption, weak governance, and opposition by small but powerful interest groups make it difficult to change and
implement sound forest policies (Utting 2000). A recent study of the charcoal sector in Tanzania illustrates this well (World
Bank 2009). An estimated 90% of Tanzania's energy needs are fulfilled through the use of wood fuels. The contribution of
the sector to the overall economy is estimated to be about US$650 million per year, and it provides income and employment
to several hundred thousand people in both rural and urban areas. Yet the sector is characterized by weak governance with
a handful of influential families controlling the trade, poor law enforcement, corruption, widespread evasion of licensing
fees and transport levies, and unsustainable harvesting from miombo woodlands. A combination of measures - governance
related (confronting the vested and powerful interests controlling the sector, and tougher sanctions), technical (expanding
the areas under woodlots, improving the efficiency of conversion of wood to charcoal), policy coordination (sustainable
household energy strategy) and economic actions (providing incentives to offset increased investment costs associated
with sustainably produced charcoal) - are necessary to ensure that the charcoal sector is put back on the rails and to reduce
the pressures to deforest the miombo. Complementary steps would include exploring alternative, sustainable, sources of
energy for rural needs (such as solar power and jatropha oil). The overall challenge would be to figure out the right balance
among the various measures to ensure sustainability of reforms.
Predatory State and Rent-Seeking in East-Asia: Broad (Broad 1994) convincingly arguesthat, in Indonesia and Philippines,
dictatorial governments crafted logging concession systems that concentrated the forests in the hands of a few-the
political, economic and military elite. This elite earned enormous profits ("rent-seeking"), little of which were passed
back to the state; and their rising economic power gave them unprecedented political clout and control. As a corollary,
the research also demonstrates that economic policy reforms, aimed at promoting sustainable use of the resource and
of distributing the wealth more equitably, were doomed because the elite used their political clout to preserve the
status quo (Broad 1994). In these forestry examples, consistent with the Acemoglu and Robinson findings (2012), it
may be posited that it was precisely the dominance of "extractive political institutions", which led to environmentally
unsustainable exploitation of the forests.
State-Capture and Rent-Seizing in East Asia: A different manifestation of a political economy challenge for the sector
arises in the context of the work on "rent-seizing" (Ross 2001). Ross reports that in a number of countries such as
Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines, the dismantling of legal and regulatory mechanisms (i.e., the institutions or
the rules of the game) that had previously served to protect forests and their inhabitants occurred during timber booms.
Between 1950 and 1995, each of the three countries experienced periods of booming timber exports and high product
prices. Ross argues that in all three countries it was the resource boom that paradoxically caused a decline in the quality
of the institutions. The windfalls generated by the booms encouraged greedy and unscrupulous politicians to engage in
a type of rent-seeking behaviorcalled rent seizing. Rent seizing was an effort by state actors to wrest the right to allocate


﻿10         THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
rents. When timber prices begin to create supernormal profits (rents) for logging firms, state officials responded by
dismantling the legal and regulatory mechanisms that had previously served to protect the forests and its inhabitants-
-mechanisms that kept logging in line with sustained yield levels, guarded the traditional rights of forest dwellers (as
in Malaysia and Indonesia), and insulated the forestry bureaucracy from political interference. At a moment when these
institutions were most needed, they were taken apart (Ross 2001).
Local politics, access rights and social conflicts in Benin: In Benin, international biodiversity aid in the form of the ECOPAS
project altered property rights in the WNP and its peripheral zones and, in so doing, threw into "disequilibrium" the
configuration of local-level political-economic interests. Changes in property rights continued to shape livelihoods and
political contest several years after the ECOPAS project ended. ECOPAS heightened the value of the Park and its buffer
zone as a political commodity over which different actors, notably CENAGREF and local elites, could struggle. It did so
through attempts to institutionalize resource use in the buffer zone and by demonstrating that it could be a source
of revenue through tourism, but especially international aid funds. In the specific context of the WNP region, results
suggest that conservation faces an uphill battle overthe longerterm. The relationship between local political-economic
elites and park authorities will be pivotal. As decentralization reforms deepen, mayors and local elected officials in
Benin have an incentive not to alienate their rural constituents who struggle with increasing competition over land and
often have a deep distrust of the Park Service, based on a history of eviction and arbitrary law enforcement. Finally,
skillful politicians can take advantage of confusion, generated by overlapping authority, unclear property rights, and
institutional uncertainly, to serve as brokers between local populations and park authorities thereby generating financial
and political capital. Uncertainty, a hallmark of the local political arenas in Benin essentially becomes another patronage
resource. Thus, although local authorities may not want to openly contradict national conservation laws, they may work
to undermine them. PA authorities and external conservation interests have no choice but to confront these realities.
However, ECOPAS was not successful in engaging local authorities and the decentralization process unfolding in the WNP
region more generally (Miller, 2013).
The above examples illustrate that political economy considerations -strongly influence the fate of the forests and
distribution of wealth and its sustainability over time. In the overall picture, stakeholder and interest groups, institutions
(rules) and existing organizations and agencies responsible forforest management, interact in complex ways to determine
how the forest resource is managed and how the associated returns are distributed. When stakeholders' power and influence
is uneven, institutions are weak (or deliberately weakened by the same vested interests), and organizations are inefficient
and corrupt, the result is resource plunder, institutional erosion and breakdown of the rule of law, and concentration of
wealth in a few hands.3 Any efforts at reform will be met by resistance by those who see themselves as likely to lose and
support from those likely to gain. A systematic political economy analysis can help gain insights into the functioning of this
complex interaction and better equip practitioners to craft a successful reform process.'
Going forward, Chapters 2 and 3 present some of the most promising approaches available to practitioners, to develop a
deeper understanding of the political economy equilibrium, including a focus on institutions, actors and organizations.
Drawing upon the experiences from these approaches, this work aims to develop preliminary guidance to conduct a
political economy analysis for the forest sector.
2. Another EU conservation project, PAPE, has begun to fill the gap left by ECOPAS and this new project may well enable CENAGREF to gain a victory in its on-going contest with local elites,
but if it does not take steps to more adequately engage with existing local politics and institutions, especially those connected to downwardly accountable democratic processes, victory
will likely only be temporary.
3. However, the positive experiences of Botswana and Chile (both, resource rich countries) suggest that the key to successful development lies in identifying and implementing actions
(especially through developing strong institutions) to discourage an "anti-social" State and transform it into a social welfare maximizing State.
4. Chapter 2 defines stakeholders, institutions and organizations and elaborates how they form the foundation of any political economy analgsis.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                                             11
Chapter 2: Political Economy Analysis
(PEA) and PEA Frameworks
Political economy analysis
To advance an understanding of political economy considerations, development practitioners have been using an
approach called political economy analysis (PEA). While definitions vary, PEA broadly is:
"concerned with the interaction of political and economic processes in a society; the distribution of power and wealth
between different groups and individuals; and the processes that create, sustain and transform these relationships
over time" (OECD 2005).s
Investigations into political economy matters have almost universally (and correctly) emphasized three features as
fundamental, and their study as critical, to developing a deeper understanding of any political economy system. These are-
institutions, organizations or organizational structures, and actors or stakeholders. The three help to better operationalize the
interaction between politics and economics, and, for the purposes of this report, they are defined as follows:
1. Institutions, in this context, refer to the rules of the game.
"....Institutions are the humanly devised constraints that structure political, economic and social interaction. They
consist of both informal constraints (sanctions, taboos, customs, traditions, and codes of conduct), and formal rules
(constitutions, laws, property rights). Throughout history, institutions have been devised by human beings to create
order and reduce uncertainty in exchange..... (North, 1991).6
2. Organizations/organizational structures typically provide the context in which actors and institutions interact.
"....Organizations are made up of groups of individuals bound together by some common purpose to achieve certain
objectives. Organizations include political bodies (political parties, the Senate, a city council, regulatory bodies),
economic bodies (firms, trade unions, chambers of commerce, cooperatives, guilds), social bodies (churches, clubs,
athletic associations), educational bodies (schools, universities, vocational training centers)..' (North, 1992).
3. Actors are stakeholders who have the capacity and authority to take decisions. Actors should be understood not only
as individuals but also as groups, and, especially, coalitions. Actors either serve their own interests or serve the
interests of a group which they represent, act within organizations and are bound by institutions.
5. www.oecd.org/dac/governanceanddevelopment/politicaleconomyanalysis.htm.
6. In a recent, sweeping, investigation, Acemoglu and Robinson, try to find answers to the central question of why some nations fail to develop while others have been phenomenally
successful. It is proposed that it is not the climate or geography or the culture that determines development, but a combination of "inclusive economic institutions" and "inclusive political
institutions" that creates the climate for sustained growth and development (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012). Inclusive institutions are based in widely held national values and free from
political influence, represent all stakeholders, have illuminated leadership, and offer stability and resilience. By contrast, the combination of "extractive economic institutions" and
"extractive political institutions" creates a toxic climate in which development is likely to fail, given that these institutions are narrow and non-transparent, work for the interests of a
few, and are prone to political influence. Thus, according to the authors, differences in the quality of both economic and political institutions is sufficient to explain the development
differences between North Korea and South Korea, Nogales (Arizona) and Nogales (Mexico), etc. Their main conclusion from this research is that, serious efforts to stimulate development
have to pay careful attention to the economic and political institutions, and the interplay between the two.


﻿12       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
The interplay between institutions, organizations and actors is a continual process and determines the actual outcomes,
as regards the means and relationships in investments, production and distribution, in any economy. The three features
can, and do, evolve overtime and thereby influence the nature of the equilibrium in that economy. Most PEAframeworks
put actors/stakeholders at the center-stage of their focus and complement that with an analysis of the institutional
and organizational factors. This is desirable, as, from a practical, operational perspective, to be able to drill deep into
political economy analysis requires us to understand the interplay among the three features.
In terms of scope and levels, PEAs can take on several forms. Many of the established PEA frameworks, which we
will discuss in the following sections, set the stage for a countrywide analysis. These can be particularly useful for
development partners who are attempting to understand the overall political economy environment and aspects of that
environment which, can or will, affect the efficacy and impacts of their support. PEAs can also focus on a specific sector
in a country, allowing for a more detailed analysis of the relevant actors, structures and overall factors influencing the
political economy of the sector. Lastly, PEAs can take on a reform/problem-specific approach, taking a granular look at
the issues surrounding a particular reform challenge in a sector within a country.'
If properly done, a PEA can serve three major functions, at different stages of the project cycle. At the beginning
of a project, it can illuminate the existing obstacles and needs for reform. More specifically it can show project
planners whether their project takes into account the key actors that will shape the project's outcomes and highlight
resistance and conflicts which might threaten its successful implementation. Second, as part of the project itself, a
PEA can catalyze changes in the political economy by influencing stakeholders. By making reliable and high-quality
information available to all stakeholders it can bring diverging interests into alignment and create a momentum for
reform. Third, repeated at the end of the project, it can show whether the project has led to reforms in the political
economy equilibrium that might create a longer-term, self-sustaining propensity towards sustainable resource use.
(If a PEA has been done at the beginning of a project, then in conjunction with a PEA at the end, it could perform
a useful monitoring role.) These are potentially powerful functions and we will examine how the PEA approaches
discussed in this report have contributed to each of the three.
Political Economy Frameworks in Common Use
An increasing number of PEA approaches have emerged over the last few years, most of which are supported by
donors and development agencies. Numerous reports have been published by international development banks and
aid organizations, development partner agencies, etc., shedding light on the structures, institutions, and actors that
form the political economy of a country, sector or specific reform area (Unsworth 2008, DFID 2004, Fritz et al. 2014,
Nash et al. 2006, World Bank 2007).
Successful examples of these analyses which have proven to be useful, include country studies conducted in Nigeria
and Bangladesh by the UK's Department for International Development (DFID). In both countries, the analyses have
"brought a greater sense of realism about the difficulty of bringing about transformative change" while simultaneously
getting stakeholders to direct their attention to "identifying the most promising entry points"in their country. For DFID
in particular, the analysis conducted in Nigeria pushed the agency to expand its scope and approach of intervention, as
seen by its increased engagement at the state level and increased inclusion of new stakeholders in the justice sector,
civil society and assemblies at the national and state level since the 2003-2005 studies (Duncan and Williams 2010). As
another example, the World Bank has produced good practice guidelines on political economy analysis and backed those
7. Generally speaking, the challenges associated with conducting a PEA increase as we transition from broad overview-types to granular problem specific types. And, as we shall see below,
reflecting this, approaches to more granular PEAs are relatively few.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                       13
with a handful of case studies to illustrate the application and the benefits to conducting such analyses (Fritz et al. 2009,
Fritz et al. 2014). Some of the more prominent and widely used frameworks are described in this chapter and the next.
DFID's country level analysis
OBJECTIVE
With the establishment of Millennium Development Goals objective, UK's Department for International Development
recognized the need for a systematic political analysis, thus the department created a country-level framework called
"Drivers of Changes" (DoC). DoC was not an immediate response to the creation of the MDGs but rather a gradual
adaptation of DFID to development aid, learning from its own and other international development agencies' failures.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The framework is donor oriented and focuses on answering two questions: "What needs to be done?" and "How can the
donors deliver it most effectively?" The framework recognized three mains areas of analysis: Actors, Institution and
Structural Features with changes governed by the relationship among these factors.
* Actors are individuals or agents involved in the sector.
* Institutions are "rules of the games" (political and public administration processes) governing the behavior of
agents. Institutions also include formal as well as informal rules.
* Structural Features look at the history and the current context and also focus on the socio-economic structures.
* Changes are both negative and positive and they are considered at different temporal scales, from immediate changes
(at Actors level) to medium-term change (at Institutions level) to long-term change (at Structural Features level).
Changes are mediated through Institutions, meaning that policy can influence actors and gradually reform structural
featuresaswell.Thus-, by havingtheframeworkcentered on Institutions, DFIDisabletoidentify policy recommendations
and "drivers of (these) changes" (see Fig 2.1).
FIGURE 2.1: FRAMEWORK FOR A COUNTRY LEVEL POLITICAL ANALYSIS (ADAPTED FROM DFID 2004)
Structural     +    _       Intttin+
Features+
IMPLEMENTATIONAL GUIDANCE
The approach consisted of a three-stage, or six-level analysis, analyzing each factor (Structural Features, Institutions,
and Actors) and their relationships, which drive changes.
* Basic country analysis
-  Political, socio-economic and institutional factors affecting the dynamics and possibilities for change.
* Institution analysis
-  Medium-term dynamics of change: Actor-Institution linkage or the incentives and capacities of actors operating
within institutions.
-  Role of external forces: donors impact on pro-poor changes.


﻿14         THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
-   Link between change and poverty reduction: long-term change, or Institutions - Structural features linkage.
DFID's policy action
-   Operational implications: Structural features - Institution strategies and actions.
-   How DFI D works - covering DFID's organizational incentives, including those promoting orimpeding the retention
of country knowledge.
APPLICATIONS OF THE APPROACH
DoC was used as the first level diagnostics approach for DFID engagement set forth in a Country Assistance Plan (Warrener
2004). Within a year of its inception in 2001, DoC analysis was carried out in eleven countries, two regions with many
in the pipelines, and other countries showing interest.8 Due to the flexibility in the framework, Thornton and Cox (2005,
as cited in Nash et al 2006) found that there is great variation in the scope of the studies, their duration and costs. The
duration of the studies ranges from 15 days to over two years and costs varied from GBP 4,000 (for Georgia) to GBP 2.1
million (for Nigeria).
BOX 2.1: APPLYING DFID'S DRIVERS OF CHANGE APPROACH IN NIGERIA
Nigeria is a DFID country with development cooperation since the late 1990s (DFID Operation plan 2011- 2015). Most of the
programs at this time were pro-poor, which concentrated on areas of sustainable development, access to market, security and
empowerment (Duncan 2003). However, Nigeria's stagnant growth and inefficient pro-poor programs called for a systematic
reassessment for development reform. Thus, in 2003, DFID commissioned a series of study on the political economy of Nigeria
using the DoC framework. The DoC did not only challenge the development assumptions based on "democracy", "champions of
change", "capacity increase" and governmental "gate keepers" (Heymans and Pycroft 2003) but also realized the unrealistic time
horizon. The result yields that each assumption had a structural features and institutions as a barrier for change, and the change
process should focus on Institutional reform in the medium term and Structural Feature reform in the long term.
*   Democracy: After escaping military governance in 1999, 'democracy' did not drive anticipated development. This is due to many
structural factors: ongoing conflicts in Africa, high reliance on oil, highly divided (based on ethnics, religion), high poverty,
rampant HIV rate etc... Thus, "democracy" alone will not deliver change unless it is accompanied by structural reform.
*   Champions of change: Champions or pro-reform agents (found within the Executives or civil society) emerged from the
democracy process. But due to resistance from interest groups which are rooted deeply in the institution and structure of the
system, these champions are undermined.
*   Capacity increase: DoC did indicate that capacity was a factor, however, lack of accountability, transparency and weak linkage
between state and stakeholders are the main deterrence to change.
*   Gate-keepers (Bureau of Debt Management; the Independent Corrupt Practices Commission; the Federal Ministry of Justice; or
the Bureau of Public Enterprise): DFID recognizes the importance of the gate-keepers but long term impacts should come from
collaboration among other actors (civil society, media, private sector, think-tanks, academia, National Assembly, and Executives).
Also, without a sound institutional environment, the effort of both these gate-keepers and champions of change are futile.
From the redefined assumptions on policy actions, DFID is able to identify issues that require actions among many development
problems Nigeria faces: oil sector reform (diversification, private sector), democracy and accountability (political risk approach),
service delivery (agent interaction). Without these structural and then institutional reforms, changes will not be sustained.
8. These countries are: Bangladesh, Colombia, Georgia, Ghana, India, Kenga, Malawi, Nigeria, Pakistan, Uganda, Zambia (Warrener 2004). Additional countries can be found in Scott 2007.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                        15
SUMMARY
The tool allows for a simple and broad view of the country which is fundamental for further analysis. It also differentiates
among short, medium and long term perspective, which is essential for a practical implementation of change. The tool
is very flexible (Scott 2007) and the DoC could be carried out at any level-problem, sector, national (the most popular
level of application), or regional. There are a few limitations. The framework does not drill down into actor-level analysis,
thus, leaving out any dynamic negotiation among actors that would drive and sustain change. The tool is more descriptive
than prescriptive, and offers limited direction for operationalization (Haider and Rao 2010).
ODI's sector level analysis
OBJECTIVE
In the context of the Millennium Development Goals, achieving sector-level changes required the Overseas Development
Institute (ODI) to understand the "political explanations for how and why sectors differ within one national context"
(Moncrieffe & Luttrell 2005). Thus, arising from this need, ODI deepened DFID's Drivers of Change approach in 2005.
ODI's framework still has all the components found in DoC, i.e. Institutions, Actors and Structural Features. However, the
ODI framework has a focus on policy making and implementation. Structural features as well as historical legacies and
process of change are just external to institutions and actors.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The analysis is divided into three stages, similar to DFI Ds DoC, with the first one covering the Basic country analysis, the
second one focusing on Institution & Actors analysis and the last one on Policy actions. At each stage, the external factors
of Historical legacies, Process of change, Structural features, Power, and Ideologies are considered as the horizontal
analysis, cutting across vertical focus. The "external factors" influence policy making but are mediated through
institutions and actors (See figure 2.2 below).
FIGURE 1.2: FRAMEWORK IN POLITICAL ANALYSIS, SECTOR LEVEL (ADAPTED FROM ODI 2005)
EXTERNAL FACTORS
Historical Legacies
Process of Change
Structural Features
Power relations
IPolicyumakin


﻿16        THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Each step is guided by a different matrix, listing the key questions for analysis (see table 2.1).
TABLE 2.1. ODI APPROACH TO PEA
Stagc 1onr AayiUnsta                   in 2 raiain             Stiy aage   mn 3n
ulnstituil &AtrOpaiolmpiaions
*Dfninetom:
Basic information    Geopolitical status              Players recognition                Defining Objectives &
Institutionalization            Organizational structure             Expectations
Government capacity &           Management                          Context, scope for influence
accountability                   Financing                          Feasible timeline (short vs
Incentives                          long term)
Capacity                            Possible conflicts in ideology
Historical Legacies  Role of historical legacies,     Historical basis for existing rules  & objectives
perceptions of legitimacy, durability, Implication for history      Determining Entry Points
consequences for policy                                             Key actors & influence
Institution                                                         Key groups & influence
Change Process       Nature and dynamics of change    Nature and dynamics of changes     costrant
Direction of trends             Opportunities and challenge for     contrfing        f
changes                             Leverag poe
Crisis and non-linear changes       Strae alne
Structural Features  Demographic, social identities,  Effect of structural factors on power
development                     relations, management,
Distribution of natural resources
Power Relations      Formal and informal power relations  Power dynamics
Balance of power                Network of actors
Formal and informal influence
Distribution of power, resources
Effect on policy implementation
Ideologies, Values   Effect on public policy at different  Transparency
Perceptions          level                            Capacity
Conflicts
APPLICATIONS OF THE APPROACH
Up to date, thereis no single report assessing the successorfailure of ODI sectorlevel analysis.CAll of ODI's project reports
are however housed on their websitel. According to the repository, ODI's sector level analFsis was applied in these sectors
but not limited to: transport (Uganda 2009), health (Tanzania and Uganda 2008), water (Ethiopia and Vietnam), etc.
9. http://wwct.ods.org/publications/3852-odi-project-brsefings


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                    17
BOX 2.2: PROMOTING SCALING UP OF RURAL SANITATION IN VIETNAM: POLITICAL ECONOMY
CONSTRAINTS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Starting in 2010, DFID engaged in the WSS sector in Vietnam in responding to the slow progress in rural sanitation toward the
water sector growth in relation to the MDGs. The study aimed to answer the questions pertaining to the marginalization of the sub-
sector rural sanitation in the water sector and the ineffectiveness of up-scaling "innovative approaches" in rural sanitation.
ODI's sector analysis identified the lack of coordination between the managing agencies and demand driven focus were the
cause for both the slow progress on rural sanitation and uptake of innovative approaches. The hierarchical decision-making and
consensus-building model created a huge gap both horizontally (from one unit to another) and vertically (from local administrative
unit to the central one). Thus rural sanitation was a mandate for the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education and Training
while Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development accounted for the rest of the water sector. This structure, plus the demand
driven prioritization (with rural sanitation takes up to less than 18% of the national target programs budget), was attributed to the
lack of incentives for innovation in the sector.
Based on the identification of these political problems, ODI recommended four interlinked actions: minimize political risk (in
response to innovative approaches), work with new actors (to scale up demand driven model), operate within existing political
cultures (follow the centralized hierarchical structure) and develop appropriate incentives (by refocusing power to local government
instead of sector level).
Source: Harris et al. 2011, Harris et al 2012.
SUMMARY
The tool is very detailed and provides guidance on all steps. This is supported by the available matrices (ODI 2005). Due
to the multidisciplinary of the analysis, the framework fosters an inter-disciplinary collaboration among DFID staff,
which strengthens the internal workgroup addressing the issues.
On the other hand, because of the level of detail required, the framework risks losing focus (0DI 2005). In addition, "risks
and assumptions" were not spelled out and taken into consideration in most applications of the tool. And finally, as yet,
there is not enough evidence on the application of the framework, to be able to assess what works well and how effective
it has been in effecting change (Edelmann 2009). Thus, evidence on the use of the tool as catalyzing change and for
monitoring and evaluation purposes is weak.
Political Economy of Policy Reform (PEPR)
OBJECTIVE
The PEPR framework began as a World Bank study aiming to:
i) examine stakeholder interests, incentives, institutions, risks, opportunities, and processes from a social analysis
perspective, and,
ii) show what works, why it works, and how it works, in order to gain a superior understanding and management of
political economy issues during the design and implementation of reforms.


﻿18       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The framework is based on the social analysis approach developed forthe World Bank's Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
(PSIA), Tools for Institutional, Political, and Social Analysis (TIPS), and operational experiences. The Framework provides
a diagnostic component with a variety of follow-up actions in order to adapt the analytical findings into more effective
guidance on reform processes and operations at the sectorlevel (World Bank 2008).
The main focus of the framework is analyzing stakeholder interests, incentives, institutions and risks in the context
of three reform areas: the reform context, the reform arena, and the reform process. This system was developed and
improved upon through key informant interviews (World Bank project team leaders and others), literature reviews, and
information from operational experiences in the agriculture sector (Burkina Faso, Senegal, Tanzania, Indonesia, Malawi,
Chad, Mozambique, and Mexico), and water supply and sanitation sector (Jordan, Albania, Argentina, Bolivia, Ghana,
Vietnam and New Delhi) (World Bank 2008).
The broadest of these reform areas is the reform context; it provides the economic, social, political and historical context at
the country orsectorlevel. More specifically, the information in the reform contextincludes countrywide social and economic
inequality, property rights, power relations, social organization (i.e., indigenous groups, cultural authorities, etc.), regional
discrepancies, systems of exchange and markets, political parties, institutions, ruling powers, historical factors and other
similar elements that affect the sector under consideration. The reform context sets the stage for the type of environment
in which the sectoral reform is being attempted, hence its national scope. It should enable an assessment of the key policy
changes that are being proposed, the objectives of those policy pieces, and their supporters.'
Zooming in beyond the reform context is the reform arena. The reform arena covers the institutions that govern relations
and behaviors, as well as stakeholders, their political and economic interests, and ability to influence or change
institutions. In this setting, institutions include both formal and informal "rules of the game". Formal rules constitute
elections, political systems, and similar systems. Informal rules constitute the norms and cultural practices that include
social hierarchies and forms of rent-seeking. Meanwhile, stakeholders include individuals, communities, groups or
organizations are interested in the result of an intervention because they can influence it or be influenced by it, in both
cases positively or negatively.
The most detailed area of the framework is the reform process. While the framework itself is a dynamic piece, the reform
process, by definition, revolves around change - through knowledge sharing, public debates, and various forms of
communication and interaction. The framework stresses the use of dialogue through partnerships, and decision-making
through actions on both the supply and demand side. In the context of policy reform, partnerships imply that stakeholders
have actual influence and responsibilities (in addition to a higher level of information disclosure, transparency on
decision-making by partners, and power sharing). Supply-side action comprises state institutions acting pro-actively
or reactively; demand-side action comes from citizens acting as consumers or producers.
Leadership is also mentioned as a contributory factor to the reform process. "Agents of change" can make a significant
impact in the reform process, as they are committed to the agenda, and capable of assembling coalitions in the name of
the reform, negotiating effectively, and conveying an eloquent and desirable vision of reform effects.
Effective engagement with international development agencies is also seen as a key piece in the reform process. At
times, countries can influence these agencies, and at times the countries are the ones being influenced by the agencies.
Therefore, the framework stresses the need to assess the type of relationship countries have with development agencies
in order to understand what stake they have in the reform process, and if/how they can aid the process.
10. Development agencies have developed frameworks for looking at the reform context in a country and two tools which we touch upon are OFID's Drivers of Change and SIDAs Power Analysis.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      19
After the diagnostic framework, an action framework is presented, which focuses on four practical inferences for policy
design and implementation:
- The critical value of understanding and observing the political economy environment,
- An increase in linkages between "systematic evidence generation and effective negotiation and communication
strategies" (World Bank 2008),
- A readjustment of the accountability framework for reforms,
- Increased awareness of how donors participate in reform processes.
SUMMARY
The "reform scenario" that the PEPR framework creates allows for development practitioners to understand how or where
each piece of the puzzle fits in. Although the framework was developed around the World Bank's operations, the same
model and pieces of information can be applied to other development agencies' operations.
However, there is very little guidance on how to obtain the needed information. The framework itself was established
through interviews and literature reviews, and then improved upon afterit was tested in the two case studies, but beyond
that, there is no roadmap of where to start, when to stop, etc. (There are no additional case studies to explore this
methodology, obtain guidance for implementation, or use for quality control). Finally, the framework does not provide
a clear frame of action in the sense that it merely lists broad areas that should be considered or improved without much
guidance on how to achieve that. It also lacks guidance on getting from its diagnostic framework to its action framework.
Problem-Driven Governance and Political Economy Analysis (PGPEA)
OBJECTIVE
The PGPEA framework emphasizes that an analytic approach to governance and political economy is essential to make
progress on development issues. The objective of the framework is to systematize approaches to governance and political
economy analysis, geared towards World Bank teams but usable by other development agencies and development banks
(Fritz et al. 2009). The framework does not set a specific structure; rather, it provides standards for governance and political
economy diagnostics under the viewpoint that such diagnostics should be core to the development and implementation
of World Bank strategies. Through the provision of diagnostics standards and lessons learned, it aims to provide practical
and concrete guidance that users can adapt to the specific situation at hand. The framework does not provide a particular
product; it takes the general view that in order to improve development effectiveness, governance and political economy
diagnostics should become integral to preparing and implementing Bank strategies and operations (Fritz et al. 2009).
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The PGPEA framework builds on existing PE approaches and pilots, including those led by the UK, the Netherlands, Sweden,
the EU, and the World Bank's Institutional and Governance Reviews (IGRs) and Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA).
The guiding principle behind the PGPEA is that to be concretely useful for practitioners, a PEA should start with a diagnosis of a
specific problem, that is, a specific unresolved development challenge that needs to be addressed. The presumption was that a
problem driven approach was more likely to lead to specific findings and actionable recommendations than would approaches
that have a broad emphasis on "understanding the context" or a focus on testing existing theories (Fritz et al. 2014).
PGPEA can be applied to analysis at the country, sector, or project level, or at multiple levels. Country-level analysis seeks to
capture the overall governance situation and the main political economy drivers. Analysis at this level servesto capture important
factors such as the geopolitical context, important social divisions (including ethnic or religious ones where relevant) and how


﻿20       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
they have evolved over time, and the evolution of the political management of economic rents. Sector and thematic PGPEA
analysis seeks to analyze institutional and governance arrangements and political drivers in a particular sector or subsector,
covering an entire sectorvalue chain or selected issues within a sector ortheme. Problem-driven PE analysis for specific projects
and/or policy decisions addresses specific questions regarding project design and management, or may be focused around the
political economy and institutional aspects of an intended policy change and its likely impacts (Fritz et al. 2009).
PGPEA focuses on three central types of factors:
* Structural: These factors influence stakeholder incentives and opportunities but are beyond the direct control of local
actors. They may be slow to change (e.g., demographic characteristics) orfast changing (e.g., international swings in
commodity prices).
* Institutional: These factors are concerned with "the rules of the game" (e.g., laws), both formal and informal
* Stakeholders/Actors: Individuals and organized groups (e.g. NG0s, trade unions, cooperatives, etc.)
The approach adopted consists of three steps (Fritz et al. 2009 and Fritz et al. 2014):
Step 1: Identify a specific development challenge. The challenge could be narrowly focused (e.g. what to do about
continued teacher absenteeism) or framed more broadly (e.g. how best to pursue further health sector reforms).
Step 2: Analyze why the observed, dysfunctional patterns are present, that is, the political economy drivers. This step
should cover three dimensions: a) the relevant structural factors that influence stakeholder positions, b) existing
institutions, including institutional dysfunctions, and, c) stakeholder interests, interactions, and power relations.
Step 3: Identify ways forward, including howto initiate change. This step includes analytical recommendations intended to offer
a road map for operational engagement, for potential entry points and for ways to engage. This step seeks to identify the
political economy driversto isolate obstacles to progressive change, and to suggest how a positive driver can be introduced.
IMPLEMENTATIONAL GUIDANCE
The framework stresses that doing the PGPEA process correctly is imperative for it to have utility. It discusses five PGPEA
steps in the process (Fritz et al. 2009):
1. Planning PGPEA work, which clarifies why this work is being done and sets the objectives
2. Defining and finding the necessary skills
a. Usually takes 2 people - one with strong political economy skills and another with detailed sector knowledge
b. Local consultants should be included, if possible, but the rest of team should also be engaged. Local consultants
can be more helpful during dissemination and follow-up
3. Considering issues about implementation of the diagnostics
a. Ensure team involvement and openness
b. Requires a decision on whether information will be shared explicitly with government
c. Essential to ensure good feedback to country/sector/task teams
d. Consider the downstream quality management for PE analysis
4. Sharing and disseminating outputs
5. Bridging analysis and follow-up/action
a. The process of moving from analysis to follow-up usually starts once initial analysis is available; it should not wait
until the written reports are fully finalized
b. A workshop with the country/sector/task team to review and debate the findings and to discuss what implications
these findings have for strategies or operations.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                          21
The PGPEA analysis relies on a range of sources for information. Generically speaking, the sources are: Pre-existing
diagnostics (e.g. economic and sector work, and public expenditure reviews), laws and regulations, organigrams and
mapping of de jure and actual process flows as important sources to capture institutional structures, sector-specific
data, public opinion surveys (existing or commissioned), other written sources (e.g. media coverage of policy debates,
minutes of parliamentary debates). Interviews with individuals and focus groups, where appropriate, are also key
sources of information. Interviewees may include knowledgeable local stakeholders-researchers, journalists, civil
society representatives, and policy thinkers within government and political parties. Information gathering also includes
in-depth discussions with the Bank's country or sector teams.
BOX 2.3: ZAMBIA: CASE STUDY EXAMPLE OF PGPEA APPLICATION
The publication "Problem-Driven Political Economy Analysis: The World Bank's Experience" provides several cases of the problem-
driven political economy analysis methodology being applied - at varying degrees - through World Bank activities. One case stood
out as an example of the type of change that is possible if political economy analyses are strongly and consistently supported.
As a result of Bank management acknowledging that the then-current strategic approach to development being applied in Zambia
was not generating the results originally expected, two levels of political economy assessment were commissioned. The first
assessment was at the country level. The second level consisted of a series of sector assessments - including agricultural land
rights, decentralization, electricity, mining, telecommunications, tourism, and urban water utilities - which used the country level
assessment as their knowledge foundation.
Two sectors were examined closely -telecommunications and electricity. In both sectors, previous efforts at reform had
attempted to reach ideal changes that did not consider the political realities of the country and sector, and ultimately failed. In
the telecommunications sector, the entry of cellular phones and the Internet to Zambian culture had a transformational impact
on the sector. Zambia's monopoly telecommunications provider, Zamtel, was not able to keep up with demand for a broadband
communications infrastructure and cellular networks. The World Bank Group and others attempted to inform Zambia of the
benefits of reforming the sector, but no reform occurred. In the electricity sector, there was an underinvestment in the development
and maintenance of power generation and extremely low electricity costs to consumers, led by the monopoly parastatal company,
the Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation (ZESCO). With an increased domestic and regional demand for electricity in the 2000s,
there was a need for sector reform to be able to respond to rising electricity demands. The World Bank Group supported Zambia
in developing a number of large-scale reform initiatives - including changing tariffs and privatizing ZESCO - but reform did not
happen.
. While direct credit for causality is not feasible, there were changes on the ground in both sectors after this change in
engagement. For the electricity sector, a series of major tariff increases were put in place in 2009 and 2010, allowing ZESCO to
connect more people to the electricity grid and heighten financial sustainability, partly through increased interest from private
investors. In the telecommunications sector, the story did not evolve as envisioned. Zamtel was privatized, but shortly after a
government administration change, the privatization was reversed. The reasoning for these actions is not entirely clear due to the
confidentiality level of the situation.
From Zambia's two-level assessment approach, four lessons emerged:
*  A stand-alone country-level assessment could not provide the specific information needed to create sector reforms, but at the
same time, sector-level assessments needed that broad information (from country-level assessments) to obtain the context of
the work.
*  The added-value that sector-level assessments provide is the in-depth knowledge of the issue and familiarity with the area,
both of which can aid operations.
*  Cross-disciplinary cooperation is necessary in order to allow the skills and knowledge of both the technical expert and political
economy expert to be used most effectively.
*  The support of high-level leadership is integral to making the necessary linkages to make the assessments useful.


﻿22       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
SUMMARY
The PGPEA framework is a systematically developed and comprehensive tool. It includes useful, clear, and stand-alone
guidance on how to structure a political economy analysis. There are a number of applications of the framework and these
offer a solid basis for guidance for would-be users. Although it was created for the World Bank, it has obvious utility for
other stakeholders and organizations.
On the other hand, by the very token of being comprehensive, the framework is less clear on how the analysis and
diagnostics, emerging from an application of the PGPEA, translate into actionable findings and interventions. Along the
same lines the approach aims to provide specific guidance while not being too prescriptive on what steps to take! This
requires judgment and balance, which the framework does not really provide. Finally, the PGPEA has not been used for
monitoring and evaluation purposes in any of the countries in which it has been applied.
The Strategic Governance and Corruption Analysis (SGACA)
OBJECTIVE
The Strategic Governance and Corruption Analysis (SGACA) is designed as a tool to build on and enhance the efforts of the
Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs in analyzing the governance climate in its partner countries. The SGACA exercise
focuses on governance and corruption issues, as these issues tend to 'infect' a country's entire social and economic life.
SGACA adds value to regular political reporting done (by embassies) in two ways. Firstly, it provides a framework to
systematically look at the impact of politics on development. Secondly, SGACA can be used to deepen political analysis
by explaining the structural factors that determine the rules of the political game, especially the underlying factors and
informal relations. All this leads to operational implications and a revision (or confirmation) of the current aid strategy
and policy of the Netherlands embassy (Hazenberg 2009, Unsworth 2008).
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The SGACA methodology builds on the experience and knowledge that came out of SIDA's (Swedish International
Development Agency) PowerAnalysis and DFID's Drivers of Change exercise. The SGACA methodology looks at governance
processes through the 'lenses of the political economy. The conceptual starting point of the SGACA is that governance
is about striking a balance between the power of the rulers and the ruled. Historically, this has happened through a
process of interaction, bargaining and competition between rulers and organized groups in society. The SGACA explores
underlying factors (including the history of state formation, the sources of revenue, and social and economic structures)
that shape the formal and informal relations between the state and organized groups in society. In doing so, the SGACA
provides insight into the incentives that drive politicians and policy makers (Unsworth 2008).
IMPLEMENTATIONAL GUIDANCE
The SGACA includes four, well-defined, components:
* The Track Record, which is the starting point and is part of the embassy's standard monitoring work. Its findings,
together with additional available information serves as a basis for the Power and Change analysis (below);
* A Powerand Change analysis (PCA), lies at the core of SGACA. An international consultant writes this analysis together
with one or two local consultants to secure the local context. This team, together with staff from the embassy, follows
a strict guideline for setting up the research. First, the factors that fundamentally shape the state and political system
(foundational factors) are mapped. Second, the researchers focus on the key aspects of the political system that
affect the quality of governance, both formal and informal (rules of the game). Finally, they address matters that
have an imminent impact on state-society relations, such as the current context and main actors (here and now);


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                23
* A Workshop, where Day 1 is planned as an internal exercise orit might be open to selected external stakeholders. Day
2 is not public and focuses on elaborating and refining the current donor strategy for the Netherlands;
* Strategic Choices that summarize the findings, in the shape of a governance and anticorruption strategy report and
present policy choices for the coming years.
BOX 2.4: SGACA IN UGANDA
Uganda provides an example of how the SGACA process changed the tactics in the development relationship between donor
country and recipient country. The SGACA has helped the Embassy in Kampala, Uganda, to formulate a Multi Annual Strategic
Plan (MASP) that takes into account political realities in the country. The strategy of the embassy is based on a sharp analysis of
which interests are shared between the Netherlands and Uganda and which are not. Its objective is to support the overlap between
the Ugandan and the Dutch policy agendas, identifying incentives and realigning the instruments accordingly. According to the
embassy, the previous MASP was both not critical enough of what was happening behind the fagade in Uganda and at the same
time too ambitious. The 'circle of interest was much bigger than [the] circle of influence' (Hazenburg 2009). Therefore, the embassy
has chosen to focus on only two sectors (education and justice, law and order) and three crosscutting issues (northern Uganda,
political governance and taxation/accountability). A clear distinction is made for all the interventions by the Netherlands, between
activities that fall within the overlap of interests, and activities that aim to mitigate negative effects of actions by the Ugandan
government. With this focus, the embassy aims to be more effective in contributing to concrete development results.
APPLICATIONS OF THE APPROACH
Atotal of 29 SGACAs were completed between mid-2007 and mid-2009, and the SGACA exercise was abandoned afterthe
completion of the Sudan SGACA in May 2009 (Hout and Schakel, 2014).
SUMMARY
The SGACA is a practical guide to help structure and analyze existing information - a 'quick-scan' - that focuses on formal
and informal aspects of governance in context of a country.
Different tools and processes used by the Dutch Embassies, such as the Track Record and the MASP generate important
information for this purpose. The SGACA is complementary to these instruments and seeks to deepen the country
specific understanding of governance and corruption. Apart from formal factors, the SGACA aims to capture the informal,
societal and sometimes intangible underlying reasons for the governance situation, which can often differ from the
formal configuration of the state. Such an analysis can improve the design of donor interventions, through a better
understanding of what really drives political behavior on the other.
The SGACA is designed to make use of available material - including from other sources and donors. The SGACA enables
(Dutch) embassies to discuss this information, and to define implications for donor strategies and engagement, preferably
in co-operation with other development partners. These insights are then used to reflect on the strategic choices and the
intervention strategy as formulated in the MASP of the Netherlands. The SGACA approach draws upon international expertise
but weavesin the country specific information to create its Power and Change Analysis, thus ensuring relevance and salience.
On the other side of the ledger, while the SGACA is a first step, in many cases it still does not give a very clear image of the
country being studied. Forinstance, in Ethiopia there is a lack of data on issues such as corruption, the civil society organizations
world, and the levels of governance. In other countries it is hard to get a good look behind the fa;ade and behind the formal
rule of law. That is why SGACAs may have to be followed by further analysis in order to, 'drill down'. The PCA can point out the
weaknesses and shortcomings in the areas of governance and corruption that the embassy wants to tackle.


﻿24       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
There might also be subjects that the PCA didn't touch upon and that deserve further research. Despite the need of policy
makers to formulate concrete actions, further in-depth research often remains necessary. Additionally, the SGACA is
completed through quite a "closed-door" process and the product is rarely publicly available. In addition, the application
of this tool appearsto be a one off process and yet forms the basis forlong-term engagement by the Dutch embassies. In
the context of the three potential functions of a PEA, the SGACA helps with project planning and with identifying priority
areas for technical and financial support but, owing to its "closed-door" approach it is less able to create a momentum
for change. And finally, because it has not had any repeat applications, its potential as a monitoring and evaluation tool
remains untested.
Power Analysis (Sida)
OBJECTIVE
The Power Analysis (PA) approach has been developed by the Swedish International Development Agency (Sida). It is
based on the understanding that issues of power asymmetries, access to resources and influence over politics must be
addressed if poverty is to be reduced. Power analysis seeks to understand how development cooperation and donor
activities are influenced by this landscape, and how the landscape of power shapes their activities (DFID/World Bank,
2005; Hyden, 2005, Sida 2013).
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
"Power analysis is a learning process that supports staff, partners and other actors to understand the forms of powerthat
reinforce poverty and marginalization, and to identify the positive kinds of powerthat can be mobilized to fight poverty
and inequality" (Sida 2013).
Power is often seen as a finite resource that people and institutions can hold, wield, lose and
gain, usually through contestation.The approach is based on understanding powerand power relationships.The definition
of "power" is flexible and each power analysis study works with its own understanding of the concept. Thus, in a power
analysis of Tanzania, the focus was on three questions related to the setting of the policy agenda, the distribution of
costs and benefits and how informal social networks influence the policy process (also see Box 2.5). In a power analysis
of Ethiopia, knowledge as power was the central organizing theme (Vaughan and Tronvoll, 2003).
IMPLEMENTATIONAL GUIDANCE
Power analysis studies are initiated by country offices (of Sida) and carried out by country experts. Most power analyses
to date have been in support of Swedish development cooperation strategy for its partner countries.
The emphasis of Power Analysis, on understanding the formal and informal political landscape, is a useful corrective to
approaches that focus largely on formal political rules and institutions. There is much scope for the analysts to adapt the
approach and define the areas of focus.
The analysis can make use of existing data sources, or collect new data. Ways of collecting data about power - its
constitution, distribution, exercise and control - might include panels of independent experts, surveys of well-informed
people, public opinion polls, and focus group discussions.
PowerAnalysis can map various levels or dimensions of context, as well as providing a framework for understanding how
history has shaped the present-day distribution of power. Depending on how and where it is employed, a power analysis
can inform actions at a macro level (country strategy), or at a micro level (whether a project is likely to be successful).


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                      25
The Sida publication of 2013 (Sida 2013, especially chs. 4 and 5) gives detailed guidance on how to do a Power Analysis,
and will not be duplicated here. The publication is recommended to the reader interested in getting further details on the
approach and methodology.
BOX 2.5: SIDA'S POWER ANALYSIS IN TANZANIA
The objective of the Power Analysis was to uncover the "character of power" in villages and mitaa [streets] in Tanzania, specifically
as related to decision-making about local development. It examined how power is exercised and by whom, .and it sought to identify
what opportunities are available for people living in poverty to influence decision making. The study was carried out in a random
sample of 15 villages, mitaa and "vitongoji" (hamlets) across Tanzania. Respondents included village leaders and local business
people (traditionally influential groups), as well as women, youth, small farmers and casual laborers (traditionally less influential
groups).
The study exposed six "new" findings. First, no significant relationship was seen between council performance (as determined by
overall council performance and per capita budget allocations for health and primary education) and the level and quality of public
participation in the villages and mitaa surveyed. Second, there is a large gap in perceptions of participation between leaders and
ordinary respondents: leaders are much more convinced than their constituents that village meetings are open, decision-making
forums where ordinary villagers can have their say. Other respondents are much more skeptical. Third, for many respondents
economic activities, such as self-help groups centered around income generation activities, are often a stepping stone for social
and political empowerment. Fourth, most villagers acknowledged that they need to engage in bribery or "gift giving" to local
leaders and officials in order to get almost anything done, from demanding small favors to circumventing the local bureaucracy
and "solving problems". Fifth, the Study uncovered both formal and informal accountability structures at village level. Finally, there
are some examples of "success stories", where the most historically vulnerable villagers (women, youth and small farmers) are
feeling more empowered, mainly as a result of good individual leadership and collective organization.
The study included two sets of recommendations towards reform. First, it cites respondents' own priorities for promoting greater
participation in their villages and mitaa, which include the need to achieve greater transparency in decision-making regarding
local development and the need for citizens to achieve better access to information. Second, the Study Team's own proposals
to improve transparency and strengthen participation include recommendations on increasing citizen access to local budget
information; reducing opportunities for corruption and patronage based politics; reducing the scope for partisan politics; helping
women to break down the cultural barriers to greater participation; and increasing options for participation in local forums through
anonymous channels.
In overall terms, the findings from the study have been used extensively in shaping the direction of local government reform.
Among other uses, the Technical Advisor for Governance in the Local Government Reform Programme is using the findings to inform
lower level cadre training and participatory planning methods at Council and lower government levels.
Source: Sida 2013, Rabe and Kamanzi 2012.


﻿26       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
APPLICATION OF THE APPROACH
To date, Sida has carried out various Power Analysis activities in Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Mozambique, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zimbabwe, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and also in some Latin American
countries. In some cases a partner has been supported to carry out a Power Analysis of a specific issue (e.g. Colombia).
Some have been published as reports, others as working papers, and others have been workshops for internal learning
purposes, with no official record. Most Power Analysis studies to date have been undertaken to provide input into the
preparation of the Swedish cooperation strategy. Some have looked at powerat the national level relevant to cooperation
strategies, while others have focused on specific regions, issues or sectors (Sida 2013).
SUMMARY
Sida's Power Analysis incorporates various dimensions of PEA. But, as a difference, it draws more on social theory and
political sociology to explain socialized and internalized norms and behaviorand to explore the interconnections between
institutions and agencies. Nonetheless, Power Analysis has the same objective (as a PEA) of making explicit hidden and
invisible relationships between key actors likely to craft, support, or block desirable policy changes (Sida 2013). Power
Analysis is able to generate deep and wide-ranging knowledge; as such, it is a good complement to other approaches to
mapping context, like measures of governance. The level of resources and time required varies, but with an emphasis on
desk research, interviews and qualitative analysis, the costs are limited largely to person-time. It does not lend itself
to cross-country comparison, but enables comparison over time in a single country. Thus, with repeat implementation,
the tool can be used for monitoring and evaluation. Arguably a limitation of the tool is that the information produced is
largely of a qualitative nature.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                     27
Chapter 3. Stakeholder-centered PEA
approaches
In the definition of political economy, recall the emphasis on "distribution of power and wealth between different groups
and individuals" and "the processes that create, sustain and transform these relationships over time" (OECD 2005).
Stakeholder analysis has the potential to unpack this emphasis by allowing for the "incorporation of stakeholders' needs
into the analysis". Stakeholder analysis uses "stakeholders' positions, their interests, their influence and their membership
in groups or coalitions to inform policy; and ensuring policies adopted are politically realistic and sustainable".
In this chapter we will describe two specific tools which have been employed to understand stakeholder attributes, their
incentives and their interactions and the resulting political economy outcomes. The first is the Agent-based Stakeholder
Model (ABSM) and the second is Net-Map. Both focus centrally on capturing and modelling stakeholder behavior.
However, as we will see, each handles it very differently, with associated strengths and limitations.
Besides focusing on stakeholders interactions, these two approaches also address the dynamic dimension of political
economy analysis. Thus, while the approaches in the previous chapter included "structural features" and "institutions",
these were considered to be exogenously fixed, with the collective action of the actors to follow. However, the two
approaches in this chapter are capable of incorporating complexity into their analysis (Ramalingam 2013). This
acknowledgement of complexity allows the two approaches to address problems that are constantly changing and are
impacted by high uncertainty, for example, like natural resource management under climate change scenarios.
The Agent Based Stakeholder Model (ABSM)
OBJECTIVE
Qualitative approaches to political economy analysis tend to be subjective and static, and they are inevitably overwhelmed
by highly complex reform environments with large numbers of relevant stakeholders. These conventional instruments
are easy to use but they do not exploit the rigor of cutting-edge political science methods now available to analyze how
coalition dynamics affect the political prospects of specific interventions. The ABSM was introduced in East Asia and
Pacific region of the Bank, in an experiment to elevate the sophistication, accuracy, and operational relevance of political
analysis at the Bank.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
The model draws on leading edge work in microeconomics and rational choice theory to analyze the preferences
and behaviors of relevant decision makers on politically driven issues. While not a substitute for a comprehensive
understanding of a country's political economy, the ABSM can add considerable value to other types of analysis (Nunberg
et al. 2010).
The ABSM initiative sought to develop a rigorous, quantitatively oriented and operationally usable political economy
analysis tool that could be systematically integrated into the World Bank's country programming cycle. This innovative
analytical approach entails a quantitative simulation of the complex bargaining dynamics surrounding reform.
11. World Bank. What is Stake Holder Analysis? http://wwwl.worldbank.org/publicsector/anticorrupt/PoliticalEconomy/stakeholderanalysis.htm


﻿28       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
The ABSM model builds on three specific theories in microeconomics and rational choice.
* Median voter theorem: Identifies the political center of gravity at the median position on a reform spectrum; hence,
the winning reform coalition is at the position of the median stakeholder.
* Risk theory: Stakeholders who are close to this median outcome are assumed to be risk averse, unwilling to risk
political capital by insisting on their own position at the possible expense of not reaching a deal. On the other hand,
stakeholders who are far away from the median outcome are more likely to risk holding up consensus in hopes of
achieving what they want.
* Game theory: The ABSM simulates how, subject to these risk tradeoffs, each stakeholder attempts to achieve their
preferred reform outcome.
The ABSM algorithm simulates the complex round- by-round bargaining dynamics among a large number of stakeholders
in a given reform process. The model anticipates how these dynamics play out over time and provides an empirical
assessment of the likely extent of reform and degree of stakeholder support for this outcome.
The model anticipatesthe outcome of these scenarios (ieinteractions between pairsof stakeholders) overtime and "provides
an empirical assessment of the likely extent of reform and degree of stakeholder support for this outcome" (Nunberg et al.
2010). Through this modelling, a forecastis made about the outcome of a reform process based on the preferences of actors.
Through real-time scenario analysis, the analyst can then test the potential impact of alternative scenarios.
IMPLEMENTATIONAL GUIDANCE
The ABSM involves five steps, as follows:
1. Frame the question: Articulate the overall objective of the political problem and break it down into its component
parts for detailed analysis.
2. Specify the issue: The ABSM defines an "issue" as the range of options that stakeholders may support related to a
policy matter. An issue needs to be assigned a numberfrom 0 to 100 in relation to two alternative extremes of reform.
3. Collect data: Conduct structured interviews with individuals who have a solid understanding of the country context,
stakeholderlandscape, and/or policy matter, and code interviews numerically to enterinto ABSM software afterwards.
For each issue, the following information should be obtained:
a. Stakeholders: List of potentially influential stakeholders
b. Positions: The extent of reform supported by each stakeholder, as shown in the "issue" range
c. Influence: The level of potential influence of each stakeholder, described in a 0 to 100 scale, relative to other stakeholders
d. Salience: The importance of the issue to the stakeholder defined by how much time and energy they are willing to
devote to the issue (from 0 to 100).
4. Analyze the base case: After entering the data collected into the ABSM, a picture of expected stakeholder interactions
over time is generated given current stakeholder positions and perceptions. This is the model's "baseline" outcome.
Through an examination of the base case results, it is possible to determine whether stakeholders are anticipated to
come togetherin support of a particular reform option, to what degree, and how quickly, and, therefore, what level of
reform could be expected under the current situation.
Define and interpret alternative scenarios: Using the analysis of the base case expected outcome, simulations can be
run, of strategies that the Bank (or other actors) might be able to use to improve reform outcomes and/or obtain greater
consensus in support of reform. Sensitivity analyses are also available to consider the effects of changes in position,
salience, or influence scores for certain stakeholders on the reform. Sophisticated statistical randomization techniques
are also available to help minimize bias from inaccurate data.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                    29
APPLICATION OF THE APPROACH
The ABSM model was piloted in 4 countries - Timor-Leste, Philippines, Mongolia, and a fourth undisclosed country.
BOX 3.1: EXPERIENCE FROM ABSM PILOTS
In Timor-Leste, the findings advanced discussions and sharpened the view of the Bank's country team on governance reforms
often taking shape as a three-stage process in that country. The exercise also emphasized that development partners may have
relatively little influence on the current civil service reform agenda, and that positions taken could have unintended effects.
In Mongolia, the analysis cautioned that there was little the Bank could do to affect sustained reform in the area at the time of
the analysis (election time). The experience suggested that the relevance and utility of the ABSM could be enhanced if modeling
capabilities were embedded within the CMU, allowing for flexible and timely responses to rapidly shifting environments and priorities.
In the Philippines, the ABSM provided a deeper understanding of the precise sources of resistance and ideas for how the (National
Program Support for Tax Administration Reform) project approach could be adjusted accordingly. It also brought to light the need
for more attention to change management within the agency and participatory activities to empower lower-level staff. In response,
the project devoted a greater proportion of its resources to change management activities, including information dissemination
campaigns and workshops to increase understanding of the reform process, and surveys to solicit feedback.
Source: Nunberg et al, 2010.
SUMMARY
The ABSM's working definition of "political economy" seemsto differ from that of the OECD, which stresses the interaction
between political and economic processes; the ABSM stresses the use of economics to predict politics. Despite this
difference, the tool can provide an anticipated, detailed image of the politics related to reforms, along with possible
outcomes for a range of Bank strategies. The model has been piloted in multiple countries (four) and so offers practical
guidance for would-be users.
On the other hand, the model is embedded in the ABSM software and therefore, the utility of this model is based on the
availability of the accompanying software and computer. The numeric scoring of actors' position, influence and salience
is also difficult to come to terms with, considering the specificity that these calculations require. According to the ABSM,
"Staff with a background in political science or institutional economics can be trained on the model's methodology,
analytical techniques, and practical application during a three-day hands-on course." (Nunberg et al, 2010).This
statement implies that country governments lacking in capacity have a slim chance in integrating this into their core
operations. Considering the requirements of this tool, it is clear that it was made for development agencies, not country
governments or other stakeholders, which limits its applicability. In the same context, there is no mention in the country
pilots of the utility or possibility for country governments to participate beyond after-analysis discussions. Finally, the
application of the ABSM started and ended as an experiment and so there is no information on its potential impact and
capability for monitoring and evaluation.


﻿30       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Net-Map Analysis
OBJECTIVE
Net-Map is a participatory stakeholder mapping technique. Hence Net-Map puts the spotlight on unpacking political
economy issues, and analyzes stakeholder connections to draw policy recommendations. It was first introduced by IFPRI
for a water project for Ghana (Schiffer and Waale 2008).
Net-Map is based on the traditions of social network analysis (SNA), in which the focus is on the actors, and the different
kinds and different strengths of relationships among the actors. Actors are the agents of change, and reforms are
achieved by facilitating different relationships among actors and capitalizing on the existing influence of actors. Net-
Map helps participants collectively solve a complex problem through three stages-information gathering, validation and
analysis. This tool is easy to understand and apply and ensures that stakeholders have access and ownership. It is low
tech and low cost, emphasizes actions and motivates taking those actions.12 It is a flexible tool, which can be applied at
different levels to draw policy recommendations.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Net-Map is based on the traditions of SNA, in which the focus is on the actors, and the different kinds and different
strengths of relationships among the actors (Jackson 2009). Unlike other methods, Net-Map assumes that institutions
and structural features are embedded in these relationships. Thus actors are the agents of change, and reforms are
achieved by facilitating different relationships among actors and capitalizing on the existing influence of actors.
From a network point of view, the connections between stakeholders could be directional. For example, the reporting
hierarchy of a network illustrates who reports to whom; this relationship is only in one direction. The connection between
stakeholders could be weighted.
The attributes of interest in political economy analysis are the "contestation, distribution of power, the incentive of the
stakeholders and their relationship among each other" (OECD 2005). These attributes are embedded in the network of nodes
and links, and can be deduced from an analysis of the centrality of the nodes.The centrality of the nodes is analogous to the
stakeholder's ability to influence. There are three main centrality measures that Net-Map touches on (Schiffer et al 2009):
degree centrality, betweenness centrality, and closeness centrality, each of which has a different meaning:
* Degree centrality states how many connections a node has. Degree centrality measuresthe involvement a stakeholder
has in the network.
* Betweenness centrality is a measurement of how much a node acts as a gateway in the network. The higher the
betweenness centrality of a node, the more paths run through that node, hence connecting other nodes. A high
betweenness centrality reflects that the stakeholder plays a key role in relaying information in the network.
* Closeness centrality measures the distance to other nodes. A low closeness centrality indicates that the stakeholder
isfarfrom others in the network.
12. The method is used by the World Bank Collaborative Leadership for Development Group (CL4D, in the Vice Presidency for Leadership Learning and Innovation) in their work with teams
around the world to increase their ability to implement challenging projects and reforms, bring together diverse stakeholders and develop resilient engagement strategies. In addition,
PROFOR is supporting ECA in the use of this technique to analyze who influences cross-border timber trade in the Russian Far East (RFE) and how to promote legal timber trade.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                        31
FIGURE 3.1 NET-MAP: OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE AND STYLIZED EXAMPLE
Defining scope of
analysise--
Em.m
Identifying actors gNGO
g Private
Guysm rrua nt
Tachn ina I asiatan ae
the lo disc u es ti cpn ts h Ave te s ch ncentovexca g  opno sa da reo&eea t  cos  oe ,c n eto s
m pgotaaspa
Policyri
Stp1-rblmdfntin-Soe faayi
Step 2: Identificnationofatr
IMPLEMENTATICINAL GUIDANCE
The Net-Map process revolves around discussions among stakeholder groups (Schiffer and Hauck 2010). During
the discussion, participants have the chance to exchange opinions and agree on relevant actors' roles, connections,
influences and views of the problem at hand. The process is guided b an independent facilitator who prompts the
questions on possible actors, nodes, influences and views. The facilitator also notes the discussion and the process of
mapping for the analysis phase.
Net-Map emplo s     a four-stage iterative approach:nd
Step 1: Problem definition - Scope of analesis
Step 2: Identification of actors
Step 3: Network mapping and relationships-actors' incentives and actors' influence
Step 4: Network analysis and follow up questions
Problem definition - Scope of analysis: Net-Map begins with defining the problem and in so doing, draws the scope of
analysis. The question being asked at this stage is usually in the form of "who influences .."', forinstance "who influences
the success of [charcoal sector] reform process [in Tanzania]" or "who influences benefit-sharing in the forest in the
context of Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) in Bandundu province in the Democratic
Republic of Congo". The more well-defined the question, the sharperthe analyjsis is likelyj to be.
13. Adapted from Schiffer and Waale 2008; IFPR1 Discussion Paper 00772


﻿32       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Identification of actors: A list is made of actors (individual and organizations) who are likely influential in the question
posed at the stage of problem definition. The list is not exhaustive at this stage but serves as guidance forthe subsequent
stages of stakeholder interaction. During this step, the stakeholders are also categorized into groups (e.g., NGO, private
sector, government, etc.).
Network mapping and relationships: In this step, actors' relationships (=links, connections or flows) are visualized,
analyzed and discussed in an interactive and iterative manner. This step relies heavily on a facilitator whose neutral
role is to engage actors into revealing both positive and negative relationships, formal and informal connections, and
achieve consensus (Figure 3.1). The figure gives examples of three types of connections: technical assistance (green),
financial flow (blue) and conflict (red). The arrows indicate the direction of flow, for example Technical assistance from
NGO I to Government agency 1; financial flow from Government agency i to NGO 2. An actor can have multiple types of
links with other actors. The flows can also have a value which can be represented by the thickness of the link. The group
exercise also incorporates actors' perceived influence. Here, NGO 1 is perceived to have the highest influence, followed
by Government agency 1, Private 2, NGO 2 and Private 1.
Network analysis and follow-up: This is done through both a qualitative narration and quantitative approach, with the
former revealing patterns of the network and the latter using different network measurements (as explained previously).
The observations raise additional questions for further investigation. This concludes the first cycle of Net-Map.
Afterthe first cycle, there is a process to verify the assumptions and results; the process involves additional stakeholders.
The process is done at various times to reveal the before, during and after intervention changes in network structure and
stakeholder engagement. The last step of the broad framework is policy recommendations based on the updated network
maps from multiple consultations.
APPLICATION OF THE APPROACH
Countries where Net-Map has been applied include Ghana, Malawi, Tanzania, Philippines, and India. They were in the
areas of health, water, forestry and public policy and focus on economic reforms to project impact evaluation.
SUMMARY
The tool can be applied at any stage of a change process-before, during and after a project. Before the project, it can
inform project leaders on the design of the project, including relevant stakeholders and the kinds of connections among
them. During the project, Net-Map can verify if the project is having the desired effect as envisioned during the project
design phase. After the project, Net-Map can show the impact of the project and inform next steps. The tool uncovers
multidimensional connections among stakeholders which helps "unbundle" complex problems.
The framework is iterative; the policy recommendations could potentially revisit the problem, identify additional actors
and links which give additional insights into the problem. It is interactive, and is intended to build consensus among
stakeholders and fill information gaps during the discussion. One of the unique features of the tool is the visualization of
the stakeholder network, which facilitates the discussion and deepens our understanding of the problem.
There are a few limitations. Organizing stakeholder meetings can be difficult and expensive, especially when the process
needs to be repeated in orderto measure change. The process could potentially create confrontation among stakeholders
during the discussion. The process requires a well-trained facilitator since the information is elicited during and afterthe
discussion. Finally, the information needs to be interpreted with caution since the network analysis does not distinguish
adequately between qualitative variables ("influence") and quantitative variables ("money flows").


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      33
Applications of Net Map to Forestry
1. Political economy analysis of illegal logging in the Russian Far East
The following example (summarized in Figure 3.X) of an application of the Net-Map process is taken from the forest
sector with a focus on illegal logging in the Russian Far East (RFE). The need for a political economy analysis of the
situation stemmed from a study on the Far East Forest Governance, which recommends "identification of social problems,
root causes and incentives" as means to address the problem (World Bank 2014). Thus, Net-Map was selected as an
exploratory tool to draw the political map of illegal logging in the RFE before national and international workshops of
stakeholder mapping are conducted.
The Net-Map process follows the framework in Figure 3.1 above. The specific question was, "Who influences the
persistence of illegal logging in the Russian Far East?" The map was drawn in January 2014 by drawing out the knowledge
and perspectives of the project leader.
The project leader identified 45 actors and five types of connections.4 The actors were divided into four groups:
international non-government, Russian government, non-Russian and private. For example, the Federal Forestry Agency
and the Russian Customs belong to Russian government group; while the European Union and the World Bank belong to
the international non-government group. The five different kinds of connections among the stakeholders are hierarchy,
technical assistance, informal money, formal money and timber flow. For instance, the leaseholder reports to the state
forest department which in turns report to the Ministry of Industry and then the Governor. These links constitute part of
the hierarchy chain; however, these are not the only hierarchical links in the network. Similarly, the formal money flows
from consumers to buyers, to processors, to haulage, and to leaseholders.
Next, the stakeholders' incentives and goals were examined. A Chinese processor, while having the highest perceived
powerin the network, had a negative influence on the persistence of illegal logging in this case (i.e. they were perceived
to assist the continuation of illegal logging). The Chinese processor would benefit financially from continuing informal
flows of timberand illegal trade. Most international non-government actors, such as the European Union (EU), European
Investigation Agency (EIA), and World Wildlife Fund (WWF) have a positive influence on law enforcement, but the
strength of their influence is perceived to be medium only.
The mapping exercise revealed that one-third of the actors do not have influence on illegal logging, while close to one-
third have low or medium influence. The latter are mostly government and non-Russian stakeholders. The stakeholder
group with the highest influence is the Chinese processors, followed by the private leaseholders.
The connections of reporting, wood flow, and formal and informal money flows show a high level of complexity. For
example while the wood flow network involves 19 stakeholders, the technical assistance network only consists of only
6 stakeholders. The web of informal and formal links takes up a third of the whole network, with the informal money
flows mainly within the Russian borders among government offices and private sectors, whereas the formal money flow
extends to international customers and non-Russian Custom offices.
14. It is important to mention that the information used in the construction of the network was received from one task team leader instead of the usual interactive stakeholder meeting/s.
Thus, it reflects the biases and perceptions of one individual "expert". However, the description serves to illustrate how simple get useful and practical the approach can be.


﻿34       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
FIGURE3.2 NET-MAP OF ILLEGAL LOGGING IN THE RUSSIAN FAR EAST
This multiplex, directed network" is then digitalized forvisualization and quantification of social network measurements.
The network shows a clear predominance of three groups: law enforcement stakeholders, private producers and private
processors. The initial result shows that the perceived influence is congruent with the measured degree centrality, i.e.
in the informal money flow network, a stakeholder with the higher informal outflow of money (the most diverse bribery
network) has the higher influence. In the formal money flow network, stakeholders who receive more formal money have
the higher influence. The exception in the formal money flow network is the haulage which receives many different kinds
of money from other private sectors, but is perceived to have no influence in the process. The exception in the informal
money flow network (bribery network) is the Russian processor, who initiates a diverse network of bribery and receives a
diverse source of formal money but is not perceived to have any influence. (This could be due to the lack of information
on the part of the project leader on the quantified amount of money flow.)
15. Multiplex network refers to a network with multiple types of connections and directed network refers to the different bidirectional links between actors.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      35
FIGURE 3.3 NET-MAP ANALYSIS OF ILLEGAL LOGGING PROBLEM IN RUSSIAN FAR EAST
* Hlerarchy
.Formal Money
on                                            me..a....rnma Money
*** Wood
TA
*   internat Non Govt.
*  Govt.
Private Serr
low  *11g *ifiem
Another observation from the network map is the existence of a core of negative actors, which consists of mostly private
sector and government actors; these actors are interconnected with multiple networks (money flow, chain of command,
and corruption).
There is a small cluster of positive actors, consisting of international non-governments; however, this cluster is not well-
connected. Thus, the perceived and measured influence is medium to low. Finally, neutral actors are found further down
the hierarchical and spatial process, i.e. after the logs cross over the Russian border.


﻿36       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
FIGURE 3.4 POSITIVE, NEGATIVE AND NEUTRAL CLUSTER OF STAKEHOLDERS
O   Hierarchy
makwwft-0 Iforml Mney
*  Positive
*  Negative
o  Neutral
low  hi h   influence
FUAO
Next steps from this preliminary analysis
The follow up questions to these observations are:
* How can the influence of negative actors reduced? How is an influential positive actor introduced into the supply
chain? How feasible is this introduction?
* How can a more complete picture of the whole problem be obtained? How can the collaboration of international
donors and NGO be strengthened and monitored? How can individuals engage directly with influential negative
actors in the core?
* How can the attitude of the processors and consumers be changed? How can certification schemes be effectively
implemented?


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                      37
BOX 3.2: LESSONS LEARNED FROM A HANDS-ON NET-MAP WORKSHOP
To test how Net-Map would fare in analyzing forest sector challenges, and to give forestry experts a hands-on exposure to the
application of the tool, PROFOR organized a half-day long workshop. The workshop gathered a handful of the Bank's experts in
political economy and natural resource management. These experts drew social network maps, using the Net-Map approach, for
two complex problems in forestry, in two countries:
*     Who influences the sustainable management of the Mount M protected area in the Philippines?
*     Who influences benefit-sharing in the forest in the context of REDD+ in Bandundu province in DRC?
In both cases, the Bank experts considered a group of diverse stakeholders: government, NGOs, private sector, local communities,
the church, etc. They discussed how these stakeholders are linked to each other by intricate networks of financial flows, advocacy,
corruption, and conflicts. The participants also assigned political incentives (negative, positive or neutral), and influence levels, to
each of the identified stakeholders.
The complex networks were captured in diagrams and analyzed further (see annex C for the Net-Maps emerging from the two
exercises). Based on the networks' structure and the stakeholders' measured influence within the network, and the perceived
influence as well as their incentives, valuable lessons were drawn. These are summarized under the following four issues:
Regarding the Bank's influence: Generally, it was apparent that the agent of change (the Bank in this case) needs to make
contact with more influential actors, or to pay attention to key relationships or leverage points. In the Philippines case, the Bank
is connected to only a few central Ministries. However, it has no direct link to those with strong influence on the activities in
the Mount M area (the Catholic church) or those who play a brokerage role between government and private/community (tribal
leaders). In the DRC case, the Bank was seen as exercising a strong influence on the analytical/intellectual design of benefit
sharing mechanisms but little influence on ensuring local stakeholder inputs to ensure that a practical and widely acceptable
scheme was established.
Regarding other influences: Besides high influencers, we should also look at low influencers, and figure out how to improve the
situation by enhancing positive but low influences. In the DRC case, the consumers are the ones who would gain influence by being
organized by NGOs.
Regarding bottlenecks in information flows: In the DRC case, it was clear that the local NGOs are in the position to be
influential actors, since they were in contact with international actors for funding and also with local communities for projects.
However, the possible lack of human resources in these local NGOs likely prevented them from serving as an information source
for local consumers to get the full picture of REDD+. Given that vital pieces of information were likely not being received by local
consumers, the group thought most consumers would have a negative influence on REDD+ benefit sharing proposals.
Regarding the network structure: An observation from the workshop was that stakeholders were poorly connected and networks
were highly fragmented. This is evident in the DRC case, in which supply chain and technical assistance networks were both
sparse and divided. This showed that not all stakeholders were able to participate in the process or that there was a lack of
information, which constrained reaching efficient solutions.
Regarding the value of doing the Net-Map: The workshop concluded that a project task team (in the duration of just 2-3 hours) could
develop critical insights through a Net-Map exercise. As a result, project design and implementation could be improved significantly.
Such an exercise (with the project task team) could also help initiate a full-scale, multi-stakeholder based Net-Map effort.
Source: Authors' summary


﻿38       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
2. Enabling reforms: Analyzing the political economy of the
charcoal sector in Tanzania
Charcoal in Tanzania is a major source of energy, contributing to 95% of energy supply (Sander et al. 2013). However,
there is no "coherent policy framework governing charcoal production, trade or use" (World Bank 2009). This leads to a
highly informal and unregulated sector, which has a direct impact on lost revenue and degraded environment conditions
(World Bank 2010). Due to the lack of information and understanding of the charcoal sector, a political economy analysis
was done using Net-Map. The project included interviews with 200 government and non-governmental stakeholders to
elicit both a complete map of the political economy and understanding the causes leading toward this network structure
based on the discussions. Net-Map in this case juxtaposes the de jure and de facto network of Tanzania's charcoal sector
governance and helps illuminate the actual limited control of the government in the charcoal sector.
The de jure network shows an ineffective governing structure due to an overlapping and complex authority. The de
facto network on the other hand displays the weak influence of the government actors on the charcoal dealers, thus
placing the influence in the hand of the dealers. In the de facto network there is a clear dominance of charcoal dealers (a
transporters and wholesalers cluster). There is also an asymmetrical information network between the charcoal dealers
and government, in which the dealers "possess information about interaction and action of government actors", while
the government has little information on the actions and motivations of the dealers (World Bank 2010). See figures 3.x
and 3.x below.
The analysis indicates that the ineffectiveness of the central government, (i.e. the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Tourism) arises for a variety of reasons:
* The lack of a communication strategy to translate central policy into local actions
* Negative actors at the national level, whose incentives are against the change
* Poorinformation exchange between the government and non-governmental stakeholders, which results in unrealistic
goals, and policies which are not implementable.
FIGURE 3.5 DE JURE GOVERNANCE OF TANZANIAN CHARCOAL SECTOR
MOF
MEMI  Otv sPmoducer
PMO-RALG Allenuthve Energy Providler
MNRITCnue
Relailer
Ditrct Audities
Wholesaler
Viage Authorities
Dealer
Development Partners 0VehideTraipmter
Bicyde Transport,er
K05          Labourer
Producer


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                        39
FIGURE 3.6 DE FACTO GOVERNANCE OF TANZANIA CHARCOAL SECTOR
TRA
MoF VPO  O
MEM    ()                          Stove Producer
PMO-RALG                 - - -----         4 Alternative Energy Provider
MNRT
MNRT* 0consumer
District Authorities                                          I  Retailer
Vehicleaorer
Village Authorities   9Dae
Development Partners                                      Vehicle Transporter
Bicycle Transporter
NGOs                 Labourer
Producer
Note
O Governmental stakeholders
* Development partners & NGOs
* Sector stakeholders involved in charcoal production, trade or utilization, as well as the manufacturers of improved charcoal stoves and
providers of alternative energy sources.
The discussion during Net-Map application also illuminated disincentives against sustainable management of the
charcoal sector, such as:
* Alack of fiscal empowerment because all charcoal revenues are remitted back to the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Affairs instead of being retained at sub-national levels where they were collected. In addition, the absence of a
benefit-sharing mechanism there is no incentive to ensure that all levies are fully collected (World Bank 2010).
* A lack of legal empowerment (land use rights and forest ownership) whereby actors are more prone to unsustainable
resource extraction. This leads to deforestation and forest degradation.
* Low forest governance capacity, coupled with corruption, accounted for approximately 80 percent of illegal charcoal
trade (Spot survey 2010 as cited in World Bank 2010).
Net-Map helped consolidate different stakeholders' perspectives and reveal the dissimilarity between the de jure and
de facto network of the charcoal sector in Tanzania. The observation led to some basic and practical recommendations
as regards: Setting realistic goals and expectations; strengthening vertical accountability and exchange of information;
engaging with charcoal dealers-transporters and wholesaler networks; promoting fiscal empowerment; and, enhancing
regulatory transparency and legal empowerment (World Bank 2010).The utility of Net-Map was also the ability to promote
discussion during mapping to explain the current situation such as the disincentives against sustainable management of
the charcoal sector. This helped refocus the reform in the direction of fiscal empowerment and enhancing transparency
as well as legal empowerment (Sander et al 2013).


﻿40       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Chapter 4. I n practical terms ...
Chapters 2 and 3 described eight approaches to doing a PEA. Many of these tools have been widely applied and contribute
a rich haul of experiences. Table 4.1 provides a snapshot view of of each tool, through the lens of scope, focus, capabilities
and characteristics.
TABLE 4.1: PEA TOOLS AT A GLANCE
SCOPE
Macro-level                                  X              X      X       X      X              X
Sector-level                                 X       X      X      X              X              X
Problem-level                                                      X              X       X      X
NOTABLE FOCUS
Stakeholders                                                       X                      X
Governance & Transparency                    X       X             X       X
CAPABILITIES
Understand reform dynamics & inform policy process  X  X    X         X      X       X    X      X
Improve stakeholder engagement                                                                   X
CHARACTERISTICS
User-friendly application                    X                     X                             X
User-friendly interpretation                 X                     X                             X
Low cost                                                                          X              X
Fine-grained results                                 X             X              X              X
Choosing a PEA Tool fit-for-purpose
While only one tool (Net-Map) has been applied, to date, to analyze political economy issues in forestry, as Table 4.1
indicates, all are practical and capable of being customized and applied in a variety of situations (including for the forest
sector). How then might a forest sector practitioner decide which tool would best suit her needs? One approach to this is
by assessing each tool on the basis of attributes that are of key importance for the sector. This section provides such a list.
The proposed attributes are organized under four groups-practicality, relevance, robustness and adaptability-in tables
4.2-4.5. The questions in the tables will have different importance for different projects (or proposed interventions), and
not every project will be interested in every question. For example, if the project is aiming to improve benefit sharing, the
project will want a tool that identifies stakeholders in detail, including underrepresented groups and subsets of groups.
The question about key actors (Table 4.3.A.i) will be particularly important. If the project is aiming to use PEA as a way
to document project impacts on, say, stakeholder participation in forest governance, questions about whether the PEA
measures things that the project intends to change (Table 4.3.C.i) and whetherthe PEA produces replicable results (Table
4.4.ii) will be most important.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                          41
TABLE 4.2: PRACTICALITY
i. Can the project carry out the PEA at a reasonable cost?  The PEA should fit within the project's budget.
ii. Can the project carry out the PEA reasonably quickly?  The PEA should be compatible with the project's timeline.
iii. Does the project need special capacity to prepare the PEA?  In the forest context, this might include involving people who have
detailed knowledge of the political economy of rural societies or of
the influence of extra-legal actors.
iv. Will project participants, supporters, and stakeholders need  Key stakeholders might have limited capacity to digest highly
special capacity to understand and apply the results of the PEA?  technical outputs.
Regarding practicality (Table 4.2), the listed factors may conflict, and there will be trade-offs. Some of the tools, such
as the three-stage ODI tool, are going to produce highly detailed results but are not going to do it fast or inexpensively.
Some, like Net-Map, might be quick but less detailed in their findings.
Tools vary regarding how much theoretical grounding, training, and equipment are needed to use the tool. Some of the tools,
like Net-Map and the ODI Sector Level Analysis tool, come with detailed written guidance on how to implement them. Some
tools, like the ABSM, recommend training and require access to dedicated computer software. Some of the tools, like the
World Bank PEPR, come with little guidance on gathering information and so require some independent understanding of
research theory and techniques in order to gather the necessary data. Again, there will be trade-offs. The tools producing
more fine-grained results are likely to require a more detailed initial appreciation of theory and technique.
TABLE 4.3.A: RELEVANCE FOR PROJECT PLANNING
i. Does the tool identify and shed light on the  To be useful in the forest sector, the tool should cover stakeholders that are often hard
roles of key actors and organizations?   to engage: rural and forest-dependent communities, indigenous peoples, minorities, and
people using the resource illegally. For many projects, a good tool will be one that not
only identifies the key actors but also charts the accountability of decision-makers to
the key actors.
ii. Does the tool identify potential bottlenecks  In forest sector projects, these might include implacable opposition to change or
that the project should plan to address?  persistent conflicts over land tenure that hamper reforms.
iii. Does the tool measure the quality of  Ineffective participation of rural people, forest businesses, or others may indicate
participation of stakeholders?           a need for the project to improve stakeholder capacity or access to information
(transparency).
TABLE 4.3.B: RELEVANCE FOR INFLUENCING STAKEHOLDERS
i. Will applying the tool inform key     This "use" attribute requires that the stakeholders participate in the application of the
stakeholders about the sector's PE and   tool. (Compare the "findings" attribute, immediately below.) In the forest context, the
encourage them to work together in ways that  tool should engage isolated rural stakeholders or similar groups that are the intended
promote project aims?                     beneficiaries of the project.
ii. Will the findings of the tool make key  Even if stakeholders do not participate in the application of the tool, dissemination
stakeholders better informed and more likely  of the PEA's results can inform and sometimes empower them. This can happen in
to promote project aims?                  two ways. First, PEA findings can help stakeholders see the potential for networking,
creating new coalitions, or using existing connections and coalitions more effectively.
Second, PEA findings can make stakeholders aware of problems they had previously
ignored, such as weaknesses in the rule of law. In the forest context, achieving these
benefits may require that the findings are accessible to a wide variety of stakeholders.


﻿42        THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
TABLE 4.3.C: RELEVANCE FOR MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF PROJECT IMPACT
i. Does the PEA track attributes that the particular project  In the forest sector, this might include the increased participation of
aims to reform?                                    marginalized stakeholders or the reduced influence of illegal actors.
ii. Is the PEA is credible, replicable, and inexpensive enough  These three attributes have implications for all PEA use and are listed
to be used for monitoring and evaluation?          separately in Tables 4.1 and 4.3.
A clear relevance factor is whether the project intends the PEA to involve and thereby influence stakeholders (Table
4.3.B). If this is the case, the stakeholder-based tools described in Chapter 3 are more appropriate than the tools based
on expert analysis in Chapter 2. Another relevant factor is whether the project will use the PEA for monitoring (Table
4.3.C). Perhaps any tool that produces replicable results can be a monitoring tool, however some of the tools, like the
SI DA Power Analysis, have been specifically judged to be suitable for comparison over time.
Tools will have specific strengths that may address planning concerns. If equity within the sector is a concern, the World
Bank's PEPR is especially designed to highlight equity issues. If understanding the quality of stakeholder participation
is a concern, Net-Map may be most appropriate as it is heavily focused on actors. However, if the main concern is to find
what intervention would be most effective, that is a question that the DFID's Drivers of Change tool is designed to answer.
Net-Map may yield information that helps a planner answer that question, but it will not produce the answer directly.
TABLE 4.4: ROBUSTNESS
Attribute                                     Notes
i. Will the PEA produce results that are credible, so that  In the forest sector, the audience can be quite a diverse group, including
the intended audience will be persuaded by the results?  project planners, project funders, project collaborators, project reviewers, or
stakeholders generally.
ii. Will the PEA produce results that are replicable?  If the PEA is to be used to monitor and evaluate project impacts, it must
produce replicable results, so that changes in the results represent actual
changes in the measured political economy.
Robustness (Table 4.4) requires that tools produce results that are credible and replicable, particularly if the PEA is to
be used to monitor project impact. Country context can affect credibility. In a highly technocratic country, the tools that
rely on expert analysis, such as the SIDA PowerAnalysis, may carry the most weight among decision-makers. In a highly
community-oriented culture, a stakeholder-centered tool like Net-Map might be preferred. As a compromise, a tool like
the Agent Based Stakeholder Model, featuring expert analysis of stakeholder interests, might be the most attractive.
Some of the tools, like the SIDA Power Analysis, seem intended to be replicable. Some, like the Dutch SGACA, appear to
be designed as one-time exercises.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                43
TABLE 4.5: ADAPTABILITY
i. Is the PEA scalable to the needed level?            This might be from local to international, as the project requires.
ii. Will the output of the PEA be fine-grained enough to shed light  For some projects, you may need an analysis that breaks down
on small factors or coarse-grained enough to provide a simple  power with government agencies or forest-dependent communities.
"big picture" view of the sector, depending on what the project  For other projects, less detail will suffice.
requires?
iii. Is the scope of the PEA broad enough to include actors outside  Actors in other sectors (agriculture, mining, transportation)
the forest sector?                                     and other arms of government (treasury, justice, planning, land
administration) almost always are part of the political economy of
forest management.
iv. Is the PEA easily adaptable to the country context?  Forest sector analyses may need to take into account local
languages, land tenure systems, roles of informal governance, and
so forth. They may also need to reflect that certain approaches to
analysis, such as the use of international experts, may carry extra
weight in some contexts.
An adaptable tool (Table 4.5) can fit different country contexts. Projects can use them at local, provincial, national, or
even international scales, as needed. The tools can weigh actors and influences from other sectors that affect forests,
such as agriculture, mining, or transportation. All of the tools presented here are designed to work in varied countries,
however they are not all designed to be scalable geographically orto focus on single sectors. The DFID Drivers of Change
Tool, despite being described as a country-level analysis, has been used at smaller scales, but it is not designed to be a
sector-specific tool. The ODI tool was developed to look at a single sector, but seems to be fixed at the country level. The
PGPEA is both scalable geographically and can be sector specific. The SGACA appears not to be designed to be flexible in
this fashion: it is a country-level, multi-sector, "big picture" tool.
Finally, given the many considerations that go into the selection of a tool, a project might choose to use more than one
tool. For example, it might use stakeholder-based approach to promote stakeholder engagement and an expert-based
approach to deliver more detail or quantitative measures. Each tool can cover part of the other tool's weaknesses. If the
two produce inconsistent results, the practitioner will know that there is bias or uncertainty and perhaps a need to probe
more deeply. Where they concur, the project leader can proceed with enhanced confidence that PEA has produced a true
picture of the sector.


﻿44       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Chapter 5. Concluding Observations
and Recommendations
Broadly speaking, success in achieving sustainable forest management has had a modest track record. Mismanagement,
deforestation, degradation, and illegal logging continue to be significant problems. Failure to weigh political economy
considerations has contributed to the lack of success in the implementation of reforms. From a technical standpoint,
analysts may diagnose the problems correctly and provide the best advice on necessary reforms. However, success
depends upon providing the right incentives to change the behavior of the entire spectrum of stakeholders. The examples
from forestry described at the beginning of this report amply demonstrate this. In cases, where stakeholders' power
and influence is uneven, stakeholders behave strategically, vested interests get to control the resource, or institutions
are weak (or deliberately weakened by the same vested interests), the result is resource plunder, institutional erosion,
breakdown of the rule of law, and concentration of wealth in a few hands.
Developing a good understanding of stakeholder motivations, however, is challenging because of the complex nature of
the sector and of the potential for strategic behavior by the stakeholders. Nevertheless, if we are to come to grips with the
fundamentals determining sustainable forest management, there is a need to develop a good understanding of the complex
balance of motivations, of power relationships and of the nature of political economy outcomes, for the forestry sector.6
To advance an understanding of political economy equilibrium, development practitioners have developed PEAtools. Most
PEA tools focus on the interactions among institutions, organizations (or organizational structures), and stakeholders
to develop a deeper understanding of PE issues. Several of the most promising ones have been discussed in Chapters 2
and 3 of this report.
Of the eight approaches considered in this report, all appear suited for application to the forestry sector. Yet each tool
is different. Some tools give a broad picture of political economy factors. Some focus on narrower considerations. Some
give results in detail. Some present general overviews. Some require a theoretical background to understand fully the
potential of the tool. Some produce intuitive outputs that almost any person can grasp.
Using any of these tools comes at a price. The tool will place demands on project budgets, timelines, and capacities. In
short, a forest-sector project leader choosing which tool to use will face trade-offs. Often, factors such as inconsistency
in the application of PEA analyses can undermine its utility. A report found that political economy guidance was the "least
likely to be used by operational (Bank) staff relative to other source material" (Desai 2011). The IEG report suggested
that better political economy guidelines are needed. Thus, Chapter4 of this report provides initial guidance for selecting
that PEA approach which would best suit the needs of a would-be user in forestry
16. Where the existing situation is undesirable, in that it results in resource mismanagement and over exploitation, we would look for ways to move it towards a more desirable path-our
maintained hypothesis is that there is always room for maneuver, and that the sgstem can be moved to a new, welfare-improving, equilibrium.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                            45
The available PEA approaches, by the very nature of the issues they consider, tend to be qualitative and based on
informed perceptions. Complementing a PEA with evidence which is more quantitative and which focuses on a more
granular issue can improve its utility and sharpen its recommendations (Burgess et al 2012). Often, other actions, by
other organizations help create an environment in which a PEA analysis becomes possible when it was not so earlier, and
creates a constituency of demand for the findings."
The application of available PEA tools to the forest sector is extremely limited-indeed only one of the eight discussed
in this report has a track-record of application to forestry. Yet experience suggests that a PEA can point the route to
getting long-lasting impacts in the sector. Thus, the main recommendation of this report is to build up the evidence base
on how a PEA for the forest sector contributes to better outcomes for the sector. In addition, it is important to recognize
that a PEA for forestry is a public good in that it can improve project results by identifying political-economy-related
risks and measures for their mitigation; it can provide guidance on the long-term reform of the sector; and it can exert a
virtuous influence on improving governance, rule-of-law and management of other sectors and of the overall economy.
Thus, promoting the use of available PEA tools (customized to the needs of forestry) should be undertaken at a corporate
level. This will ensure a body of learning which would allow implementation of political economy analyses which are
high-impact and cost-effective.
17. In the context of illegal timbertrade in the Russian Far East, covert investigation by the Environmental Investigation Agencg and a hard-hitting report has paved the way forsystematic
engagement on political economy issues (comment by a reviewer of this report).


﻿46       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
ANNEX A: Political economy factors
influencing forest sector reforms in Africa:
Evidence from six country case studies
Six countries in Africa-Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia and Uganda-were selected for an in-depth
analysis of their experiences with forest governance reforms with a view to assessing the importance of each of the
seven factors in their reform processes. These factors are: (i) Strengthen the political will for action and a leadership role
for the State; (ii) Create partnerships, form coalitions and promote participatory processes; (iii) Ensure availability and
access to information; (iv) Promote transparency and accountability in the implementation of reforms; (v) Identify and
promote "ambassadors for change"; (vi) Harness international initiatives to motivate national reforms; and, (vii) Ensure
availability of resources (human, financial, etc.) adequate to the needs of reform
The analysis was carried out by 4 sector experts from the World Bank. This was a purposive sample and guiding criteria for
this selection were the availability of current information on reforms in these countries and the experts' familiarity with
the countries. Despite this constraint, these countries vary widely in terms of the size and type of forests they have, the
extent of large scale commercial exploitation of theirforests, export orientation, forest industries, forest dependent local
populations, the overall level of economic development, the intensity and breadth of reforms undertaken in the sector,
political conditions, stakeholder involvement and donor engagement, etc. Thus, they offer a rich set of experiences and
provide enough variability for using the individual findings to support more general conclusions. (An obvious extension
of this work would be to add more countries to the selection to enrich the analysis and make the findings more robust).
The basic question that we are trying to answer from our reading of the country data is: what kind of influences have the
seven factors had on the forest governance reform processes in the country under scrutiny? We realize that identifying
answers to this question is a hugely challenging task. No ready-made quantitative measures are available either of
changes in the outcome (progress of the governance reform efforts) or of the seven factors hypothesized to make a
difference to such progress. Thus, calculation of statistical correlations and testing for causality is not possible."
In the absence of reliable and comparable quantitative data, our approach has adopted the route of a narrative-based
assessment of the possible contribution of each of the seven factors in each of the six countries. Narrative-based
approaches are susceptible to well-known biases such as those associated with sample selection, researcher perceptions,
attribution and cross-country comparability. We have tried to control for some of these by adopting common protocols
for assessment and frequent cross-examination and discussion among the experts who completed the scoring.
In our effort to move towards quantification and to help compare our country findings, we have used the narrative-
driven assessment to score the contribution of the seven underlying factors into one of five categories: Very Influential,
Influential, Somewhat Influential, Not Influential and Uncertain (=Do Not Have Enough Information). Important findings
from these assessments are summarized in the table and discussed in the next section below.
18. Given that there are a number of ongoing efforts at quantitative measurement of the quality of forest governance, we hope that quantitative data will become available in the next few
years and will allow for rigorous statistical testing in future.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      47
TABLE A.1: EXTENT OF INFLUENCE OF THE SEVEN FACTORS ON FOREST GOVERNANCE REFORMS FOR SIX AFRICAN
COUNTRIES.
Political will and the leadership role of the State
Partnerships and participatory processes out anl
Availability and access to informationGIBC
Transparent and accountable implementation                         KL
Ambassadors and advocates for change  is                                                     Be
Harnessing international initiatives
Adequacy of reors                         sourcesc
B=Burkina Faso; C=Cameroon; G=Ghana; K=Kenya; L=Liberia; U=Uganda.
1. Political will and leadership role of the State
This factor clearly stands out as having played a very influential role in the reform processes, in all six countries. The
dominant contribution of this factor is also consistent      with the survey responses which ranked this factor as being
of highest importance in initiating and sustaining reforms. In Burkina Fasor, e limite the state has been actively
championing reforms directed at improving the use and conservation of its natural resources. A recent initiative by
three Ministries-Environment, Agriculture and Livestock-provides a framework document for a unified framework and
coordinated actionsforrural development, including forests. In Cameroon, the Forest Law of 1994 reflected the politically
high-risk strategy of radically overhauling the legislative framework as a means of increasing the efficiency in the sector
and community participation in forest management. This could not have been achieved without the political will and full
support of the government. In Ghana, broad guiding principles and government policy documents have been relevant
and of high quality and have provided the enabling framework. However, the limited success in implementation e.g.
reflected in the significant share of illegal logging in the domestic market orthe continued relatively high deforestation,
point to a resistance rather than lack of capacity and will for reforms.
The commitment and leadership role of the state has varied over the course of reforms and the countries. Our analysis
suggests that, broadly, the state has exercised significant positive influence in creating the policy and governance
frameworks but may have been less successful in implementing forest sector change. This finding suggests that we take
a closer look at the components of "Political will" as an "unbundling" will enable us to better identify interventions that
could be undertaken in situations where it is lacking or not strong enough.
One approach at such "unbundling" uses a two-step process. First it is postulated that, for power-holders to become
committed to act, they need to want to take agiven action, feel confidentthat they can undertake that action and feel that
they must undertake that action. Second, it is postulated that the political want, political can and political must, depend
upon factors which are assorted into four groups individual, organizational, relational and societai levels. Personal
values and beliefs (of politicians), organizational incentives and rewards, constructive civil society-state relations and
public support are examples of the factors at the 4 different levels. At the individual level, beliefs and values determine
the extent to which an individual is intrinsically motivated to act and direct advocacy with an individual can serve to shift
her priorities, thus influencing political will or behavior (Malena 2009).


﻿48       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Another way for reformers to think about political will is to see that it is not always unified or always directed towards
reform, but it may have components that are consistent with reform, and reformers may be able to harness those
components. That is to say, the prevailing political will might be largely directed towards attracting foreign investment,
or securing more development assistance, or increasing political clout, or enhancing national or personal stature, but
some of these aims might be advanced through good governance reforms. In a Cartesian sense, it is as if each of these
aims is a vector that has a reform component which reformers could help to strengthen.
This discussion suggests that actionable options exist through which political will may be fostered and strengthened.
Thus, development practitioners should explore these before despairing that no progressis possible because of the "lack
of political will".
2. Partnerships and participatory processes
This factor assesses the role of partnerships and multistakeholder coalitions as ways to ensure that the best thinking
goes into analyzing the reform challenges and the same coalitions generate a momentum for change. The focus is on
national processes. The Table A.1 illustrates the varying importance of this factor as it ranges from "Very influential" in
Kenya to "Influential" in Burkina, Cameroon and Ghana, to "Somewhat influential" in Liberia and Uganda.
In Kenya, CSOs (e.g., Green Belt Movement, Forest Action Network, Kenya Forest Working Group) have played a critical
role in bringing forest issues to the attention of the public and holding the government to account. In addition, the
government's commitment to participatory forest management materialized partly as a result of pressures from CSOs
including at the sub-national levels. Ghana's 1994 Forest and Wildlife Policy envisaged local community participation
with rights to consultation, access and benefits from resource use but this aspect was never effectively implemented.
The current legal framework does not provide opportunities for civil society and citizen participation in the allocation of
timber rights, which is at the core of the distribution of benefits from forests. Because of the discouraging environment,
rural communities have chosen to align themselves with the informal chainsaw milling sector instead of trying to
influence policies in the formal sector. In Liberia, while the legislation is conducive to participation and communities and
CSOs are supposed to participate in decision making both at policy and implementation levels, the practice is weak. There
are concerns, for example, that the concession and social agreements are not thoroughly vetted by the communities that
stand to be affected and this will escalate social tensions and conflicts down the road. However, it is clear that multi-
stakeholder processes have increasingly become an integral part of the forest sector development processes, especially
in countries engaged in VPA negotiations or REDD+ readiness. To what extent they will be able to contribute to a real
change in power relations and benefits is yet to be determined.
3. Availability and access to information
To recapitulate, this proposition recognizes the power of high quality, publicly available high-quality information (e.g.
open data) on forest governance components in promoting an informed debate and call to action. In the table above, this
factor is found to be "Influential" in Ghana and Uganda, "Somewhat influential" in Burkina Faso, Cameroon and Liberia
and is assessed as being "Not influential" in Kenya.
In Kenya, the forest service had little reliable information on the status of the resource in terms of quality, quantity,
trends in growth, etc., to support forest management planning. In addition, even when good information existed, access
for the general public was extremely difficult. Thus, this was not a major factor in the drive for reform. In Uganda, prior


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                     49
to the sector reform (linked to the overall Economic Recovery Program of the country) around 1987, availability and
access to information was poor and was not a driver of the reform processes. However, post 1987, the country's National
Forest Authority has developed clear guidelines and practices for sustainable forest management and is using modern
technologies such as GIS to gather up-to-date information on forest inventories and using it for policy development and
forest management. The internet, mobile phones and ITC in general has dramatically improved access to information and
the possibilities for stakeholders to understand and even influence processes (Castr6n and Pillai 2011). Forest sector
institutions, such as in Ghana, are also increasingly providing documents and information on the web.
4. Transparent and accountable implementation
As mentioned earlier, this factor captures the accountability of the state and other actors in implementation processes
and the need for trust among all stakeholders. Devolving the responsibility for monitoring and evaluation (for example)
to local stakeholders can contribute much to this trust-building process. Thisfactoris assessed as playing an "Influential"
role in four countries (Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana and Liberia) and "Somewhat influential" in the other two (Kenya
and Uganda) and in the aggregate it may be considered to influence the reform processes. These assessments from the
country analyses are also consistent with the survey's rating of this factor as the third most important to the reform
process. For example, in Ghana, lack of accountability and transparency in decision making is a characteristic at all
levels. Of the 50 Timber Utilization Contracts granted after 2003, only 6 were granted via competitive bidding! At the
level of the District Assemblies and Traditional Councils, lack of accountability and information makes it hard to establish
whether any of the revenues collected actually benefit the communities impacted by timber harvesting. In Liberia,
accountability actions have played an arguably important role in improving sector governance. The chain-of-custody
system, called for in the Forest Reform Law, has increased accountability and transparency in the collection of forest
revenues. This has curtailed the diversion of revenues for military purposes, as was the case in the Charles Taylor era.
Lack of accountability, especially in relation to financial transparency, is not only characteristic of state institutions but
affect also local and traditional authorities as in the case of Ghana. Though the situation is improving in many countries,
partly due to information technology and various multi-sector processes, this is strongly linked to development of
overall policies and legislation on freedom of information that would force sector institutions to disclose and comply.
5. Ambassadors and advocates for change
Supporting evidence is relatively weak regarding the factor, "Ambassadors and advocates for change", except for
Kenya where it is assessed as "Influential". Simply put, the huge contribution of the iconic Waangari Mathai to forestry
including social forestry, which was eventually recognized as genuinely apolitical, was a major reason for the influential
impact of this factor in Kenya. This was complemented by the contribution of the CS0s in the country. This factor scores
a "Somewhat influential" in Liberia, a "Not influential" in Cameroon and Uganda and an "Uncertain" in Burkina Faso and
Ghana. The country assessments are broadly consistent with the information compiled from the crowd-sourcing where
this factor rates as the second most unimportant.


﻿50       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
6. Harnessing international initiatives
Harnessing international initiatives to motivate international reforms is ranked as "Very influential" in four countries
(Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ghana and Liberia) and "Influential" to "Somewhat influential" in the case of Kenya and Uganda
respectively. The dominant role of this factor in our sample is in stark contrast to the lowest ranking given to this factor by
the crowd-sourcing survey. It may be speculated that the strong contribution in our sample arise from a biased selection
where our choice, was influenced strongly by the extent of available literature, which itself is highly correlated with the
extent of influence by international programs, external donors and development agencies. However, in many countries such
as Ghana, forest sector reforms and policy processes have been initiated through donor supported programs and over time
reflect a mix of the evolving global priorities as well as national circumstances and needs. Itis also clearthat the trade related
initiatives such as the VPAs, which directly impact on the economic values, have triggered forest sector reform. Furthermore,
it should be noted that this factor received far more "it depends"votes, in the survey, than any other factor, suggesting that
its value may vary with context. Clearly the discrepancy between the country based evidence and the opinion of experts
needs further checking and exploration, in the context of a larger sample of countries.
7. Adequacy of resources
This factorgets a rating of "influential" forfour countries (Burkina Faso, Kenya, Liberia and Uganda) and an "uncertain"
in the case of Cameroon and Ghana. Taking the case of Ghana first, it appears that the forest sector, in addition to national
budgets, has received significant external support over more than 20 years and consequently has both had resources and
built capacity to implement reforms, though it is apparent that the state has not been able to fully capture the revenue
potential of the forestry sector. In Cameroon, it seems that "adequate" resources were going into the sector, although it
itself was not yielding much by way of taxes and charges. By contrast, for the other four countries, we have reasonably
strong evidence that resource constraints (both financial and human) dogged reforms and contributed to a situation
of, "good on paper but not on the ground". In Burkina Faso for example, fiscal reforms at the central level have led to
improvement in financial flows in terms of timeliness and reliability. However, at the decentralized level the resources of
local authorities are limited and unevenly distributed and even were reforms have been undertaken, resource constraints
continue to exist. This does not augur well for the sustainability of reforms. The Ugandan evidence also points to the
importance of this factor in sustaining the reform efforts. The forest sector in Uganda has always been underfunded
by the government. However, before the reform, this inadequate funding definitely crippled the forest department
and compromised its ability to deliver on its mandate. During the reform process however, donors provide the funding
and therefore enabled many of the reforms to be implemented. Currently, because of widespread mismanagement and
corruption, donor funding has dried up and it looks unlikely that reforms will be sustained. Our explorations also suggest
that adequacy of resources may not by itself provide the momentum for reforms, but is essential to facilitate the reform
process once that gets initiated, i.e., adequate resources are an enabler and not an initiator of forest governance reforms.
In overall terms, of the set of seven core factors, the country case analysis ratings support the importance of all the
factors in creating momentum for reforms, to a greater or lesser extent, in all the six countries.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      51
ANNEX B: Application of the Net-Map
Approach to the Health Sector
Malawi Knowledge for Health impact assessment project
The following example is taken from the Knowledge for Health (K4Health) piloted in Malawi funded by USAID and
implemented by Management Sciences for Health (Bema et al 2011). In response to Malawi's poor performance in
the health sector, especially with high fertility rate, high maternal mortality, low contraceptive prevalence and high
HIV prevalence; USAID piloted a project to improve information exchange through mobile health intervention, called
Knowledge for Health (K4Health). The project aimed to "address gaps in how information on family planning and
reproductive health (FP/RH) and HIV/AIDS is generated, shared, and used at all levels of the health system in Malawi".
The project identified three key intervention areas at different levels (Campbell et al 2014):
* National level: forming a national knowledge management task force to manage and disseminate FP/RH and HIV/
AIDS information.
* District level: support information flows by creating two District Learning centers (DLC) in Salima and Nkhotakota.
* Community level: improvement of knowledge sharing by establishing a mobile phone network between District
Health facilities (DHO) and CHWs and supplying this network with essential technical information.
Net-Map was used as an evaluation tool to measure the impact of the Malawi K4Health project. K4Health in Malawi
was implemented over an 18-month period from January 2010 to June 2011, and Net-Map stakeholder mapping was
conducted at the beginning of the project (on March 2010) and after the conclusion of the project (on June 2011). The
baseline and endline network and measurements of Salima and Nkhotakota are displayed below for comparison.


﻿52        THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
FIGURE B.1 THE 2010 AND 2011 INFORMATION EXCHANGE NETWORK IN SALIMA, MALAWI (CAMPBELL ET AL 2014)
a. Baseline, 200                                   b. Endline, 2011
*  FmIl PePingIfo a o                                 Fmly PlnWg In ntin
**  mfViAIDS inforatson                           ----  iwAiCS infomptln
vilue Hew Commte
O TradItuar I Leadr
O*c.
5HWA00rui haHLIth centerstoi
41,4
-Whalfhu1t
-. k_j
Mir.istryoEdFaDeeiq
M"ry of  dmo
0                  -0         -o   cc -0 -ao  -0
CBDA CtO CHAM    CL   DIC HA5HC      HIV MOD MOE MOH NAC NGO       R   IHU  TI. VHC
E)0lt 02011
Note: CBDAs, community-based distribution agents; CB0s, community-based organizations; CHAM, Christian Health Association of Malawi; CL, clients; DHO, district health offices; HSAs,
health surveillance assistants; HC; health centers; HIV, HIV/AIDS unit; MOD, Ministrg of Defense; MOE, Ministry of Education; MOH, Ministry of Health; NAC, National AIDS Commission;
NGOs, nongovernmental organizations; RB, regulatory bodies; RHO, Reproductive Health Unit; TL, traditional leaders; VHC, village health center.
The baseline network shows a hierarchical (National level: forming a et al 2014), mostly one directional knowledge
sharing, while the after network in 2011 depicts a more diverse and bidirectional information flow. Even though the
density of 2011 network is the same with 2010, there is an increase in HIV/AIDS information flow compare to FP/RH
information and compare to the before network.
The after network also introduces a variety of new actors: CHWs (CBDAs and HSAs), CHAM, NAC, MOE, MOD, traditional
leaders, regulatory bodies. Among these new actors, CHWs, or CBDAs and HSAs are perceived to be highly influential in
knowledge exchange. Both of these actors are responsible for receiving and providing FP/RH and HIV/AIDS information.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                53
During the project, key actors were introduced to the network, notably CHAM, the media, and the Ministry of Health. These
actors played a central rolein broadcasting and relaying information on reproductive health and HIV/AIDS. Also, the importance
of community organizations and community health workers - CHWs (community-based distribution agents- CBDAs- and health
surveillance assistants - HSAs), along with local health centers, community based organizations - CBOs- is recognized.
FIGURE B.2. THE BEFORE AND AFTER INTRODUCTION OF MOBILE PHONE AND INFORMATION HUB NETWORK IN
NKHOTAKOTA, MALAWI HEALTH CARE (CAMPBELL ET AL 2014)
a. Baseline, 2010                                    b. Endlin", 2011
famN) Planning hinfomail n                        FmlV Planni  inrmarion
- --  IM~AI Ibadrivation                         ----  HaikAIDSitonaio
Health UnIts  jAOUc
O:        -NG
aDistr-t Health Facilri-ei
Health CntErsClinact      4  C     IIWhted
C;ommun"r KtaWil W alr
t         r Vp   r       tr                                   a,T!
KG%
501%
70%
50%.
COA0 ClK   W CHAhI CW Cliil.N OHO  K MIW  MED W H N:m   ric  PH  P1  On  -n Zo
Note: CBDAs, community-based distribution agents; CB0s, community-based organizations; CHAM, Christian Health Association of Malawi; CL, clients; DHO, district health offices; HC;
health centers; HIV, HIV/AIDS unit; MED, media; MOH, Ministry of Health; MLO; multilateral organizations; NGOs, nongovernmental organizations; PH; private hospitals; PI, professional
institution; RI, research institution; RHU, Reproductive Health Unit; ZO, zones.
After the introduction of mobile phones and dedicated information sharing hubs (managed by the CHWs), the
communication network in 2011showed a clear improvement in information sharing, and a diversified network structure.
The after network also showed an increased number of stakeholders and increased interaction among stakeholders, thus
revealing the participatory nature of the intervention and the success of the project. This success was attributed to the
usage of mobile phone which "eliminates geographic distance" and expedites information exchange (Bema et al 2011).
The project is an example of how Net-Map as a tool is flexible in its application and can be used as a project evaluation
tool, analyzing a more robust and resilient after network of information exchange.


﻿54       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
ANNEX C: Two Additional Net-Map Examples
Constructed During a Practitioners
Workshop at the World Bank
Who influences the sustainable management of Mount M Area in
the Philippines?
The Net-Map was drawn in the context of main streaming climate change in the Philippines. The project leader further
narrowed down the question to the sustainable management of mount M area.
The project leader identified 34 stakeholders, divided into five groups and these stakeholders were connected through
four kinds of connections. The stakeholder categories are government, communities, non-government organizations,
private sector and others. The four kinds of links studied are advocacy, formal funds, conflict and bribes or nepotism.
There are invaluable lessons and questions by studying the four different connection networks separately.
Within the advocacy network, the high influence actors that contribute positively to the sustainable management are
the Catholic Church, the tribal leaders, the Protected areas bureau and the local council; of which the World Bank is only
connected to the last group. The network is also fragmented in which the Ministry of Agriculture is only linked to the Palm
oil companies and the Coconut processors. Also, the network showed that the Catholic Church plays a brokerage role,
in connecting between the negative players (the farmers and government offices against or neural toward sustainable
development) and the positive players (NG0s, the international development agencies).
The formal financial network also shows an interesting division, in which the main network does not include mining
companies, tribal leaders and indigenous tribes. The network also shows the central positions (despite low perceived
influence level) of the Ministry of Environmental resources and the World Bank. Besides financial flow among positive
actors, there are also links from positive actors to negative actors, for example from the World Bank (positive actor)
to Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Planning (negative actors) or second order delivery of development aid money
to negative actors in the case of Ministry of Environmental resources receiving money from the World Bank and USAID
(positive actor) to finance the Mines Geosciences Bureau (negative actor). This financial flow opposes sustainable
development.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                             55
FIGURE (.1 WHO INFLUENCES THE SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF MOUNT M AREA IN THE PHILIPPINES
.  Idia Tribes
Migra O lcie Farmers Council
Land Mat Board
subsistence Frmeriba
M. Environ iRec (local)
ldfePoicders
Ind. Pepl Council
Comout Pimntation FemmwO
MiJ  gCma                                 Protecded Areas Bume
Muslim loaders
Cathok Chu              1 Mines Gea Signs Bum          Environ Resource
evencral Podical CounlUE
boora                           Academia AB eC
Fishiren                                                   SI
011 palm greowers                                                B.FishersesW. SG   an
FIGURE (.2 NETWORK OF ADVOCACY (LEFT) AND FORMAL MONEY FLOW (RIGHT)
forstManpiur
Chattoal Produs  Ge a
EstarismCompnie
Fomaofnds  Avcay       Bib/epts      -   onlc
e-e
Trm                                             ILEintantiarguit
The conflict and bribery networks also brought to light the diversity of the problem, in which formal, informal, positive,
negative stakeholders are all involved.


﻿56       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
FIGURE C.3 NETWORK OF CONFLICT (LEFT) AND BRIBERY/NEPOTISM (RIGHT)
ON... ON
~e--
oOn -
The exercise was a good indicator of areas of improvement for future detail political economy analysis into the problem.
Net-Map was able to point out the advocacy gap (in which the World Bank did not connect directly with the positive and
influential stakeholder), the funding relations in which development aid money was directly and indirectly spent on
stakeholders which oppose to sustainable development.
Who influences benefit sharing in forests under REDD+ in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (Bandundu Province)?
Net-Map was chosen as a political economy analysis tool for this project in exploring the benefit sharing scenery in
Bandudu Province in DRC. Similarly to the previous example, this map is mainly based on the perception of the project
leader who is familiar with the project and with facilitation from other environmental experts.
The project leader identified 24 stakeholders, belong to five groups and being connected by five different kinds of
relationships. The stakeholder categories are Government, Consumers, NGOs, Operators, and International Actors. The
kinds of links studied are Financial, Authorization, Product, Corruption, and Technical Assistance.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                                      57
FIGURE C.4 WHO INFLUENCES BENEFIT SHARING IN FORESTS UNDER REDD IN DRC (BANDUNDU PROVINCE)
AW   r                                                             Formal funds
-*Authorization
Corruption
thUWF  RE                     Product
-~Technical Assistance
Domesti             Positive
*   Negative
Neutral
0   Low influence
AM         BM                       High influence
AFD
Corupio
--y-- Produc
i~omq puLORDers.
Domesu'rimNeutralr
13mmtkitUnbecamner) int. Timber luter
iAt Timber Conn.
FIGURE C.5 NETWORK OF FORMAL FINANCIAL FLOW (LEFT) AND SUPPLY CHAIN (RIGHT)
uvoem Tomber cnw.
WFI..
MAA-. CO


﻿58       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Analysis of the formal financial flow reveals that only positive or neutral stakeholders are involved with formal financial
transaction. This brings up question for future analysis, whether the negative stakeholders were excluded or due to this
financial conflict that they opposed the benefit sharing scheme. Another observation from this financial network is the
central stakeholderis the Ministry of Environment, receiving funds from different international development agencies,
however, is not considered as a positive but a mixed/neutral stakeholder. This network is also disconnected with other
integral stakeholders of REDD such as Loggers and Treasury.
Opposite to the financial network, in the supply chain network, all stakeholders (producers, intermediaries and traders)
are negative or mixed. This current perception prompts for a deeper analysis of the cause of this behavior and how to
influence or what incentive would fit.
FIGURE C.6 NETWORK OF AUTHORIZATION/CORRUPTION (LEFT) AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (RIGHT)
Ptwainc Govt        M  f Err 
~~Farmers
The network of corruption is quite compact with only four stakeholders, with the most influential and central one being
the Ministry of Environment, this corruption from producers to authorizers and oversight agency.
Using Net-Map, the project team was able to identify further questions that would be essential to the operation of REDD:
* Is this view representative of all stakeholders, what additional insights can be generated from a more diverse group?
* What is the role of technical assistance when it originates from positive actors to mixed or negative actors, would
additional relationship be sufficient to change the attitude of these actors?


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                  59
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The origins of power, prosperity and poverty. Profile
Books Ltd. London 2012.
Acosta AM and Pettit J. 2013. Practice guide: a combined approach to political economy and power analysis
discussion note prepared for the Swiss Development Cooperation. URL: https://www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/
ACombinedApproachtoPEandPAAMejiaAcostaandJ Pettit2013.pdf
Alumai, G., Kishor, N., Johansson, S., Castr6n, T., and Rosenbaum, K. 2012. Forest governance reforms in producer
countries: Creating the right conditions for controlling illegal logging and trade in illegal timber in Africa. Paper
prepared for the international conference: Illegal logging and legality verification-the FLEGT/VPA as new modes of
governance. Copenhagen, 6-7 December, 2012. Conference Draft 11-15-2012.
Arsano, Y., Mekonnen, E., Gudisa, D., Achiso, D., O'Meally, S., Calow, R., Ludi, E. 2010. Governance and drivers of change
in Ethiopia's water supply sector. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Auty, Richard M. 2003. Natural resources, Development Models and Sustainable Development. Environmental Economics
Programme, Discussion paper 03-01. Available at: www.iied.org/eep
Bema T, Campbell N, Jumbe B, Perry C. 2011. Taking Knowledge for Health the Extra Mile: An Evaluation of the Malawi
Knowledge for Health (K4Health) Project. Management Sciences for Health.
Beuran, M., Raballand, G., and Kapoor, K., 2011, 'Political Economy Studies: Are They Actionable? Some Lessons from
Zambia', Policy Research Working Paper 5656, World Bank, Washington DC.
Booth, D. and Golooba-Mutebi, F. 2009. Aiding economic growth in Africa: The political economy of roads reform in
Uganda. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Robin, B. 1995. The Political Economy of Natural Resources: Case studies of the Indonesian and Philippines Forest Sectors.
The Journal of Developing Areas. 29, 317-340. April 199S.
Burgess, Robin, Hansen, M, Olken, B, Potapov, P and Sieber, S. 2012. The Political Economy of Deforestation in the Tropics.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics (2012), 1707-17S4.
Buse, K., Booth, D., Murindwa, G., Mwisongo A. and Harmer, A. 2008. Donors and the Political Dimensions of Health Sector
Reform: The Cases of Tanzania and Uganda. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Campbell, N., Schiffer, E., Buxbaum, A., McLean E, Perry C, Sullivan TM. 2014. Taking Knowledge for Health the Extra Mile:
Participatory Evaluation of a Mobile Phone Intervention for Community Health Workers in Malawi. Global Health:
Science and Practice Journal 2(1): 23-34
Castr6n, T. and Pillai, M. 2011. Forest Governance 2.0: A primer on ICTs and governance. Washington DC: Program on
Forests.
Corduneanu-Huci, C., Hamilton, A. and Ferrer, I. M. 2013. Understanding policy change: How to apply political economy
concepts in practice. World Bank Publications, The World Bank, number 11879, March.


﻿S0       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Danida, 2011, 'Applying Political Stakeholder Analysis: How Can it Work?', Technical Advisory Services, Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Denmark, Danida, Copenhagen
Deacon, R. T. 2010. The Political Economy of the Natural Resource Curse: An Intrepretive Survey. University of California,
Santa Barbara and Resources for the Future.
Desai, Raj M. 2011. An Evaluation of Political-Economic Analysis in Support of the World Bank's Governance and
Anticorruption Strategy. IEG Working Paper 2011/4.
DFID. 2004. Drivers of Change. Public Information Note. London: DFID.
DFID and World Bank. 200S. Tools for Understanding Institutional, Political and Social Analysis (TIPS).
Duncan, A. and Williams, G. (2010). Making development assistance more effective by using political economy analysis:
what has been done and what have we learned? http://www.thepolicypractice.com/papersdetails.asp?code=16
Edelmann, D. 2009. Analysing and managing the political dynamics of sector reforms: a sourcebook on sector-level
political economy approaches. Working Paper 309. Results of ODI research presented in preliminary form for
discussion and critical comment. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Fisher et al. 2013. Mapping the Ideological Networks of American Climate Politics. Climatic Change 116(3): 523-545.
Fritz, V., K. Kaiser, and B. Levy. 2009. "Problem-Driven Governance and Political Economy Analysis" Washington DC:
World Bank.
Fritz, Verena, Brian Levy and Rachel Ort (editors). 2014. Problem-Driven Political Economy Analysis: The World Bank's
Experience. Directions in Development, The World Bank, Washington DC. 2014.
Haider, H and Rao, S. 2010. Political and social analysis for development policy and practice - an overview of five
approaches. Technical Report. University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Harris, D., Jones, L. and Kooy, M. 2011. Analysing the Governance and Political Economy of Water and Sanitation Service
Delivery. ODI Working Paper 334. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Harris, D., Kooy, M., Nam, P.Q. 2012. Scaling up rural sani-tation in Vietnam: political economy constraints and op-
portunities. ODI Working Paper 341. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Harwell, Emily, Douglas Farah and Arthur Blundell. 2011. Forests, Fragility and Conflict: Overview and Case studies.
PROFOR 2011. Washington DC.
Hazenburg J. 2009. The SGACA experience: incentives, interests and raw power; Making development aid more realistic
and less technical.
Heymans, C., Pycroft, C. 2003. Drivers of change in Nigeria: a preliminary overview. United Kingdom's Department for
International Development. URL: http://www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/DOC27.pdf accessed on December10 2013.
Hout, Wil and Lydeke Schakel. 2014. SGACA: The rise and paradoxical demise of a political economy instrument.
Development Policy Review 2014. 32 (5): 611-630.
Hyden, G. (2005) 'Why Do Things Happen the Way They Do? A PowerAnalysis of Tanzania', Sida online. http://hei.unige.
ch/news/files/Goran_Hyden_Power_analysis.pdf.


﻿THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM                      61
Jackson, M. 0. 2009. Social and economic networks. Princeton University Press.
Karl, Terry Lynn. 1997. The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Luttrell, C., Resosudarmo, I. A. P.; Muharrom, E.; Brockhaus, M.; Seymour, F. 2014. The political context of REDD+ in
Indonesia: Constituencies for change. Environ. Sci. Policy 35: 67-75.
Magrath, W., R. Grandalski, G. Stuckey, G. Vikanes, and G. Wilkinson. 2007. Timber Theft Prevention: Introduction to
Security for Forest Managers. Washington DC, World Bank.
Malena, C. (editor). 2009. From Political Won't to Political Will: Building Support for Participatory Governance. Civicus.
Kumarian Press.
Miller, D.C. 2013. Conservation Legacies: Governing Biodiversity and Livelihoods around the W National Parks of Benin
and Niger. PhD diss., University of Michigan.
Moncrieffe and Luttrell. 2005. An analytical framework for understanding the political economy of sectors and policy
arenas. Overseas Development Institute.
Nash, R., Hudson, A. and Luttrell, C. 2006. Mapping political context - A toolkit for civil society organizations. Overseas
Development Institute (ODI): London, UK.
North, Douglass C. 1991. Institutions. Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 5 (1): 97-112, Winter 1991.
North, Douglass C. 1992. Institutions and Economic Theory. The American Economist, Vol. 36 (1), Spring 1992, pp. 3-6.
Nunberg, B., Barma, N., Abdollahian, M., Green, A. and Perlman, D., 2010, 'At The Frontier of Practical Political Economy:
Operationalizing an Agent-Based Stakeholder Model in the World Bank's East Asia and Pacific Region', Research
Working Paper 5176, World Bank, Washington DC.
OECD DAC. 2005. Lessons Learned on the Use of Power and Drivers of Change Analyses in Development Cooperation, DAC
Network on Governance (GovNet), OECD, Paris, online at http://www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/DOC82.pdf.
Poole, A., 2011, 'Political Economy Assessments at Sector and Project Levels', How-To Note, World Bank, Washington DC
PROFOR. 2012. Assessing and Monitoring Forest Governance: A User's Guide to a Diagnostic Tool. Washington DC.
Program on Forests (PROFOR).
PROFOR 5 FAO. 2011. Framework for Assessing and Monitoring Forest Governance. http://www. profor.info/sites/profor.
info/files/ForestGovernanceFrameworkO.pdf or http://www.fao.org/ climatechange/27526-Occ61ecc084048c7ag
425f64942df7oa8.pdf.
Rab6, P. and A. Kamanzi. 2012. Power analysis: a study of power analysis at the local level in Tanzania. ASC Working
Paper 105, Leiden: African Studies Centre https://openaccess.1eidenuniv.nl/bitstream/handle/1887/19551/ASC-
075287668-3226-01.pdf ?sequence=2
Ramalingam B. 2013. Aid on the edge of chaos. Oxford University Press
Reed, M.S. et al. 2009. Who's in and why? A typology of stakeholder analysis methods for natural resource management.
Journal of Environmental Management 90:1933-194
Robinson, James A. Ragnar Torvik and Thierry Verdier. 2006. Political foundations of the Resource Curse, Journal of
Development Economics, Volume 79, Issue 2, April 2006, Pages 447-468.


﻿62       THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DECISION-MAKING IN FORESTRY: USING EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS FOR REFORM
Ross, Michael, L, 2001. Timber Booms and Institutional Breakdown in Southeast Asia. Cambridge University Press.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner. 1997. Natural Resource Abundance And Economic Growth. Center for International
Development and Harvard Institute for International Development, Harvard University, Cambridge MA, November, 1997
Sander K, Gros C, Peter C. 2013. Enabling reforms: Analyzing the political economy of the charcoal sector in Tanzania.
Energy for Sustainable Development 17116-126
Schiffer, E. 2007. Net-Map Toolbox: Influence Mapping of Social Networks. International Food Policy Research Network,
Washington DC.
Schiffer, E. and, Hauck, J. 2010. Network Learning Through Participatory Influence Network Mapping. Field Methods
22(3) 231-249.
Schiffer, E. and Waale, D. 2008. Tracing Power and Influence in Networks. IFPRI Discussion Paper 00772. International
Food Policy Research Network, Washington DC.
Scott, Z. 2007. Professional developments: The changing face of "drivers of change". Public Administration and
Development, 27:85-90.
Shanks, E., Luttrell, C., Conway, T., Vu, L. and Ladinsky, J. 2004, Vietnam: understanding pro-poor political change - the
policy process. Overseas Development Institute, London.
Sida. 2013. PowerAnalysis: A Practical Guide (by Jethro Pettit). Sida, 2013.
Unsworth, S. 2008. Framework for strategic governance and corruption analysis. Designing strategic responses towards
good governance. The Hague: Conflict Research Unit Clingendael
Unsworth, S. and Williams G., 2011,'Political Economy Analysisto Improve EU Development Effectiveness: DEVCO Concept Paper.
Utting, P. 2000. Forest Policy and Politics in the Philippines: The Dynamics of Participatory Conservation. Ateneno de
Manila University Press.
Vaughan, S. and K. Tronvoll. 2003. The Culture of Power in Contemporary Ethiopian Political Life, Sida Studies, No. 10,
online at http://www.sida.org/sida/jsp/sida.jsp?d=118anda=3005andlanguage=en_US.
Warrener, D. 2004. Synthesis Paper 3. The Drivers of Change Approach. Overseas Development Institute, London.
World Bank. 2014. Russian Federation: Far East Forest Governance Study. Working Paper, the World Bank, Washington
DC. 2014.
World Bank. 2010. Madagascar Governance and Development Effectiveness Review: A Political Economy Analysis of
Governance in Madagascar. December 2010. Report No. 54277-MG. Public Sector Reform and Capacity Building Unit
(AFTPR). The World Bank.
World Bank. 2010. Enabling reforms: a stakeholder-based analysis of the political economy of Tanzania's charcoal sector
and the poverty and social impacts of proposed reforms. Policy Note. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2009. Environmental crisis or sustainable development opportunity? Transforming the charcoal sector in
Tanzania. Policy Note. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2008. The Political Economy of Policy Reform: Issues and Implications for Policy Dialogue and Development
Operations. November 2008. Report No. 44288-GLB. Social Development Department. The World Bank.


