                101712



Transformation-Ready:
        Using ICT to Fast-Track
    Africa’s Development Path
                                                                                                                                                   T ra n sformation-ready
Connectivity on the Rise But an Unfinished Agenda
Africa’s growth performance has improved
remarkably during the last decade. One
of the key contributors to this impressive                                                                                                          2
progress has been the role of Information
and Communication Technologies (ICT),
which are creating new business and
investment opportunities for national and
regional economic development. Mobile
technology innovations and the widespread
liberalization of telecommunications markets
have stimulated over US$56 billion in
private sector investment in the continent
                          1
between 1998 and 2008 and led to an
unprecedented increase in access to telephone services. Africa has become the fastest growing region
in the global cellular market, going from less than 2 million mobile phones in use in 1998 to over
400 million today. More than 65 percent of the population now lives within reach of wireless a voice
network, up from less than 1 percent ten years ago.

Despite the impressive growth of the sector, African countries face considerable challenges in
providing access to high speed Internet for the nearly one billion people on the continent. Connectivity
gaps at international, regional, national and rural levels still exist, and lack of competitive access to
submarine cables keeps the price of international voice calls and Internet connectivity high.

Getting the environment right for the private sector participation and sound competition remains the
most important and unfinished agenda.


1
    Total investment amount in mobile sector between 1998-2008 in Africa (including northern African countries). Source: World Bank PPI database
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             T ra n sformation-ready
We Believe in Universal Connectivity                                                                                    Transformation-Ready: Using ICT to
                                                                                                                        Fast-Track Africa’s Development Path
With the right enabling environment, the private sector could extend
voice service coverage to 95 percent of the population and basic
Internet coverage to 89 percent. Extending the coverage of wireless                                                     The evidence of ICTs’ impact on a country’s economy and growth is becoming increasingly clear.        4
networks to make basic voice and basic Internet available to the                                                        Recent World Bank research shows that a 10 percent increase in mobile phone subscribers leads
entire population in sub-Saharan Africa would require US$17 billion
                                                                                                                        to a 0.8 percent increase in economic growth. Similarly, a 10 percent increase in high-speed
investment over the next ten years. The private sector could account for
                       2
                                                                                                                        Internet connections leads to a 1.3 percent increase in economic growth.
close to US$12 billion .

                                                                                                                        Innovations in data access using ICT are already transforming the way many Africans are
In order to achieve more than basic internet coverage (i.e mass market
high-speed Internet access at affordable prices), significant additional                                                conducting business, and government delivering services. With continued increases in access to
public investment through public private partnership arrangements                                                       high-speed communications, the transformative nature of these advances will continue to spread
would be needed to complement private sector investments.                                                               across Africa.

                                                                                                                        ICT is now used in many more ways than before and fundamentally affects people’s everyday
Providing the right enabling environment can notably include:
                                                                                                                        lives. Governments are becoming more efficient and transparent by offering information and
•	 Completing the reform agenda by establishing full competition throughout the sector.
                                                                                                                        services online. Access to global knowledge has the promise to unleash the power of human
•	 Revising the licensing framework to accommodate rapid technological change and
                                                                                                                        capital, stimulate innovation, and offer equity and inclusion, as well as provide opportunities to
   emerging competition.
                                                                                                                        all segments of society.
•	 Reforming the state-owned enterprises (SOEs) that hinder sector growth and development.
•	 Promoting sound and predictable level of direct and indirect taxation of the sector.                                 Africa is Transformation-ready and new and innovative technologies are helping change the
•	 Ensuring low-cost international access infrastructure by preventing monopoly control over                            development paradigm.
   bottleneck facilities.
•	 Promoting the development of high-bandwidth backbone infrastructure.                                                 Read about how citizens, farmers, entrepreneurs, teachers and governments are using
•	 Stimulating innovation in the use of wireless technologies by reforming radio spectrum is                            Information and Communications Technologies to transform Africa.
   allocation mechanism and management.



2
    Source: Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic (AICD) Report, 2010, Chapter 7 - ICT: A Boost for African Growth
                                                                                                                 T ra n sformation-ready
Using ICT to Transform Agriculture
Agriculture has always been an information-intensive sector. Access to phones and Internet can
facilitate effective dissemination of information on planting and crop management, disease and pest
control, veterinary care and other related issues. Providing useful knowledge to farmers and merchants            6
through ICTs can improve and ensure their yields, supply chain, and consequently, income levels. This
is even more essential for smallholder farmers who facer higher information costs, both as producers
and sellers, as a result of their typically greater isolation and the poor state of rural information and
communication infrastructure. A number of countries are beginning to see the positive impact of ICTs.
For example, between 2001 and 2006, the presence of cell phones in Niger was associated with a four
percent reduction in consumer grain prices and a 29 percent increase in traders’ profits as compared to
non-cell phone markets. In Uganda, farmers are accessing weather and market price information using
mobile phone text messaging. At a more advanced level, availability of tailored ICT-based services can
provide commercial farmers with tools to participate in an increasingly globalized food market which
have opened both new market opportunities and challenges, especially for Africa.

•	 National agricultural information systems are
   bringing relevant research and extension                     Kenya Agricultural Commodity Exchange
   information to local users at the national level
   and supported with ICT.                                      The Kenya Agricultural Commodity exchange
                                                                (KACE), a private sector-led initiative, is
•	 Price information systems are facilitating                   leveraging the widespread use of cell
   dissemination of accurate and up-to-date price               phones to help farmers get more value for
   information to farmers with dramatic impacts                 their products by providing daily agricultural
                                                                commodity prices and extension service
   on their negotiating positions and incomes.
                                                                messages via SMS (SMS Sokoni).
•	 Through ICT, farmers are improving their
                                                                Farmers have experienced up to 70 percent
   livelihoods by increased access to potential
                                                                increase in income.
   markets, awareness among producers on consumer
   trends, new production techniques, or by providing
   technical information to farmers to assist them in
   meeting quality standards.
                                                                                                                                  T ra n sformation-ready
                                           Ghana Community                  Increasing Government
                                           Network: GCNET                   Efficiency and Transparency
                                           GCNET, a customs and trade
                                           facilitation e-government
                                                                            Through ICT
                                                                                                                                   8
                                           application taken up in
                                           partnership with the private     Governments across Africa are utilizing ICTs as
                                           sector is arguably one of the
                                                                            a tool to modernize government and increase
                                           most successful electronic
                                                                            accountability, transparency and efficiency through
                                           applications in Africa, and
                                           demonstrates the potential       systematizing and streamlining administrative
                                           for using PPPs for advancing     workflows and creating common depositories of
                                           e-government. GCNet is a joint   information and data with electronic means.
                                           venture with the two major
                                           partners being the Customs       The impact of ICT applications on productivity
                                           Department and a Swiss           and efficiency of public services has been striking
                                           company Societe Generale         in a number of African countries. The Tanzania
                                           de Surveillance. The Customs
                                                                            Revenue Authority’s (TRA), for example, embraced
                                           Department contributed $1
                                                                            transformation with the introduction electronic
                                           million towards equity while
                                           the balance equity of $4.3
                                                                            systems which has helped the government
                                           million came from the private    increase tax revenues without increasing tax rates
                                           sector. GCNet has achieved       and enhanced the efficiency and effectiveness of
                                           demonstrable success with        the country’s administration. Domestic revenue
                                           customs revenues increasing      mobilization has increased from 11% of GDP in
                                           by 49% in the first 18 months    2003 to 17% in 2008.
It is estimated that of the 6.5 billion    and the time taken for customs
people in the world 5 billion don’t        clearances coming down from
have a bank account. Anywhere in           6 days to under 4 hours at the
the world if you ask people why they       Accra Airport.

don’t have a bank account if comes
down to affordability, accessibility and
availability.
                                                                                                      T ra n sformation-ready
Banking the Unbanked
Banking via cell phone in Africa is easily one of the most
significant developments in the continent’s recent history.
Several recent innovations have been developed by the                                                 10
private sector in Africa to address the unmet demand for
reliable financial services for the poor.

WIZZIT is one such ‘virtual bank’ in South Africa that
has capitalized on the mobile platform to reach the
‘unbankable’. To reach its customers, WIZZIT has adopted
a unique direct sales approach, employing nearly 2,000
previously unemployed WIZZkids with good local
knowledge and contacts in the neighborhoods where
they operate. Its services can be used with any mobile
phone from all operators.

Similar initiatives in Africa, such as Safaricom’s M-Pesa
in Kenya or MAP Mobile banking solution in Uganda
have revolutionized banking in these countries. Both are
bringing to the unbanked and under-banked. These innovative solutions offer mobile phone users the
opportunity for person-to-person and bill/loan payments. The value of person-to-person transactions
via M-Pesa reached over US$300 million per month in September 2009 and just under 8 million
registered users. In Uganda, 350,000 have new bank accounts due to MAP services.

The success of these investments has provided the ground for rival services across Africa and the
incentive for banking to reach out to the under-served.
                                                                                                         T ra n sformation-ready
ICT-enabled Incubators Transform
Business Ideas into Reality
The spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship thrives                                                    12
in Africa just as it does anywhere else in the world.
However, the vast majority of small businesses
created by entrepreneurs fail in their first year. African
governments are beginning to recognize the important
development contributions made through innovation and
entrepreneurship and are focusing on ICT-enabled business
incubation initiatives as a critical tool to African innovators.

Business incubators provide protected environments
for business start-ups. One of the small businesses that
has benefited from the services of a business incubator
is Equinox Intercom in Ghana. Started in 2006, Equinox Intercom offers the software application
“eCampus” to educational institutions to build and manage online courses and collaborative activities.
The company now employs eight people, and its software is translated into 35 languages. Equinox CEO
Cecil Nutakor says, “my business would have died out or be struggling to gain momentum if we did not
join the incubator in 2006.”

In Senegal, Mina Production, a sewing and dyeing enterprise incubated at the National Council of
Negro Women, is benefiting from access to office space and modern office equipment, as well as
training in management, accounting, marketing, computer software and weekly coaching sessions.
Mina Production owner Aminata Diop says, “We realized that before the incubation, we operated in the
dark, we were making money on a daily basis, but we have never operated as an organized business.
Incubation helped us be visible through Internet, for the first time we have a free space on Internet
where we are displaying our products.”
                                                                                                            T ra n sformation-ready
Learning and Teaching with ICT
Innovations in technology have led to an increased use of ICTs in all sectors – and education is no
exception. Just as cell phones have leapfrogged fixed line technology in the telecommunications
industry, mobile devices with internet access and computing capabilities are impacting the learning         14
and teaching experiences in African classrooms.

Although at present a small percentage are benefiting from online learning due to high cost of
bandwidth, institutions and governments have come up with innovative ways to provide Internet
connection. One of the largest initiatives, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
e-Schools Initiative, led by African Heads of State and the African Union, it is providing to all African
schools with ICT tools to ensure that young graduates have the requisite skills to fully participate in
the information society and knowledge economy.

In Rwanda, to support its vision to produce 50,000 computer programmers—the country’s needs by
2020— the government wants every child in the country between the ages of nine and twelve (1.3
million in all), to have a laptop by 2012, each with an internet or intranet connection to download
free educational software and electronic books. To this end a partnership has been initiated with
the One Laptop per Child organization linked to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Similar
initiatives are being explored in other countries using Intel’s Classmate netbook or Portugal’s
Magellan netbook. This ecosystem approach is the result of aggregating local, regional, and global
technology organizations in addition to NGOs and governments that provide hardware, software,
and infrastructure expertise, complemented by the schools’ governing boards, principals, teachers,
administrators, and students.

Mobile applications are also being used to monitor teacher attendance, school books inventories,
etc. The use of computers and Internet are only beginning to transform teaching and learning in
Africa. Improved access will enable Africa’s students to learn and compete with their peers around
the world in a more level playing field.
                                                                                                           T ra n sformation-ready
ITES-BPO: The Next Frontier
Rapid growth in global outsourcing has made the IT Enabled Services (ITES) and Business Process
Outsourcing (BPO) industries essential new growth frontiers in Africa. Large and small companies
around the world are increasingly calling on African enterprises to meet their demand for efficient,       16
reliable, and cost-effective customer support and other key services. Success in Africa’s ITES-BPO
sector brings with it a number of benefits, including:
•	 Employment of women who now account for a large percentage of the total professional and
   technical workers in the IT services and ITES—a much higher rate of female participation than in
   the service sector in general 3.
•	 Increase in investment - The IT and ITES industry helps attract foreign investment, transform the
   financial sector, energize local exports, and nurture ICT skills and innovation in the workforce.
•	 Job creation – It is estimated that every 1 job created in the IT/ITES sector results in the creation
   of 4 additional jobs in ancillary sectors like transport, training, catering etc.

Countries like Mauritius and Ghana have identified IT enabled services (ITES) as one of the
key sectors for enhancing economic growth and want to position themselves as premier BPO
destinations in Africa.

In recent years, Mauritius has created about 7000 jobs in IT/ITES, and the sector is contributing about
4 percent of the country’s GDP.

Ghana estimates that it will create some 37,000 jobs by 2011, and increase the sector’s contribution
to GDP by about US$750 million 4.



3
    Source: The Global Opportunity in IT-Based Services: Increasing Country Competitiveness, World Bank
4   Source: GASSCOM – Ghana Association of Software and IT Services Companies
                                                                                                                                                                                            T ra n sformation-ready
Who Are We
The Global Information and Communication Technologies Department (GICT) is a joint department of the              IFC activities include:
World Bank and the International Finance Corporation (IFC). Bringing together IFC’s experience in private
                                                                                                                  •	 Financing over the last 10 years private sector operators in 41
sector investment transactions and the World Bank’s expertise in policy and regulatory matters, GICT                                                                                        18
                                                                                                                     African countries, providing US$941 million in debt, guarantee
promotes access to information and communication technologies in developing countries.
                                                                                                                     and equity financing in IFC own account;

What We Do                                                                                                        •	 Mobilizing for these projects another US$588 million for the
The World Bank Group is the largest major multi-lateral financier and provider of policy advice in the field         account of syndicated banks in form of B loans and guarantees;
of ICT in developing countries. Over the past 10 years, the World Bank Group has provided more than US$3          •	 Expanding access to ICT by developing and replicating Advisory
billion of funding in over 80 countries through its financing arms; the International Bank of Reconstruction
                                                                                                                     Services programs, such as the Village Phone program, which are
and Development (IBRD or World Bank), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Multilateral
                                                                                                                     now being rolled out in multiple countries with 12,000 Village
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).
                                                                                                                     Phone Operators (more than 70 percent women) in five countries
                                                                                                                     (Uganda, Nigeria, Madagascar, Malawi, India) serving an estimate
The World Bank activities in Africa include:
                                                                                                                     3 million under-served populations.
•	 Support for on-going sector reforms in over 30 countries through advice and capacity building for
   governments and regulators Targeted investment in partnership with the private sector to improve
                                                                                                                  Information for Development Program (info Dev)
   regional connectivity (Regional Communications Infrastructure Program - including, Burundi, Kenya,
                                                                                                                  InfoDev is a multi-agency partnership with a mandate to maximize
   Madagascar, Rwanda, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania; Central African Backbone Program - including:
   Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad; ECOWAS Connectivity Program (under preparation);                     the impact of ICT on development and poverty reduction. InfoDev has
                                                                                                                  a particular focus on increasing access to information infrastructure,
•	 Targeted investment in partnership with the private sector to improve regional connectivity: Regional
                                                                                                                  applications and services, and supporting private sector ICT innovators
   Communications Infrastructure Program - including, Burundi, Kenya, Madagascar, Rwanda, Malawi,
                                                                                                                  and entrepreneurs.
   Mozambique, Tanzania; Central African Backbone Program - including: Cameroon, Central African
   Republic, Chad; ECOWAS Connectivity Program (under preparation);
                                                                                                                  GICT and the Government of Korea (GoK) have also recently
•	 Supporting e-government applications to foster transparency and efficiency of public institutions and
                                                                                                                  launched a partnership to advance the ICT for Development agenda,
   improve delivery of social services to citizens (countries includeGhana; Rwanda; Kenya, Mozambique,
                                                                                                                  with the goal of contributing to growth, and poverty reduction in
   Tanzania; Benin (under preparation); Morocco, and Tunisia;
                                                                                                                  developing countries (Korean Trust Fund in ICT4D).
•	 Promoting skills development in the IT/IT enabled services sector to allow countries to connect with leading
   international companies, cutting edge business practices and current technologies (Nigeria, Ghana).
 Many of the stories in this booklet are derived from a complementary series of
short films on “Connecting Africa” and “info Dev’s Business Incubation Network.“
            Visit www.worldbank.org/connectingafrica to learn more.




            Global Information and Communication Technologies
                  1818 H Street NW, Washington, D.C. 20433 USA
                Phone +1 (202) 458-7077 | Fax +1 (202) 614-0388
                               gict@worldbank.org
                             www.worldbank.org/gict
