                                         101749

PROFOR

         WORKING PAPER

         Understanding Long-Term
         Impacts in the Forest Sector:
         PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS
Acknowledgements
This report was written by Daniel C. Miller (Task Team Leader and Sr. Forestry Specialist, World Bank) and Catherine
Benson Wahlén (Independent Consultant).

Helpful inputs were provided by Selene Castillo, Tuukka Castrén, Diji Chandrasekharan, JongA Choi, Neeta Hooda,
Anders Jensen, Peter Jipp, Stig Johansson, Julian Lee, Nalin Kishor, and Nga Phuong Nguyen. Exchanges with the Climate
Smart Agriculture indicators team led by Ademola Braimoh helped inform this report. Laura Ivers, Veronica Jarrín, and
Sujatha Venkat Ganeshan provided essential support to this activity.

The team benefited from insightful comments and suggestions from Rocio Sanz Cortes, Jeneen Reyes Garcia, Carole
Megevand, and Anthony Waldron as well as from members of the Science for Nature and People (SNAP) working group
on evidence-based conservation and the Forests and Livelihoods: Assessment, Research, and Engagement (FLARE)
network. The peer reviewers were Julien Colomer (Evaluation and Impact Assessment Officer, IUCN), Gerhard Dieterle
(Adviser, GCCPT, World Bank), Anders Jensen (Sr. Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, GPSOS, World Bank), and Avjeet
Singh (Sr. Operations Officer, GWADR, World Bank).

The work was done under the overall guidance of Valerie Hickey, Practice Manager, Environment and Natural Resources
Global Practice, at the World Bank.

Financial support for this activity from the Program on Forests is gratefully acknowledged.


Disclaimer
All omissions and inaccuracies in this document are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed do not
necessarily represent those of the institutions involved, nor do they necessarily represent official policies of PROFOR or
the World Bank.

Suggested Citation
Miller, Daniel C. and Catherine Benson Wahlén, 2015. Understanding Long-Term Impacts in the Forest Sector: Predictive
Proxy Indicators. Washington, DC: Program on Forests (PROFOR), World Bank.

For a full list of publications please contact:
        Program on Forests (PROFOR)
        1818 H Street, NW
        Washington, DC 20433, USA
        profor@worldbank.org
        www.profor.info/knowledge

PROFOR is a multi-donor partnership supported by the European Commission, Finland, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the World Bank Group.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS               3




        Ta b l e o f C o n t e n t s

        ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	2
        LIST OF BOXES, FIGURES, AND TABLES	4
        ACRONYMS	5
        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	6
        1. INTRODUCTION	10
        2. USE OF PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICTORS IN FORESTRY AND OTHER SECTORS	13
        	 2.1 DEFINING PROXY INDICATORS	                                                   13
        	 2.2 LITERATURE REVIEW	                                                           13
        	 2.3 STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF PROXY INDICATORS	                               14
        3. IDENTIFYING PREDICTIVE PROXIES IN OPERATIONAL INVESTMENTS	16
        	 3.1 OVERALL APPROACH	                                                            16
        	 3.2 PROJECT IDENTIFICATION	                                                      17
        	 3.3 DATA COLLECTION	                                                             18
        	 3.4 CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING QUALITY INDICATORS AND PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS 	 20
        	 3.5 VALIDATION OF INDICATORS AND DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDICATOR MENU	               21
        4. RESULTS	22
        	 4.1 OVERALL ANALYSIS OF INDICATORS 	                                             22
        	 4.2 IDENTIFICATION OF PREDICTIVE PROXIES FROM THE WORLD BANK FORESTRY PORTFOLIO	 24
        	 4.3 POTENTIAL PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS	                                       25
        	 4.4 POTENTIAL PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS WITH BROAD RELEVANCE	                  38
        	 4.5 THE UTILITY AND IMPORTANCE OF WORLD BANK CORE SECTOR INDICATORS	             40
        	 4.6 ASSESSING MONITORING AND EVALUATION IN THE WORLD BANK’S FORESTRY PORTFOLIO	  43
        5. OPPORTUNITIES FOR AND CONSTRAINTS ON USE OF PROXIES IN WORLD BANK PROJECTS	50
        	 5.1 OPPORTUNITIES	                                                               50
        	 5.2 CONSTRAINTS	                                                                 51
        6. GUIDANCE ON USING PROXIES	52
        7. CONCLUSION	54
        	 7.1 SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS	                                                     54
        	 7.2 TAKING THIS WORK FORWARD	                                                    55

        Annex A. Data and Methods	56
        Annex B. Exploring Potential PPIs in Knowledge Programs: The Case of PROFOR 	67
        Annex C. Menu of Highly Rated Forest Sector Indicators	74
        Annex D Glossary	105
        References	107
4   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




    Boxes
    Box 1: What is a Predictive Proxy Indicator?	                                                                         11
    Box 2:	 Clarifying Links in the Results Chain 	                                                                       19
    Box 3: Testing Predictive Proxy Indicators in the Argentina Forests and Community Project	                            28
    Box 4: Forestry-Relevant Core Sector Indicators in IDA and IBRD Projects	                                             41
    Box 5: From Unsatisfactory to Satisfactory: The India Ecodevelopment Project 	                                        43
    Box 6: Avoiding Overdesign: The Cape Peninsula Biodiversity Conservation Project	                                     45
    Box 7: Another Impact on Project Outcomes? TTL Turnover	                                                              48
    Box A1: Application of SMART Criteria	                                                                                62

    Figures
    Figure 1: Approach to Identify Predictive Proxy Indicators	                                                           16
    Figure 2: Regional Representation of World Bank Forestry Projects Reviewed	                                           17
    Figure 3: Project Outcome Ratings	                                                                                    18
    Figure 4: Distribution of Projects by PDO Type	                                                                       19
    Figure 5: PDO Indicators SMART Scores	                                                                                23
    Figure 6: GEO Indicators SMART Scores	                                                                                24
    Figure 7: Results Chain for Indicator Cluster 1: Sustainable Forest-Related Income	                                   27
    Figure 8: Results Chain for Indicator Cluster 2: Afforestation/Reforestation to Support Livelihoods Improvement	      31
    Figure 9: Results Chain for Indicator Cluster 4: Positive Environmental Impacts (Climate Change–Related)	             34
    Figure 10: Uptake of Forestry Core Sector Indicators by Indicator	                                                    42
    Figure A1: Representation of High-Forest Countries	                                                                   57
    Figure A2: Regional Representation of Projects Reviewed	                                                              57
    Figure A3: Project Lending Type	                                                                                      59
    Figure A4: Project Environmental Category	                                                                            59
    Figure A5: GEO Type	                                                                                                  60
    Figure A6: Project Area Focus	                                                                                        60

    Tables
    Table 1: Examples of Indicators Relevant to Sustainable Forest-related Income Predictive Proxy	                       29
    Table 2: Examples of Indicators Relevant to Afforestation/Reforestation to Support Livelihoods
    	 Improvement Predictive Proxy	                                                                                       32
    Table 3: Examples of Indicators Relevant to Positive Environmental Impacts (Biodiversity-Related) Predictive Proxy	   33
    Table 4: Examples of Indicators Relevant to Participatory Project Design and Implementation Predictive Proxy	         37
    Table 5: Examples of Indicators Relevant to Strengthened Land Tenure Predictive Proxy	                                39
    Table 6: Examples of Indicators Relevant to Predictable, Sustainable Financing Predictive Proxy	                      40
    Table 7: Uptake of Forestry Core Sector Indicators in World Bank Projects	                                            42
    Table 8: Common Lessons Learned on Indicators	                                                                        46
    Table B1: Summary of Information on PROFOR Indicators Reviewed	                                                       68
    Table B2: Top 25 Scoring Indicators in PROFOR Indicators Review	                                                      70
     
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                      5




        Acronyms

        AFR 	        Africa Region
        CBFM	        community-based forest management
        CIFOR	       Center for International Forestry Research
        CODE 	       Committee on Development Effectiveness
        CSI 	        Core Sector Indicator
        EAP 	        East Asia and the Pacific
        ECA 	        Europe and Central Asia
        EOP	         End of Project
        ESP	         Environmental Service Program
        FAO	         Food and Agriculture Organization
        FLARE	       Forests and Livelihoods: Assessment, Research, and Engagement
        FOREST 	     focused, outcome-oriented, replicable, evidence-based, short-term, and timeless
        GEF 	        Global Environment Facility
        GEO 	        Global Environment Objective
        ICF	         International Climate Fund
        ICR 	        Implementation Completion Report
        IEG 	        Independent Evaluation Group
        IO 	         intermediate outcome
        IUCN	        International Union for Conservation of Nature
        JFM 	        joint forest management
        LAC 	        Latin America and the Caribbean
        M&E 	        monitoring and evaluation
        MENA 	       Middle East and North Africa
        MTR 	        mid-term review
        NTFPs 	      non-timber forest products
        PA 	         protected area
        PCR 	        Project Completion Report
        PDO 	        Project Development Objective
        PES	         payment for environmental services
        PPI 	        predictive proxy indicator
        PROFOR 	     Program on Forests
        RCT 	        randomized control trial
        REDD+	       Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation
        SAR 	        South Asia
        SDR 	        Special Drawing Rate
        SFM 	        sustainable forest management
        SMART 	      specific, measurable, attributable, realistic, and time-bound
        SME	         small and medium-size enterprise
        SNAP	        Science for Nature and People
        TTL 	        Task Team Leader
6   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




    E X E C U T I V E S U M M A RY

    Background and Study Rationale
    The international development community is increasingly demanding better evidence on the effectiveness of policies
    and programs across different sectors. The forest sector is no exception. Governments and donor agencies explicitly seek
    to link investment to proven impact. Yet the evidence base necessary to inform interventions in the forest sector that
    can successfully enhance the livelihoods of the forest-dependent poor, foster economic growth, reduce emissions from
    deforestation and degradation, and conserve forest biodiversity remains weak.

    There is a particular need to identify robust indicators to track and assess the impacts of forest-related investments.
    The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) 2013 review of the Forests Strategy of the World Bank, the largest multilateral
    funding source in the sector, and the subsequent Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) report highlighted
    this need. The IEG recommended the development of outcome indicators on sustainable forest management to track
    progress across the World Bank’s Forests Strategy. The 2013 CODE report highlighted the imperative to develop short-
    term proxy indicators for long-term impacts in the forest sector.

    To date, however, there is little systematic knowledge on the availability of such predictive proxies in the sector, what form
    they should take, and the conditions under which they are effective. This PROFOR-financed study responds to this gap
    in knowledge and to broader demand from donors, government agencies, and implementing organizations to develop
    robust, yet practical means to better understand the impacts of forest sector investments. It focuses in particular on
    potential predictive proxies for longer-term term outcomes and suggests that such indicators do in fact exist. The report
    identifies a set of theory-based predictive proxy indicators (PPIs) relevant to one or more overarching development
    objectives: poverty reduction and economic growth, biodiversity conservation, climate change mitigation and adaption,
    and good governance.

    The results and the approach used here lay the foundation for future analytical work to test and refine PPIs in the forest
    sector. They also have the potential to inform efforts in other complex development sectors seeking reliable information
    in the short term on likely longer-term outcomes. This report should be of special interest to World Bank Group Task Team
    Leaders (TTLs) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialists who are working on operational and analytical investments
    that have a forestry component. The indicators discussed here can help to inform the design and implementation of
    such investments so that they are able to have more positive impacts on the World Bank’s key development goals of
    eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. The indicators developed in this
    report also should also be of interest to other actors involved in forest sector investments, and the approach is relevant
    to other sectors that may also grapple with long time horizons and significant temporal lags between interventions and
    impacts. Looking ahead, this report should have particular resonance as the international community looks to adopt an
    ambitious set of Sustainable Development Goals and related targets and indicators to guide development policy over the
    next 15 years.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      7




        Analytical Approach
        The results presented in this report draw from several sources of evidence. The primary information source is an analysis
        of the World Bank’s forest lending portfolio over the past 25 years. This portfolio review focused on 80 projects, including
        the full sample (n=48) of the Bank’s investment during the study period in the top 11 countries in terms of forested area
        and/or prominence of forest biodiversity: Brazil, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
        India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Peru, and the Russian Federation. In addition, 32 projects were randomly selected
        from all the relevant projects in the portfolio. Project selection was weighted by region so that regions with a larger
        number of projects were proportionately represented within the review.

        Following the selection of projects and the data collection process, a three-step approach to identifying potential
        predictive proxies was used: developing criteria for good predictive proxies; assessing possible indicators for their
        potential as predictive proxies, on a scale from 1 to 5; and validating potential proxies. All project indicators were
        evaluated according to the SMART (specific, measurable, attributable, realistic, and time-bound) criteria, using a Likert
        scale from 1 to 5.

        A PPI should provide a credible indication about some future change or state based on currently available evidence. It is
        a stand-in for what we would like to measure directly (a future change or state) but cannot (yet) measure. To be judged
        as having potential as a predictive proxy, the indicator had to imply a plausible theory of change explaining why it was
        likely to accurately predict a desired future change or state that would result at least in part from a given intervention.

        We augmented potential PPIs identified through the portfolio review with indicators used by other key actors in the
        forestry sector and suggested by experts, including World Bank TTLs and research specialists. We then used a theory-
        based approach to validate the PPIs based on expert views gathered at a workshop of TTLs and other World Bank staff and
        at meetings at the Oxford Center for Tropical Forests and with members of the Science for People and Nature working group
        on evidence-based conservation and the Forests and Livelihoods: Assessment, Research, and Engagement network. This
        report also explored validating PPIs by collecting data on hypothesized proxies at different points in time (that is, during
        a project, at project end, and post-project) and examining whether the outcomes measured persist over time and across a
        large number of interventions. While some relevant time series data sets were identified, cost considerations prohibited
        exploring this validation method more fully during this phase of the work.


        Findings
        The main overall finding is that predictive proxy indicators do appear to exist and can be used in practice. Given the
        complexity and diversity of the forest sector and novelty of the task, this conclusion was far from a certainty when this
        research began. We identified a range of potential PPIs, several of which have already been used in World Bank forest
        projects. These PPIs focused primarily at the Project Development Objective (PDO) and Global Environment Objective
        level, although some intermediate-level indicators were identified. The report argues that robust PPIs can provide an
        important ex ante evaluation tool that enables practitioners and researchers to predict future outcomes and longer-term
        impacts if certain assumptions hold.

        To help inform the design and implementation of forestry operations and knowledge, we developed a list of top ranking
        indicators based on an assessment of their predictive potential and their SMART score. These indicators are presented
        in an indicator menu organized by major objective (that is, relating to poverty, biodiversity, climate, or governance)
8   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




    and including brief notes on how they might be used. The indicator menu is presented as an annex and represents a key
    product stemming from this analytical work.

    This review did not identify any standalone “silver bullet” predictive proxies, but a major contribution is the idea that
    multiple indicators, considered together, can have strong predictive potential. The report describes a series of seven
    indicator clusters that form PPIs. These clusters consist of two to four indicators and address the following broad
    development objectives or themes:

    •	   Sustainable forest-related income
    •	   Afforestation/reforestation to support livelihoods improvement
    •	   Positive environmental impacts (biodiversity-related)
    •	   Positive environmental impacts (climate change-related)
    •	   Increased carbon stocks
    •	   Participatory project design and implementation
    •	   Effective project monitoring and evaluation

    The report highlights the importance of indicators on land tenure and sustainable financing. These two indicators are part
    of several clusters and are also recommended as key indicators in many cases of the likely persistence of project gains
    over the longer term.

    Another major finding from the review is that the World Bank’s Core Sector Indicators (CSI) are generally robust and often
    have strong potential as PPIs. Five of the seven forestry CSIs feature as elements in the PPI clusters that were developed.
    A sixth, relating to support for policy and regulatory reforms, is also likely an important constituent in additional PPI
    clusters. Moreover, several CSIs from outside the forestry sector also constituted key elements in PPI clusters. Thus, the
    use of CSIs can have the double benefit of helping to capture both end-of-project and longer-term outcomes of forest
    investments in a consistent way across countries and contexts.

    Uptake of forestry CSIs has improved over time, and 63 percent of active forestry projects approved since the CSIs were
    launched in July 2012 now include at least one CSI. This finding suggests that some ongoing projects may already have in
    place clusters of indicators that may have the capacity to predict longer-term outcomes.

    The review also found that project M&E within World Bank forest sector investments has improved over time, as indicated
    by an increased emphasis on M&E and tracking progress on indicators, particularly those relating to outcomes as opposed
    to outputs, in more recent project Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs) compared with Project Completion Reports
    or earlier ICRs. This is a positive finding, especially given that the quality of project M&E has been shown to influence
    project outcome ratings. Regression analysis quantified a strong positive association between the quality of project M&E
    in the forestry projects reviewed and ultimate project outcome ratings: as project M&E scores increased by one category
    (from moderately satisfactory to satisfactory, for example), project outcome rating scores increased by one-half a rating
    category. This result indicates a significant return on investment in M&E for overall project outcomes, one that may
    portend sustained results over time for projects.

    An important practical contribution of the report is a distillation of key lessons learned on M&E based on review of the
    World Bank Forests Portfolio. For example, projects should avoid overdesign. A broad-brush results framework that clearly
    lays out objectives and key performance indicators but avoids restrictive detail can facilitate adaptive management,
    innovation, and—ultimately—better results. Projects should also use M&E in a proactive manner to assess progress and
    address weaknesses early during implementation. A well-functioning M&E system has been found to provide the basis
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                        9




        for stronger dialogue between the donor and client during project implementation. In addition to these general lessons,
        the report also includes examples of projects with exemplary M&E frameworks recognized for their careful design,
        adaptive nature, and focus on impact and quality.

        The report goes beyond identifying potential PPIs and distilling M&E lessons to also analyze opportunities and constraints
        to the use of PPIs in World Bank projects, with potential relevance to interventions by other donors and actors in the sector.
        Opportunities highlighted include the potential for such indicators to facilitate the use of a smaller number of indicators
        in projects, comparisons across projects, regions, and sectors, and more cost- and time-effective measurement. The use
        of PPIs may also have significant value as a communications tool showing the impacts of forest-related investments.
        Constraints identified include project incentive structures that promote indicators that are achievable within project
        time frames but lack imagination or ambition, disincentives to collect and report on data including due to cost and lack
        of available technical support, and the need to match indicators with larger client priorities and capacity.

        Drawing from the portfolio review and discussions with TTLs and other forest project implementers, the report provides
        guidance on using PPIs. This guidance highlights potential factors to consider when developing proxy indicators, including
        suggestions on criteria for selecting PPIs and looking beyond World Bank projects for examples of proxy indicators. A
        key innovation presented is a more robust framework of criteria to identify PPIs: the FORESTS criteria. Akin to the SMART
        criteria for good indicators generally, the FORESTS criteria suggest that effective predictive proxy indicators should
        be focused, outcome-oriented, replicable/reliable, evidence-based, short-term, and timeless. The extent to which all
        these criteria must be fulfilled to create a strong PPI remains to be tested.


        Paths Forward
        This report highlights the importance of many CSIs, including several outside the forest sector, as well as secure tenure
        and sustainable financing mechanisms as measures that can be combined with other indicators as part of a cluster or used
        as stand-alone indicators. It underscores the importance of identifying additional PPIs, testing and validating them in
        new operations as well as through retrospective analysis. Future development of PPIs must strive to be cost-effective
        and be integrated into ongoing World Bank and other development agency strategies for realizing key international
        development objectives not only in forestry but also in other complex sectors.

         
10   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     1. Introduction

     The international development community is increasingly demanding better evidence on the effectiveness of policies
     and programs across different sectors. The forest sector is no exception. Governments and donor agencies explicitly seek
     to link investment to proven impact. Yet the evidence base necessary to inform interventions in the forest sector that
     can successfully enhance the livelihoods of the forest-dependent poor, foster economic growth, reduce emissions from
     deforestation and degradation, and conserve forest biodiversity remains weak (Miteva, Pattanayak, and Ferraro 2012;
     Wunder, Angelsen, and Belcher 2014; CIFOR 2015).

     There is a particular need to identify robust indicators to track and assess the impacts of forest-related investments. The
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) review of the Forests Strategy of the World Bank (IEG 2013), the largest multilateral
     funding source in the sector, and the subsequent Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) report highlighted
     this need (CODE 2013). The IEG evaluation observed that environmental indicators used in forest projects tended to
     measure effort or process (such as the number of hectares under management plans or the number of hectares planted)
     rather than project outcomes. Further, the evaluation found that poverty reduction indicators used in World Bank projects
     were often inadequate for measuring whether programs and projects reached the poorest and most vulnerable members
     of the community (IEG 2013: xviii, 102). The IEG therefore recommended that technical guidance on sustainable forest
     management (SFM) outcome indicators be developed and used to better track progress across the objectives of the World
     Bank’s Forests Strategy. The CODE report specifically highlighted the imperative to develop short-term proxy indicators
     for long-term impacts in the forest sector (IEG 2013).

     To date, however, there is little systematic knowledge on the availability of such predictive proxies (see Box 1)
     in the sector, what form they should take, and the conditions under which they are effective. A study of World Bank
     environment lending, for example, found that “the data necessary to examine how specific donor supported institutions
     fare in the medium to long-term simply do not exist in most cases” (Buch, Buntaine, and Parks 2015: 30). Even a basic
     understanding of the characteristics that would make for a strong predictive proxy remains lacking. A recent review
     of World Bank investments in forest governance (Kishor and de Rijk 2014) similarly found that the “E” part of M&E
     (monitoring and evaluation) is rarely used to look at project impacts. The authors recommended the development and
     testing of predictive proxy indicators (PPIs) along with greater use of more rigorous impact evaluation methods.

     This Program on Forests (PROFOR) study responds to this gap in knowledge and to broader demand from donors,
     government agencies, and implementing organizations to develop robust yet practical means to better understand the
     outcomes and impacts of forest sector investments. It focuses on identifying predictive proxy indicators for operational
     investments but also considers the prospect of such proxies for analytical work designed to influence policy and practice.

     Any effort to identify potential predictive proxies and provide recommendations on their use confronts two particular
     challenges in the forest sector: interventions usually involve considerable complexity, and they often take a long time
     to show results. For example, results of investments in thinning, tree stand improvement, or natural regeneration under
     SFM are unlikely be apparent for 10–30 years. At the same time, forestry projects often include multiple objectives,
     require the integration of socioeconomic and ecological expertise, and entail processes that unfold over different spatial
     and temporal scales. These characteristics make attribution of impacts to specific interventions (as opposed to other
     factors) difficult within the forest sector, particularly within the context of landscape and cross-cultural approaches.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                     11




            BOX 1: WHAT IS A PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATOR?

            A predictive proxy indicator is best understood by defining each element in the term. An indicator is commonly understood as “a
            parameter or a value from parameters which points to, provides information about, or describes the state of a phenomenon with
            a significance extending beyond that directly associated with a parameter value” (OECD 1993). Indicators can be qualitative or
            quantitative. They can also be categorized by type according to their function.

            One example is a proxy indicator, which can be defined as an indirect measurement of a variable lacking direct information
            (IEG 2012) and a substitute for an indicator that is hard to measure directly and that may reveal performance trends, potential
            problems, or areas of success (World Bank 2014a). The variable can be lacking information for several reasons, including that
            direct measurement is too challenging or costly to obtain in a reasonable time period.

            Proxy indicators are used when the effect of a particular intervention cannot be assessed using direct information. The proxy
            indicator replaces the use of such direct data with secondary data that are feasible to collect and provides information on the
            effect of the intervention using this indirect information. As the term suggests, proxy indicators are therefore almost inevitably
            approximations. An example of a proxy indicator sometimes used in the forestry sector is the development and implementation of
            forest management plans, which is seen as a proxy for sustainable forest management outcomes.

            A predictive proxy indicator, or simply predictive proxy, is a specific type of proxy indicator that seeks to provide information about
            the future. This study uses the term predictive proxy indicator to refer to a measure taken during implementation of a project,
            program, or policy that stands in for longer-term impact. A predictive proxy thus provides an indication about some future change
            or state based on currently available evidence. In short, it is a stand-in for what we would like to measure directly (a future change
            or state) but cannot (yet) measure.




        The objective of this study is to identify potential predictive proxy indicators to enable an assessment of outcomes that
        have long incubation periods (that is, long-term outcomes or impacts) and for which attribution is unclear and to provide
        guidance on their application. It highlights the value of PPIs as early indicators that a project, program, or policy is likely
        to achieve desired results, that it may need some adjustments to reach stated objectives, or that achievements are likely
        to be sustainable after implementation.

        The approach and findings presented here should have broad relevance to those working in the forest sector and even
        in other sectors where predictive indicators may be of use. This report should be of interest to project teams and
        M&E specialists in a variety of organizations ranging from bilaterial and multilateral donors to technical agencies in
        developing countries to NGOs and research institutions. Given the focus on indicators in World Bank projects, it will be of
        special interest to World Bank Group Task Team Leaders (TTLs) and M&E specialists who are working on operational and
        analytical investments that have a forestry component. The indicators discussed here can help to inform the design and
        implementation of such investments so that they are able to have more positive impacts on the key development goals of
        eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. The future- and results-oriented
        nature of these indicators also mean that they have particular relevance in the context of REDD+ and the World Bank’s
        Program-for-Results lending instrument, both of which require credible near-term indication that longer-term changes
        and results will occur.

        Ideally, robust predictive proxy indicators would be used during implementation to suggest that a given policy, program,
        or project is on the right track and is likely to have desired impacts for a significant period of time after the intervention
        has concluded. This study, based largely on review of indicators used in World Bank forestry projects, suggests that
        such indicators do in fact exist. We identify a set of theory-based PPIs that contain indicators relevant to one or more
        overarching development objectives: poverty reduction and economic growth, biodiversity conservation, climate change
12   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     mitigation and adaption, and good governance. The report highlights the particular importance of the World Bank’s Core
     Sector Indicators (CSI) (World Bank 2014b), which are designed to help track and aggregate project results across the
     organization. The forestry CSIs are central, but the report finds that CSIs from other sectors such as governance are also
     key PPIs. These results, described in detail below, provide essential guidance for future analytical work to test and refine
     potential PPIs in the forest sector. These results and the approach used here also have the potential to inform efforts in
     other complex development sectors seeking reliable information in the short term on likely longer-term outcomes.

     This review of the World Bank’s forestry portfolio also finds that project M&E and the use of indicators has improved over
     time, as indicated by an increased emphasis on M&E and on tracking and evaluating progress on indicators in more recent
     project Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs) compared with Project Completion Reports (PCRs) or earlier ICRs.
     This finding suggests a positive trend in attention to indicators across the World Bank’s forest portfolio. In addition, the
     review showed a positive association between the quality of project M&E and project outcome ratings. As project M&E
     scores increased by category, project outcome rating scores increased by one-half a rating category. These and other
     findings are discussed in more detail in the sections below.

     The next section of this report reviews relevant peer-reviewed and grey literature on PPIs from the forestry and other
     sectors. It defines predictive proxy indicators and draws lessons from different sectors that may be applied to forestry.
     Sections three and four form the core of this report. They describe the methods and data sources used to identify predictive
     proxies and present main findings from the research. In addition to the central focus on evidence from the World Bank’s
     forest lending portfolio over the past 25 years, this study also draws from indicators used by other key agencies working
     in the forest sector and gleans insights from experts within the World Bank, other donor and implementing agencies,
     and the research community. It also includes a brief analysis of the PROFOR portfolio to examine the potential of proxies
     related to knowledge and analytical work. Sections five and six provide analysis on the opportunities for and constraints
     on using PPIs and present guidance on how they might be used in practice. The last section summarizes key findings and
     suggests avenues for taking this work forward.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      13




        2. Use of Predictive Proxy Indictors in
        Forestry and Other Sectors

        2.1 Defining Proxy Indicators
        A proxy is something that can be used to represent another thing. A proxy indicator is thus an indirect measurement
        of a variable lacking direct information (IEG 2012) or an indicator that substitutes for another indicator that is hard
        to measure directly (World Bank 2014a). Trust, for instance, is a common proxy indicator of social capital (Morrone,
        Tontoranelli, and Ranuzzi 2009). In the forest sector, development and implementation of forest management plans have
        been advanced as a proxy indicator for sustainable forest management outcomes (IEG 2013).

        Proxy indicators are used when a direct measurement is hampered by complexity, cost, or insufficient length of time for
        data collection on implementation results. As described earlier, the forest sector is beset by each of these challenges.
        That forest-related interventions typically do not generate impacts during their lifetimes is a defining feature of work in
        the sector and a central rationale for this study’s focus on predictive proxy indicators.

        As described in Box 1, a predictive proxy indicator denotes a measure taken during implementation of a project, program,
        or policy that stands in for longer-term impact. A predictive proxy thus provides an indication about some future change
        or state based on currently available evidence. Proxy indicators are used when the effect of a particular intervention
        cannot be assessed using direct information for reasons that range from limited resources for data collection to a lack of
        data or timing-related challenges. In such situations, a proxy indicator uses data that can be collected as a substitute for
        direct data. As the term itself suggests, proxy indicators are therefore almost inevitably approximations.


        2.2 Literature Review
        A review of peer-reviewed and grey literature did not reveal any use of the term predictive proxy indicator in the forest
        sector. However, PPIs have commonly been used in the fields of education, health care, finance, and management.

        For example, the level of education is frequently used as a predictor for potential earnings, with primary education
        showing the highest social profitability in all world regions (Psacharopoulous 1994). In their analysis on the effect of
        education on earnings, Blundell, Dearden, and Sianesi (2005) found an average return of 27 percent for individuals
        who completed higher education compared with anything less, although they also caution that the relationship between
        schooling and earnings is not entirely linear, with varying returns depending on qualification levels.

        Obesity is another factor that has been shown to affect earnings. For example, Cawley (2004) found that a difference in
        weight of 64 pounds compared with average weight was associated with an 18 percent difference in wages among white
        women in the United States, or the equivalent of three years of work experience or one and a half years of education.

        In the field of management, a body of literature has examined the relationship between firm performance and human
        resource issues, such as staff turnover. For example, Huselid (1995) highlighted the relationship between firm
14   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     performance and high performance work practices (comprehensive employee recruitment and selection procedures,
     incentive compensation and performance management systems, employee involvement and training). Using a sample
     of nearly 1,000 firms in the United States, he illustrated that high performance work practices have an economically and
     statistically significant impact on employee turnover and productivity and on corporate financial performance.

     The disparate examples of PPIs just mentioned share in common that they are based on historic correlations from large
     amounts of data. “Big data” is becoming more prevalent in the field of forestry but it has so far been largely limited to
     biophysical data; large, comparable, socioeconomic datasets remain few and far between in the forestry sector (FAO
     2014), hampering efforts to develop and empirically test predictive proxies. For this reason and others mentioned earlier,
     predictive proxies have not been developed in the forestry sector—a limitation this report seeks to address.


     2.3 Strengths and Limitations of Proxy Indicators
     Among approaches to shed light on the impacts of complex interventions like those characteristic of the forest sector,
     predictive proxy indicators have the advantage of being future-oriented and relatively cost-effective. Many other forms
     of evaluation focus on understanding the impact of past actions and struggle to provide information about likely future
     trajectories. More rigorous forms of impact evaluation, including the increasingly popular use of ex ante randomized
     controlled trials (RCTs), can provide useful information to inform implementation but are most often carried out at the end
     of a given project, program, or policy and provide evidence on outcomes at that point in time. To date, such approaches
     have focused less on what findings have to say about likely future impacts (Woolcock 2013), which is especially true
     the longer the period of impact considered. Providing near-term information on longer-term results is a key potential
     comparative advantage of predictive proxy indicators. Further, in comparison to impact evaluation, which can be quite
     costly, collection and analysis of data on predictive proxy indicators could be relatively inexpensive. In sum, if backed
     up by time-tested evidence, predictive proxies could form a powerful tool for understanding longer-term impacts in
     forestry and other sectors where complexity and long time lags are characteristic.

     Despite these virtues, PPIs will not be perfect. In addition to the challenge of identifying and testing such indicators,
     predictive proxies will be based on correlation and cannot fully address the problem of attribution. Correlation—a relationship
     of concomitant occurrence or co-variation—does suggest that a causal relationship may be present and also can help establish
     the validity of a given indicator (Scriven 1991), such as a predictive proxy. However, such indicators will be limited in the
     causal claims they can make, as they do not in and of themselves control for other potentially confounding factors, such
     as other interventions, economic fluctuation, political change, and climatic and ecosystem variability. A further potential
     limitation is the need for PPIs to account for the distorting nature of the socio-institutional environment that projects create
     during implementation but that will be absent when the intervention is completed. As this report argues, however, careful
     identification and development of potential PPIs can help account for such important contextual factors.

     The foregoing as well as available literature on indicators related to poverty and environment suggest that identifying
     a single proxy indicator with robust predictive capacity is highly unlikely in a sector as complex as forestry—let alone
     in the cross-sectoral work that is increasingly popular in a landscapes framework (Sayer et al. 2013; GEF 2014). For
     example, Stuart and Collen state “the notion of a single perfect indicator misunderstands what biodiversity is all about.
     Biodiversity is a complex concept and different indicators reveal different facets that are important…Just as there is a
     suite of indicators in the economic world (Gross Domestic Product, Dow Jones Index, inflation rate, unemployment rate,
     etc.), a suite of biodiversity indicators is something that is inevitable from the very nature of biodiversity itself. No one
     measure…of biodiversity can tell us what is happening to all aspects of what is, by definition, a multifaceted term (Stuart
     and Collen 2013: 434–35).” The same limitation likely applies to PPIs in the forest sector, biodiversity-related or not.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      15




        In the absence of a “silver bullet” predictive indicator, this report proposes that clusters of indicators, when taken
        together, have greater predictive power than when analyzed in isolation. The “pressure-state-response” framework
        used to analyze environmental change (OECD 1994) includes a cluster of indicators for each environmental problem that
        suggest the origin of pressures for each environmental problem, what the state of the environmental attribute or good is,
        and what the policy or practical response is or could be to reduce pressure. For example, Shyamsundar (2002) used this
        approach to analyze the relationship between deforestation and poverty, providing a series of indicators, some of which
        may have predictive potential when considered jointly.

        In conclusion, predictive proxies are a very promising tool for dealing with the challenge of assessing impact in the forest
        and other complex development sectors, but they should be seen as a complement to, not a substitute for, other forms of
        evaluation such as RCTs and rigorous forms of impact evaluation.
16   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     3. Identifying Predictive Proxies in
     Operational Investments

     3.1 Overall Approach
     This study aimed to conduct an in-depth examination of the World Bank forest portfolio and to examine other relevant
     data sources to develop guidance on the identification and use of PPIs for project impacts. Figure 1 illustrates the three
     step approach used to identify predictive proxies: developing criteria for good PPIs, assessing possible indicators for
     their predictive potential on a scale from 1 to 5, and validating potential PPIs.

     FIGURE 1: APPROACH TO IDENTIFY PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS


         1. Develop criteria for                    2. Assess possible                      3. Validate
        good predictive proxies                     predictive proxies                   potential proxies




                                                                       Expert Opinion                   Data on hypothesized proxies
                                                                                                       at different times (during; end;
                                                                                                                post-project)



     Potential PPIs can be validated in at least two ways. The first is based on expert knowledge and theory. This theory-based
     approach (Weiss 1995, 2000) seeks to identify a plausible logic or theory of change for why a given indicator or set of
     indicators would have predictive power. Such “applied forward reasoning” (Levin et al. 2012) was developed based on
     interviews with forestry project managers within the World Bank and other key institutions in the forestry sector and
     academic experts. Potential predictive proxies were also developed and vetted at a workshop of TTLs and other World
     Bank staff at the World Bank in January 2015. Discussion at three external meetings—at the Oxford Center for Tropical
     Forests in June 2014, the Science for Nature and People (SNAP) working group meeting on evidence-based conservation in
     February 2015, and the Forests and Livelihoods: Assessment, Research, and Engagement network (FLARE) on sustainable
     forests and livelihoods in March 2015—provided additional insights and validation of predictive proxies.

     A second way to validate PPIs is to collect data on hypothesized proxies at different points in time (during the project, at
     the end of project, and post-project) and see if the outcomes measured persist over time and across a large number of
     interventions. This approach would provide concrete evidence of the association of a given indicator or set of indicators
     with longer-term outcomes, as has been done in other sectors. However, it is an expensive, time-consuming, and
     challenging task that would require bringing together information from a variety of different data sources and, in many
     cases, remeasuring indicators in the post-implementation period. As such, it is beyond the scope of the current review.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      17




        3.2 Project Identification
        This study is rooted in a systematic review of the World Bank’s forest portfolio. Details on the methods used to identify
        projects included in this review and to collect and analyze data on them are provided in Annex A. The primary evidence
        base for this study is 80 projects chosen to represent the geographic diversity of World Bank’s forestry portfolio, weighted
        toward high forest cover countries and/or those of exceptional biodiversity importance (Figure 2). To allow variation in
        the lag time between project completion and the present, closing dates of selected projects ranged from 1991, the year
        the Global Environment Facility (GEF) was established, to 2013, the last year for which project evaluation data were
        available. India (n=16), China (n=10), Mexico (n=6), and Brazil (n=5) had the largest number of projects included in the
        review, with other countries typically having only one or two projects.

        FIGURE 2: REGIONAL REPRESENTATION OF WORLD BANK FORESTRY PROJECTS REVIEWED
18   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Projects reviewed account for nearly $6 billion in investments, with project budgets ranging from $0.9 million for the
     Rural Environment Project (P066199) in Azerbaijan to $1.3 billion for the First Programmatic Development Policy Loan
     for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL; P095205) in Brazil. These projects included the range of lending
     types used by the World Bank, with the majority (76 percent) being Specific Investment Loans (SIL). The majority of
     projects received a satisfactory rating (see Figure 3).

     FIGURE 3: PROJECT OUTCOME RATINGS


     60
                                                     52
     50

     40

     30

     20

     10                 8                                                          8                                                        8
                                                                                                                 2
       0
             Highly Satisfactory               Satisfactory                 Moderately                   Moderately                   Unsatisfactory
                                                                            Satisfactory                Unsatisfactory




     3.3 Data Collection
     Project analysis was structured around a results chain framework linking activities to outputs to outcomes to impacts.
     (See Box 2.) For each project, data were collected from ICRs1 on the project’s Project Development Objective (PDO)
     or Global Environment Objective (GEO), project indicators, project design, M&E framework, and performance ratings.
     Data on indicators include baseline values, original target values, revised target values, actual value achieved, and the
     timeline for the following types of indicators, where applicable: PDO indicators, GEO indicators, intermediate outcome
     (IO) indicators, outcome/impact indicators, output indicators, and project or management objectives or activities.
     Additional project data collected included project approval and closing dates, project financing (including disbursed
     amounts and co-financing), sector distribution, and environmental category. Information about transition to regular
     operations or about any succeeding World Bank projects was also noted.




     1. ICRs were used for all projects for which they were available. For projects that closed in March 1994 or earlier, PCRs were used.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                 19




            BOX 2: CLARIFYING LINKS IN THE RESULTS CHAIN

            The World Bank’s results chain framework is best understood by defining its various components. Results encompass outputs,
            outcomes, or impacts of a development intervention. A results chain describes how particular inputs will likely lead to intended
            outcomes.

            Outputs are defined as products and services provided by a project, such as roads or water connections or revisions to legal
            frameworks. Outputs may also be described as intermediate results.

            Outcomes are results that occur after the use of outputs, such as reduced travel times or availability of clean drinking water in a
            village. Outcomes can also include modified behavior, conditions, or situations as a result of program outputs. Outcomes can be
            short-term, medium-term, or long-term (5–25 years).

            An Intermediate Outcome is a result that is proximate to an intended final outcome but often more achievable and measurable
            during a project’s lifetime than an intended final outcome.

            Longer-term Outcomes are typically not visible at project closure and may not be apparent until 5–25 years after a project closes.

            Impacts represent the ultimate result of the outcome, which most often becomes evident several years or more after project
            completion.

            Source: World Bank 2014a.




        To gain an understanding of the main focus of projects included in the review, PDOs were coded as focusing primarily on
        one of four categories: biodiversity conservation, climate change adaptation and mitigation, good governance, poverty
        reduction (including the concepts of economic growth and shared prosperity), or equally on biodiversity and poverty
        (Figure 4).

        FIGURE 4: DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECTS BY PDO TYPE
        Biodiversity and Poverty 6%




                                        Biodiversity 16%



                                             Poverty 13%
                    Intitutions 44%
20   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     This report is also informed by several additional sources of data, including interviews with World Bank project managers,
     M&E specialists, and other experts within and outside the World Bank. In total, more than 100 people, including about 20
     World Bank TTLs, were consulted for information and ideas on PPIs.

     Indicators used by a range of non-World Bank donors in the forestry sector were also collected and assessed for their
     proxy potential. Indicators from leading donors in the sector with available results frameworks, such as DFID, KfW, and
     GIZ, as well as trust funds (for example, FIP and FCPF), and relevant policy organizations (such as FAO, Forest and Farm
     Facility) were collected from websites and directly from staff. In addition to the core focus on operational investments,
     this study also included a preliminary analysis of potential predictive proxies related to knowledge work in the forest
     sector. This analysis was based on a review of PROFOR activities, which collected information on activity indicators and
     outcomes with the aim of identifying knowledge-related proxies and providing recommendations for advancing broader
     work on the identification and use of predictive proxies related to forest knowledge. More details on this element of the
     study, including background, methodology, results, and findings, can be found in Annex B).




     3.4 Criteria for Evaluating Quality Indicators and Predictive Proxy
     Indicators
     Following the data collection process, all World Bank project indicators were evaluated according to the SMART (specific,
     measurable, attributable, realistic, and time-bound) criteria, using a Likert scale from 1 to 5. Indicators were also rated
     for their potential as proxies using the same scale. In the absence of established practice, working criteria for scoring
     each indicator’s potential as a predictive proxy were developed. To be judged as having potential as a predictive proxy,
     the indicator had to score highly on the SMART criteria but also meet the following minimum requirement—it implied a
     plausible theory of change explaining why it is likely to accurately predict a desired future change or state resulting at
     least in part from a given intervention.

     A theory of change is a logical description of how a given intervention or change process is expected to lead to longer-term
     outcomes and impacts. Its distinguishing feature is an explicit articulation of assumptions thought to connect specific
     steps to achievement of longer-term goals (Schorr and Weiss 1995). For instance, a sustainable financing indicator may
     be a predictive proxy based on a theory of change that arrangements for funding a given intervention over time imply
     that the intervention will be implemented even after project closure, with the assumption that it will continue to generate
     positive impacts. This indicator implies that the necessary funding is secured for a given period of time, that institutional
     arrangements are in place to allocate the funds, and that the use of the funds is effective.

     Along with having a plausible theory of change, two additional criteria2 were considered in assessing the PPI potential
     of each indicator:

     •	 Active stakeholder support—The indicator suggests “buy-in” by those whose behavior a given intervention wishes
        to influence such that desired behavior appears likely to persist after the intervention has finished (for example,
        incentives exist for a given action or behavior independent of project funding). Such indicators may relate to the
        strength of forest user groups, social capital or cohesion, and various forms of participation, among others.



     2. A more comprehensive set of criteria for identifying PPIs was developed subsequent to initial coding as described here. The FOREST criteria were developed based on this initial effort
     and discussion of results in various forums. See section 6.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                     21




        •	 Change in behavior or capacity—The indicator measures a change in capacity to implement actions related to a given
           intervention or a change in behavior to support the intervention’s actions. Examples include an indicator measuring
           an increase in capacity to carry out forest management by a forest department or forest user group or one that
           measures a reduction of community reliance on resources inside a protected area.

        The highest possible score for a given indicator was 30 (25 based on the SMART criteria and 5 based on the PPI criteria).
        All indicators were coded into one of five categories based on their overall long-term outcome: poverty alleviation
        (including economic growth and shared prosperity), biodiversity conservation, climate change mitigation, governance,
        and other. Annex A provides further details on the assessment of indicators used in the World Bank’s forestry portfolio.


        3.5 Validation of Indicators and Development of an Indicator Menu
        The primary means of validating potential PPIs was through expert opinion gathered through interviews, presentation of
        results to external audiences, and a workshop with World Bank TTLs and others. Results are discussed in sections 5 and 6.

        Based on the portfolio review and expert input, a list of top scoring indicators was created. The purpose of this indicator
        menu is to provide an easy to use resource that can inform the design and implementation of forestry operations.
        Indicators are grouped according to their main development objective. The menu includes basic information on indicator
        type, the context in which it has been used, and notes on how it might be used moving forward. This indicator menu is
        presented as Annex C and represents a key product stemming from this analytical work.
22   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     4. Results

     This section provides a general overview of results from the portfolio review and indicator analysis, with a particular
     focus on how indicators used in World Bank projects were evaluated and how this process contributed to the identification
     of predictive proxies. The section then proposes potential PPIs, including illustrative results chains for three of the
     proposed cluster indicators. Finally, it highlights the importance of M&E in World Bank projects and underscores several
     key lessons learned on M&E from the project review.


     4.1 Overall Analysis of Indicators
     Projects included in the review used a range of indicator types, in line with World Bank trends at the time of project
     appraisal and implementation. For instance, the most recent projects typically include PDO and/or GEO indicators and IO
     indicators, while older projects used either impact/outcome indicators, output indicators, or a combination of indicators.

     The evaluation of indicators in this review primarily focused on PDO and GEO indicators, based on the assumption that
     analysis and recommendations on these would be most broadly relevant for World Bank TTLs and other project designers.
     IO indicators were also evaluated based on the SMART criteria to facilitate potential future exploration of their utility as
     predictive proxies.

     The analysis underscored the importance of evaluating indicators with targets. When indicators were considered without
     targets, they tended to score lower on all the SMART criteria. An example from the Madhya Pradesh Forestry Project
     in India (P010506) illustrates how the inclusion of targets can make an indicator more specific and measurable. The
     indicator—increased management effectiveness in project Natural Protected Areas—lacks specificity on its own because
     it simply suggests an increase without providing a unit of measurement and uses the term “effectiveness.” But with
     the target of two new and four updated Natural Protected Area management plans, five Protected Area Management
     Committees in operation in Project Natural Protected Areas, and three Natural Protected Areas administered by private
     nonprofit organizations by December 2004, the indicator becomes more specific and therefore more measurable.

     Although some indicators addressed too many issues together, others group several issues together in a way that makes
     each component seem more like steps of a whole. One such example is from the same project—increase forest cover and
     productivity through the development of participatory processes for management and use of forest resources, taking
     special account of the interests of tribals and other disadvantaged groups. The indicator is: Joint Forest Management
     (JFM) approach established; Participatory Rural Appraisal–based microplanning methods established; silvicultural
     practices adapted to multiple objectives of JFM; restoration techniques for degraded areas based on natural regeneration
     tested; tribal interests in planning measured; and interests of other disadvantaged groups, scheduled castes and women,
     and the landless measured. This indicator, while quite lengthy, includes details that show how the project envisions
     increasing forest cover and productivity.

     The number of PDO indicators included in projects ranged from 1 to 26, with an average of 6 PDO indicators per project. Eleven
     projects included a GEO indicator, with a range from 1 to 8 indicators per project. Four projects included 1 GEO indicator.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                    23




        Figure 5 shows the distribution of PDO indicators according to the SMART and PPI criteria. The majority of the indicators
        (n=80, or 45 percent) received scores between 21 and 23, with only 8 percent receiving the top range of scores.

        FIGURE 5: PDO INDICATOR SCORES
                    14-17-4%       27-30-8%




              18-20-19%
                                     24-26-24%




                       21-23-45%




        The four highest-scoring PDO indicators each received a score of 29:

        •	 Increased capacity to finance SINANPE recurrent costs with local resources, from the Peruvian National Trust Fund for
           PAs–Programme for a Participatory Management of PAs Project (P068250) in Peru, which was rated satisfactory
        •	 Tenure of at least 30 percent of the occupants in national lands in the project area regularized through formal, long-
           term usufruct agreements or title developed with the assistance of the project, from the Forests and Rural Productivity
           Project (P064914) in Honduras, which was rated moderately satisfactory
        •	 Generation of 13.3 million cubic meters of timber and 2.73 million tons of bamboo by December 31, 2025, with
           RMB 1.1 billion net income from fruit tree crops by year 2022, from the Sustainable Forestry Development Project
           (P064729) and Sustainable Forestry Development Project (Natural Forest Protection; P060029) in China, which was
           rated satisfactory
        •	 A total of 60,000 terajoules per year produced by renewable energy sources or saved by energy efficiency projects
           supported by BNDES, once they are fully operational, from the First Programmatic Development Policy Loan for
           Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL; P095205) in Brazil, which was rated satisfactory

        Figure 6 shows the distribution of GEO indicator scores. The majority of the indicators (n=9, or 43 percent) received
        scores between 24 and 26.
24   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     FIGURE 6: GEO INDICATORS’ SCORES


                                27-30-14%
               18-20-19%




            21-23-24%              24-26-43%




     The two highest-scoring GEO indicators received a score of 30:

     •	 At least 80 percent of the conservation activities proposed for each protected area designed with a participatory
        approach, from the Consolidation of the Protected Areas System Project (SINAP II; P065988) in Mexico, which
        received a satisfactory rating
     •	 Trends in the rate of habitat conversion in protected areas included in the Project, also from the SINAP II project in
        Mexico

     The highest scoring PDO and GEO indicators are all from projects that closed in 2010, which lends some anecdotal support
     to the general finding that M&E, as well as indicators, have improved over time. Annex A highlights additional detail
     and examples of indicators that scored high on the SMART criteria and illustrates limitations of some indicators. It is
     important to note that while scoring indicators based on the SMART criteria was a useful way to rank and discuss existing
     indicators, good M&E practice suggests that all five criteria are minimum criteria.


     4.2 Identification of Predictive Proxies from the World Bank
     Forestry Portfolio
     There are 176 PDO indicators that were rated for their potential as proxy indicators. Eleven indicators (6 percent) were
     rated as highly recommended (score=5). Fifty-five indicators (31 percent) were recommended (score=4). Eighty-
     four (48 percent) were rated as recommended with some caveats (score=3). The remaining 27 indicators scored are
     not recommended. Top-scoring potential PPI indicators are included in the indicator menu in Annex C. Twenty-one
     GEO Indicators were rated for their potential as proxy indicators. Out of these, nine (41 percent) were rated as highly
     recommended and are also included in the indicator menu.

     Like overall coding of PDOs and GEOs, indicators were also coded in terms of their long-term outcome: poverty
     alleviation (including economic growth and shared prosperity), biodiversity conservation, climate change adaptation
     and mitigation, good governance, and others. Ten indicators were classified as other because they did not address any of
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                        25




        the four main themes, either because they focused on issues such as pollution or water or because the indicator lacked
        sufficient specificity to be classified.

        The majority of PDO indicators (n=94, or 53 percent) were classified as addressing governance. Forty-four indicators (26
        percent) focused on poverty, while 22, or 12 percent, focused on biodiversity. Only 6 indicators (3 percent) focused on
        climate change.

        It is also important to note that several indicators could have been coded under multiple themes. For instance, the
        following three were coded as governance indicators but also address biodiversity concerns:

        •	 Raise public awareness of biodiversity values and increase participation in biodiversity (Central Asia Biodiversity GEF
           Project; P042573)
        •	 Six natural forest management areas under effective management (Sustainable Forestry Development Project
           (P064729) and Sustainable Forestry Development Project (Natural Forest Protection; P060029) in China)
        •	 More effective and extensive support for Conservation and Development (India Ecodevelopment Project; P036062)

        The majority of GEO indicators focused on biodiversity (n=10; 48 percent). Governance was the second highest area
        of focus for GEO indicators, with nine indicators, or 43 percent of indicators. One indicator focused on poverty and no
        indicators focused on climate. In addition, one indicator was classified as other.


        4.3 Potential Predictive Proxy Indicators
        PPIs identified through the World Bank forestry portfolio review, the inventory of indicators used by other key donors in
        the forestry sector, and expert views are described below.

        This process did not yield standalone predictive proxies in most cases, but it did result in the identification of clusters of
        two to four indicators that, taken together, were determined to have a strong predictive potential. The description of each
        indicator or indicator cluster includes the following:

        •	 Anticipated outcome(s)
        •	 Description of the theory of change detailing how a given intervention is expected to lead to longer-term outcomes
           and impacts
        •	 Rationale for including each indicator as part of the cluster to capture and track the anticipated outcome
        •	 Brief guidance notes on practical use of the indicator cluster

        Following each proposed indicator cluster, indicators that have been used in previous World Bank or other projects are
        included for reference. Illustrative results chains showing where different indicators in several PPIs might be placed are
        included for some of the proposed indicators in this section. The PPIs are demarcated in bold, italic font.
26   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                  POVERTY

                                         Indicator Cluster 1: Sustainable Forest-Related Income

     a) people in targeted forest and adjacent communities with increased monetary or nonmonetary benefits from forests
                                                                       +
                      b) people in targeted forest and adjacent communities have secure access and use rights
                                                                       +
                           c) forest activities are aligned with biodiversity-friendly management practices
                                                                       =
                                                    sustainable forest-related income

     Theory of Change: This indicator cluster is designed to be adaptable based on the time period of interest. All three
     indicators are likely needed to ensure that forest-related income not only increases but also that it continues to flow
     over the longer term based on SFM practices. The first two indicators in the cluster (a and b) may be have some predictive
     power on their own, but without some indication that benefits are derived in a sustainable manner, benefits will not persist
     over the longer term. Thus, the inclusion of indicator c in the cluster strengthens inference about whether monetary and
     nonmonetary benefits will continue to be delivered over a longer time period.

     The first indicator in the cluster measures the extent to which people in the project area have gained monetary benefits or
     nonmonetary benefits from forests, such as improved access to fuelwood, income from sale of forest products, or cultural
     and spiritual services. One implication of this indicator is that local people may be more likely to support SFM if they
     receive benefits from forests, either through increased income, such as through employment in the forest sector, or through
     direct benefits, such as harvesting non-timber forest products (NTFPs) for consumption or sale or through payments for
     environmental services (PES) schemes. Although this benefit stream would likely help shift incentives toward SFM so that
     benefits can continue to be delivered, this indicator is insufficient on its own to ensure sustainable forest-related incomes.
     Additional indicators are needed to help track whether harvest and use of forest resources is sustainable over time.

     Two complementary indicators have been added based on the assumption that forest products (wood and non-wood) are
     more likely to be harvested at sustainable levels if people know that their access to and benefits from forest resources
     are formally recognized and secure. The third indicator addresses the importance of ensuring sustainable income flows
     over a longer period of time, in recognition that deriving benefits and having the right to continue deriving them is not
     enough to ensure sustainable income flows. An additional indicator is required to provide information on the likely
     ecological sustainability of efforts to extract forest benefits. This last indicator aims to capture whether or not forest use
     is sustainable by specifying that activities should follow “biodiversity-friendly” management practices. As described
     below, this indicator is a World Bank CSI, which while desirable in many cases is not the only possible indicator of
     sustainable forest use. Other indicators that capture ecological sustainability may be substituted here.

     The importance of including indicators on access and use rights and aligning forest activities with biodiversity-friendly
     management practices is elaborated upon in a large literature on common property. This literature supports the assertion
     that individuals will invest in maintaining forest products, NTFPs, and other resources at sustainable levels if they have
     secure resource rights, including the right to access the resource and rights to establish rules and norms to control
     overuse of the resource (e.g., Ostrom and Schlager 1996; Mendelsohn 1994). More recent reviews (e.g., Lawry et al.
     2014; Kishor et al. forthcoming) further support the economic theory that long-term investment and increased tenure
     security form plausible pathways through which recognition of property rights can improve the welfare of those who
     receive title and such recognition (formal or informal).
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                27




        FIGURE 7: RESULTS CHAIN FOR INDICATOR CLUSTER 1: SUSTAINABLE FOREST-RELATED INCOME

                                                    Intermediate
              Activities/Outputs                                                        Outcomes/Indicators               Long-term Outcomes
                                                 Outcomes/Indicators

        A. Develop income earning           A. Increased producer and              A. Increased benefits from
        activities.                         investor access to markets,            forests.
        •	 Persons trained in vocational/   value-adding and economic              People in targeted forest and
           business development skills      diversification opportunities          adjacent communities with
           (#)                              •	 Targeted population starting a      increased monetary or non-
        •	 New NTFPs processing                micro-enterprise (%)                monetary benefits from forests
           technologies (#)                 •	 Survival of micro-enterprise xx
        •	 Producer organizations              months/years after start (%)
           established (#)                  •	 Employment increased in wood
                                               production and processing
                                               (number)
        A. Develop infrastructure to        •	 Timber forest products
        support forest production and          developed (#)
        marketing.                          •	 Marketable non-timber forest
        •	 Roads constructed,                  products (#)
           rural (km)                       •	 Markets for ecological
        •	 Markets constructed/                services developed (carbon
        rehabilitated (#)                      sequestration; water
                                               management; conservation)
                                            •	 Share of total timber harvested
                                               processed in-country (%)
                                            •	 Share of total NTFPs harvested
                                               processed in country (%)
                                            •	 New income-generating
                                               activities based on processing
                                               of forest products at local level                                        Increased contribution
                                               (number)                                                                 to economic growth and
                                                                                                                        poverty alleviation

                                            B. Enhanced rights to forest           B. Enhanced rights to forest
                                            and tree resources and forest          and tree resources and forest
                                            products and services                  products and services.
                                            •	 Forest area with documented         People in targeted forest and
                                               and gazette tenure rights (ha)      adjacent communities have
                                            •	 Timber species with                 secure access and use rights
                                               documented harvest rights
                                               (number, %)
                                            •	 Non-timber forest products
                                               with documented harvest
                                               rights (type, number, %)
                                            •	 Documented rights to land


                                            C. Increased forest user               C Forest activities are
                                            adoption of sustainable forest         sustainable.
                                            management practices.                  Forest activities are aligned with
                                            •	 Producers adopting sustainable      biodiversity-friendly management
                                               forest management practices         practices
                                               (#, % of targeted households)
                                            •	 Area with improved forest
                                               management techniques (ha)
28   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Guidance Notes: Developing a results chain is one of the first steps in considering how the proposed cluster indicator can
     be used in projects. Figure 7 presents an example of where the proposed cluster indicators fall in the results chain, along
     with illustrative examples of activities and outputs. For this cluster indicator on sustainable forest-related income, the
     proposed PPIs are all outcome indicators and are demarcated in bold, italic font.

     The first indicator is a World Bank forestry CSI. Further information on the use of this indicator can be found at http://
     siteresources.worldbank.org/PROJECTS/Resources/40940-1367867968385/CoreSectorIndicatorsList.pdf.

     The second indicator addresses security of tenure and rights over time as a result of the project and measures the
     recognition of use rights through forest agreements, management plans, titles, or other formalized use rights. Use or
     ownership rights cover the full continuum of land tenure situations, customary or statutory, individual or collective, on
     private or public lands, and can accommodate any land tenure system, in line with the CSI definition. Further information
     on the World Bank CSI on land administration and management indicators can be found at http://siteresources.worldbank.
     org/PROJECTS/Resources/40940-1367867968385/CoreSectorIndicatorsList.pdf .

     The third indicator aims to ensure that forest benefits do not exceed the sustainable yield. For instance, the indicator should show that
     benefits from logging operations are carried out based on a sustainable management plan or that collection and harvesting of NTFPs
     is at sustainable levels. The term biodiversity-friendly comes from the World Bank’s biodiversity CSI, “new areas outside protected
     areas managed as biodiversity-friendly (ha),” (http://siteresources.worldbank.org/PROJECTS/Resources/40940-1367867968385/
     CoreSectorIndicatorsList.pdf) and refers to compliance with social and environmental standards in a way that respects civil and
     indigenous rights, maintains or enhances social and environmental conservation values, prohibits invasive planting, and ensures
     that harvesting meets national laws and international treaties on biodiversity signed by the country in which the project is located.

     As described in Box 3, this PPI cluster is being tested in a recently approved World Bank project, the first such empirical test
     of the predictive potential of indicators. See Table 1 for specific examples of indicators relevant to this predictive proxy.


         BOX 3: TESTING PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS IN THE ARGENTINA FORESTS AND COMMUNITY PROJECT

         The Argentina Forests and Community Project (P132846), approved in April 2015, has provided a timely opportunity to begin
         testing some of the predictive proxy indicators identified in this report. The project seeks to improve forest management and
         increase access to markets and basic services by small forest producers (including indigenous people and campesinos) in the
         comparatively poor yet forest-rich areas in the country’s northern provinces. Two-thirds of Argentina’s remaining natural forests
         are in the Chaco region, but they are increasingly threatened by high deforestation rates. At the same time, more than 70 percent
         of the population in this remote region lives below the poverty line, and forest loss threatens to deepen levels of impoverishment.

         To address the rapid loss of natural forests, the government of Argentina created a Forest Law in 2007, which includes a Forest
         Fund designed to protect natural forests by supporting conservation, restoration, and sustainable management of natural forests
         and PES. The Fund has totaled more than $50 million in recent years, but to date less than 4 percent of eligible indigenous or poor
         criollo communities have accessed it. Financing from the Forest Fund supports implementation of approved SFM plans.

         This World Bank project will support efforts by the government to increase access to the Forest Fund, including by helping
         communities develop SFM plans and strengthen their tenure. These activities and the project’s focus relate to all three indicators
         identified in PPI cluster 1 on sustainable forest-related income. It includes the CSI on people in targeted forest and adjacent
         communities with increased benefits from forests as well as two tailored indicators relating to sustainable financing and tenure
         security. The Argentina project team thus saw an opportunity to test these indicators for their predictive potential. At the PDO
         level, the project results framework includes “Increased share of Forest Fund resources allocated to small forest producers” and
         at the intermediate outcome level it includes “Forest area brought under strengthened tenure.” The project will collect data on
         these three indicators during implementation and explore the prospect of continued data collection and analysis in the post-project
         period to provide the first forward-looking test case of how well the indicators performed as predictive proxies.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                              29




        TABLE 1: EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS RELEVANT TO SUSTAINABLE FOREST-RELATED INCOME PREDICTIVE PROXY
         General Indicator from PPI cluster   Specific example indicators                                                Source
         a) Monetary and nonmonetary          •	 People in targeted forest and adjacent communities with increased       World Bank CSI
         benefits from forests                   monetary or nonmonetary benefits from forests
                                              •	 People employed in production and processing of forest products         World Bank CSI
                                              •	 Changes in income in forest communities over time                       FIP
                                              •	 Number of direct jobs created as a result of International Climate      DFID
                                                 Fund (ICF) support
                                              •	 Number of forest-dependent people with livelihoods benefits             DFID
                                                 protected or improved as a result of ICF support
                                              •	 Level of diversity of income-generation activities                      FAO-FFF
                                              •	 Permanent jobs created through small and medium-size enterprise         FAO-FFF
                                                 (SME) productive activities
                                              •	 Income generated from forest services for forest-dependent people       GEF
                                                 and communities
                                              •	 Jobs created through the SME productive activities                      GIZ
                                              •	 Annual incremental revenue to villages                                  P046768 in Senegal
                                              •	 Average forest-based product income (cash and kind at 2009              P073094 in India
                                                 real prices) realized by Vana Samarakshana Committee members
                                                 resulting from improved forest productivity
                                              •	 Number of jobs created from project investments                         P064914 in Honduras
                                              •	 20 percent increase in net value of forest goods and services           P035751 in Mexico
                                                 produced by assisted communities and ejidos
                                              •	 30 percent increase in jobs available in assisted communities vs.       P035751 in Mexico
                                                 control, from the Community Forestry II
                                              •	 Decline in seasonal outmigration for employment                         P073094 in India
                                              •	 Poverty reduction: per capita income of project beneficiaries           P046952 in China
                                                 increased by specified percentage
         b) Tenure and property rights        •	 Percentage of indigenous peoples and local community members/           FIP
                                                 forest communities (women and men) with legally recognized
                                                 tenure rights and secure access to economic benefits and/or the
                                                 means of maintaining traditional livelihoods
                                              •	 Increase in land and resources under legal control and                  FIP
                                                 management of indigenous peoples and local communities,
                                                 including through traditional forest management systems
                                              •	 Increase in area with clear, recognized tenure of land and resources
                                                                                                                         FIP
                                                 for indigenous peoples and local communities
                                              •	 Legal rights granted by competent authorities to have access to         GIZ
                                                 forest resources
         c) Sustainability of forest          •	 Improved natural resource management practices                          FIP
         activities                           •	 The SME has identified and delimited special areas (water bodies,
                                                 flooding, soil, endangered species, areas of value) within the forest   GIZ
                                                 management plan
                                              •	 The SME applies CITES or IUCN or national lists of endangered           GIZ
                                                 species to avoid the harvesting or collection of endangered species
30   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                         Indicator Cluster 2: Afforestation/Reforestation to Support Livelihoods Improvement

                                                a) seedling survival rate after three years
                                                                       +
                                     b) thinning of seedlings/young trees after three to five years
                                                                       =
                                                 Income from forest over the longer term

     Theory of Change: This cluster indicator uses intermediate indicators with strong proxy potential for predicting potential
     income from forests over the long term. The first indicator measures the survival rate of planted seedlings after three
     years. This addresses the importance of ensuring that planted seedlings survive beyond the life of the project, with the
     potential to develop into productive young trees and, eventually, into a productive forest plantation that yields benefits
     for targeted beneficiaries, such as local populations or governments. Additional indicators, however, are needed to help
     track whether the seedlings will survive and contribute to income from forests in the future.

     A complementary indicator has therefore been added based on the assumption that productive forest plantations require
     management, such as the thinning and maintenance of seedlings and young trees over time, to ensure that the seedlings
     develop into productive forest plantations. Pre-commercial thinning is a technique used to improve the health and
     quality of seedlings (Smith et al. 1997). It is expected that the combination of these two indicators will help to promote
     afforestation or reforestation efforts with the aim to contribute to poverty eradication and boost shared prosperity in
     project areas over the long term.

     Although not included in the cluster, this indicator may require additional indicators related to the ecological
     appropriateness of afforestation and/or reforestation efforts, secure property rights, and sustainable financing. Secure
     property rights, for instance, could help to motivate individuals to invest in seedling survival over the long term. However,
     ample seedling survival rate or presence of thinning activities may themselves imply that property rights are secure, thus
     obviating the need for a separate indicator on property rights. Indeed, it may be that seedling survival rate in a given area
     is sufficient as a stand-alone PPI given that it may imply secure property rights and active management. This indicator
     cluster is the only one in this report that uses IO indicators. Empirically testing whether these two indicators predict
     sustainable forest-based income would be useful to better understand whether these indicators are sufficient on their
     own or need additional indicators to have sufficient predictive power.

      
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                           31




        FIGURE 8: RESULTS CHAIN FOR INDICATOR CLUSTER 2: AFFORESTATION/REFORESTATION TO SUPPORT
        LIVELIHOODS IMPROVEMENT

                                                  Intermediate
              Activities/Outputs                                                    Outcomes/Indicators            Long-term Outcomes
                                               Outcomes/Indicators

        A and B. Develop income            A. Seedling Survival Rate after   A and B. Increased benefits
        earning activities.                3 years                           from forests.
        •	 Persons trained in forest                                         People in targeted forest and
           processing technologies (#)                                       adjacent communities with
        •	 New timber value chains                                           increased monetary or non-
           developed (#)                                                     monetary benefits from forests
        •	 Producer organizations



                                                                                                                 Income from Forests over
        A and B. Develop                   B. Thinning of Young Seedlings/   A and B. Strengthen provision       the Long-term
        infrastructure to support          Trees after 3-4 years             of forest management advisory
        forest production and                                                services. –
        marketing.                                                           •	 Advisory personnel training in
        •	 Roads constructed, rural (km)                                        [topic] (#)
        •	 Markets constructed/                                              •	 Community members trained
           rehabilitated (#)                                                    in [topic] (#)
                                                                             •	 Forest User Groups formed (#)




        Guidance Notes: Developing a results chain is one of the first steps in considering how a proposed cluster indicator can
        be used in projects. Figure 8 presents an example of where the proposed cluster indicators fall in the results chain, along
        with illustrative examples of activities and outputs. For this cluster indicator on afforestation/reforestation to support
        livelihoods improvement, the proposed PPIs are both IO indicators and are demarcated in bold and italic font.

        The first indicator measures seedling survival rate after three years, using the total number of surviving seedlings as a
        unit of measurement. The second indicator measures whether or not thinning of seedlings or young trees occurs after
        three to five years. The time frame for thinning will depend on the species of trees selected and its geographic location.
        See Table 2 for specific examples of indicators relevant to this predictive proxy.
32   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     TABLE 2: EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS RELEVANT TO AFFORESTATION/REFORESTATION TO SUPPORT LIVELIHOODS
     IMPROVEMENT PREDICTIVE PROXY
      General Indicator from PPI cluster    Specific example indicators                                  Source
      a) Seedling survival rate after       •	 Replanting (ha): Upkeep of about 55,000 ha of existing    P001168 in Cote d’Ivoire
      three years                              forest plantations and the establishment of 9,000 ha of
                                               new plantations to complete the planting program of the
                                               1st and 2nd Forestry Projects
                                            •	 Adapt and improve technologies and provide technical      P010506 in India
                                               advice, including staff acceptance of improved planting
                                               stock and nursery technologies; number of improved
                                               seedlings to private farmers
                                            •	 Seedlings produced                                        P003287 in Zimbabwe
                                            •	 Increase in forest area covered by improved forest and    P053830 in the Russian Federation
                                               pest management
      b) Thinning of seedlings/young        •	 Adapt and improve technologies and provide technical      P010506 in India
      trees after three to five years          advice, including staff acceptance of improved planting
                                               stock and nursery technologies; number of improved
                                               seedlings to private farmers
                                            •	 Increase in forest area covered by improved forest and    P053830 in the Russian Federation
                                               pest management



                                                                 BIODIVERSITY

                                Indicator Cluster 3: Positive Environmental Impacts (Biodiversity-Related)

                            a) forest area brought under adaptive, biodiversity-friendly management plans
                                                                          +
                                                     b) predictable, sustainable financing
                                                                          +
                                        c) functioning institutions to enforce rules and resolve conflict
                                                                          =
                                            Positive environmental impacts (biodiversity-related)

     Theory of Change: The first indicator, a CSI on forest area brought under management plans, measures the forestland
     area that as a result of a Bank project has been brought under a management plan that has been prepared, endorsed,
     and is in the process of implementation. To ensure that activities under the management plan are biodiversity-friendly
     (including both socially and ecologically appropriate, see below) and to allow for adaptive management in the event
     that a particular activity or objective needs to be revised, the indicator aims to measure the forest area under adaptive,
     biodiversity-friendly management plans; consequently, these two terms have been added to the CSI. To ensure sufficient
     financial resources to implement and enforce the management plan over time, two cluster indicators have been added
     that address sustainable financing and the existence of institutions to ensure enforcement of the management plan.
     This combination of indicators has the potential to yield increased carbon stocks that will be sustained, supported, and
     enforced over time.

     The inclusion of an indicator on institutions is supported by a wide literature on the importance of institutions. For
     example, common property literature also highlights examples where local communities have successfully developed
     institutional arrangements to manage their natural resources (e.g., Ostrom 1990; Agrawal 2001).
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                      33




        Guidance Notes: Together, this cluster of three indicators aims to provide a predictive proxy for longer-term environmental
        outcomes. The first indicator, forest area brought under management plans, includes production and protection
        forests as well as other forests under sustainable management. See http://siteresources.worldbank.org/PROJECTS/
        Resources/40940-1367867968385/CoreSectorIndicatorsList.pdf

        A “biodiversity-friendly” management plan complies with social and environmental standards, as defined by a
        biodiversity CSI. The term aims to ensure standards that respect civil and indigenous rights, maintain or enhance social
        and environmental conservation values, prohibit invasive planting, and ensure that harvesting meets national laws and
        international treaties on biodiversity signed by the country in which the project is located.

        The sustainable financing indicator can either be the one proposed below or another financing indicator that is appropriate
        for the project situation. The third indicator on governance institutions aims to ensure that the management plan is
        implemented and enforced. For instance, if the management plan stipulates that no logging is allowed in the area, an
        institution would need to be in place to ensure that this rule was followed and that any violators were prosecuted. See
        Table 3 for specific examples of indicators relevant to this predictive proxy.

        TABLE 3: EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS RELEVANT TO POSITIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (BIODIVERSITY-
        RELATED) PREDICTIVE PROXY
            General Indicator from PPI cluster   Specific example indicators                                            Source
            a) Forest area brought under         •	 Improved natural resource management practices                      FIP
            adaptive, biodiversity-friendly      •	 Land area under effective forest management practices               GEF
            management plans                     •	 Number of relevant principles for sustainable forest and farm       FAO-FFF
                                                    management mainstreamed into national policies and planning
                                                 •	 Area of forests on Tanzania Mainland managed according to           P057234, P058706 in Tanzania
                                                    approved forest management plans (including CBFM and JFM)
                                                 •	 Area under sustainable natural resource management, from            P046768 in Senegal
                                                    the Sustainable and Participatory Energy Management Project
                                                 •	 Hectares of forests brought under participatory management          P049395 in Ethiopia
                                                 •	 Increased forest cover and productivity through development         P010506 in India
                                                    of participatory processes for management and use of forest
                                                    resources, taking special account of the interests of tribals and
                                                    other disadvantaged groups
            b) Predictable, sustainable          •	 See examples under a separate entry below for a
            financing                               “predictable, sustainable financing” predictive indicator
            c) Functioning institutions to       •	 Government institutions provided with capacity building             CSI
            enforce rules and resolve conflict      support to improve management of forest resources (number)
                                                 •	 Improved access to effective justice/recourse mechanisms            FIP
                                                 •	 Evidence that infractions in the forest sector are detected,        FIP
                                                    reported, and penalized
                                                 •	 Evidence that laws and regulations in project/programs              FIP
                                                    are being implemented, monitored, and enforced and that
                                                    violations are detected, reported, and prosecuted
                                                 •	 Number of networks, alliances, and federations formed and           FAO-FFF
                                                    active (number of female and male members)
                                                 •	 Perception of representativeness among members (females,            FAO-FFF
                                                    males, youth, indigenous peoples, marginalized groups)
                                                 •	 Number of men and women from producer groups who hold a             FAO-FFF
                                                    decision making position in relevant policy making processes
                                                 •	 Capacity for sustainable forest management improved in state        P067367 in Romania
                                                    institutions responsible for forest management and among
                                                    underserved private forest owners
         
34   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                             CLIMATE CHANGE

                             Indicator Cluster 4: Positive Environmental Impacts (Climate Change–Related)

                            a) forest area brought under adaptive, biodiversity-friendly management plans
                                                                         +
                                        b) indicator of sustainable financing to implement plans
                                                                         +
                                    c) functioning institutions to enforce rules and resolve conflict
                                                                         =
                                       positive environmental impacts (climate change-related)

     Theory of Change: This indicator is similar to the last one but is oriented toward positive climate change effects, such as
     carbon storage or other positive mitigation or adaptation impacts as a result of forest interventions. The indicator could
     be used to measure SFM, increased carbon stocks, increased adaptive management, or biodiversity results, depending
     on the project and management plan focus. To ensure sufficient financial resources to implement and enforce the
     management plan over time, two cluster indicators have been added that address sustainable financing and the existence
     of institutions to ensure enforcement of the management plan. This combination of indicators has the potential to yield
     increased carbon stocks that will be sustained, supported, and enforced over time.

     FIGURE 9: RESULTS CHAIN FOR INDICATOR CLUSTER 4: POSITIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS (CLIMATE
     CHANGE–RELATED)

                                               Intermediate
           Activities/Outputs                                                     Outcomes/Indicators                Long-term Outcomes
                                            Outcomes/Indicators

                                                                             A. Forest activities are
                                                                             sustainable.
                                                                             Forest area brought under
                                                                             adaptive, biodiversity-friendly
                                                                             management plan



                                       B. Increased financing for SFM.       B. Financing is predictable
                                       •	 Amount of payment for              and sustainable.
                                          ecological services (carbon        Predictable, sustainable financing    Positive environmental
                                          sequestration; watershed           exists                                impacts (climate-change
                                          management; conservation                                                 related)
                                          areas) ($)                                                               •	 area under SFM
                                       •	 Private investment in                                                    •	 trends in carbon stock
                                          forest-related activities by                                             •	 increased adaptive
                                          type (tourism, environmental                                                management
                                          services, logging) ($)



     C) Institutional Activities/                                            C) Institutions enforce rules
     Inputs                                                                  and resolves conflicts
     •	 Forest User Groups formed                                            Functioning institutions present to
        (number)                                                             enforce rules and resolve conflict
     •	 Forest extension service
        established
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                     35




        Guidance Notes: Developing a results chain is one of the first steps in considering how the proposed cluster indicator can
        be used in projects. Figure 9 presents an example of where the proposed cluster indicators fall in the results chain, along
        with illustrative examples of activities and outputs. For this cluster indicator on positive environmental impacts (climate
        change–related), the proposed PPIs are all outcome indicators and are demarcated in bold, italic font.

        Please see Indicator Cluster 3 for guidance on and examples of relevant indicators.

                                                   Indicator Cluster 5: Increased Carbon Stocks

                              a) forest area brought under adaptive, biodiversity-friendly management plans
                                                                      +
                                                     b) area restored or reforested (ha)
                                                                          +
                                                      c) predictable, sustainable financing
                                                                          =
                                                              Increased carbon stocks

        Theory of Change: This cluster of indicators aims to measure increased carbon stocks. The first indicator, a CSI on forest
        area brought under management plans, measures the forest land area that, as a result of a Bank project, has been brought
        under a management plan that has been prepared, endorsed, and is in the process of implementation. To ensure that
        activities under the management plan are biodiversity-friendly (including both socially and ecologically appropriate,
        see below) and to allow for adaptive management in the event that a particular activity or objective needs to be revised,
        the indicator aims to measure the forest area under adaptive, biodiversity friendly management plans; consequently,
        these two terms have been added to the CSI.

        To ensure sufficient financial resources to implement and enforce the management plan and support afforestation/
        reforestation efforts over time, an indicator has been added that addresses sustainable financing, with the aim of
        ensuring that efforts to increase carbon stocks will be sustained, supported, and enforced over time.

        Guidance Notes: Please see Indicator Cluster 3 for guidance on the individual indicators and examples of relevant
        indicators.

                                                                  GOVERNANCE

                                     Indicator Cluster 6: Participatory Project Design and Implementation

            a) proportion of citizens who consider that design and/or implementation of project subjected to consultation is
                                                   responsive to their views (percent)
                                                                          +
                                   b) changes to project activities as a result of consultations (yes/no)
                                                                   and/or
                   c) grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits that are actually addressed (percent)
                                                                          =
                                                           project gains likely to persist
36   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Theory of Change: This cluster of indicators aims to ensure that users are engaged in the project and help contribute
     to its improved results, in line with the CSIs on participation and civic engagement, with the ultimate aim of ensuring
     that project gains and results continue and persist over time. The cluster of indicators is based on a theory of change
     that project beneficiaries or people whose behavior a project seeks to change are more likely to perceive the project
     intervention as benefiting them or to continue to change their behavior if they have a voice in the project design and
     implementation through some form of consultation or feedback. It is also important to include target groups in project
     design and implementation, because they are the ones who will ultimately have responsibility for sustaining project
     activities or changed behaviors in the future.

     Guidance Notes: The first and third indicators are CSIs, and all three indicators are included as examples in the World
     Bank’s Results Framework and M&E Guidance Note (World Bank 2014a) and reflect a two-way interaction between target
     beneficiaries and project staff or other relevant actors. The first two indicators measure consultation: the first one aims to
     monitor the degree of involvement citizens have in the design and implementation of projects while the second captures
     whether there is a tangible response to citizen feedback. For the first indicator, the CSI guidance notes that different projects
     will use different mechanisms to engage communities in project implementation and that the indicator will adopt the project
     definition of community consultation activities and provide a simple count of how many men and women have participated
     in a range of consultation activities over a certain time frame, reporting on the highest number of participants in each
     community and measuring the period between project effectiveness and project completion mechanisms.

     For the third indicator, CSI guidance (World Bank 2014b) explains that the indicator measures the transparency and
     accountability mechanisms established by the project so the target beneficiaries have trust in the process and are willing
     to participate and feel that their grievances are attended to promptly, although it is understood that grievance or redress
     mechanisms will not be established in all projects.

     Importantly, each of the above indicators are an option for meeting the World Bank’s new goal to include beneficiary
     feedback in all projects where beneficiaries are clearly identified. This goal aims for all projects to measure and report on
     at least one indicative citizen engagement indicator in the project results framework (see World Bank 2014a).

     The portfolio review yielded a number of indicators related to participatory project design and implementation, though
     many of these examples from past forest projects need some revision or modification before they could be recommended
     for use as indicators in current and future projects. (See Table 4 for specific examples of indicators.) For instance, the
     following two examples aim to ensure increased participation but represent outcome statements, rather than indicators,
     even though the projects used them as indicators:

     •	 Increased participation of women in planning, managing, monitoring, and evaluating Project Natural Protected Areas,
        from the Peruvian National Trust Fund for PAs–Programme for a Participatory Management of PAs Project (P068250)
        in Peru
     •	 Increase forest cover and productivity through development of participatory processes for management and use of
        forest resources, taking special account of the interests of tribals and other disadvantaged groups, from the Madhya
        Pradesh Forestry Project (P010506) in India
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                                                            37




        TABLE 4: EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS RELEVANT TO PARTICIPATORY PROJECT DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
        PREDICTIVE PROXY
         General Indicator from PPI cluster                 Specific example indicators                                                                          Source
         a) proportion of citizens who                      •	 Number of men and women from producer groups who hold a decision                                  FAO-FFF
         consider that design and/                             making position in relevant policy making processes
         or implementation of project                       •	 Perception of representativeness among members (females, males,                                   FAO-FFF
         subjected to consultation is                          youth, indigenous peoples, marginalized groups)
         responsive to their views (percent)                •	 Percent of Forest Fund projects supporting indigenous and criollo                                 P132846 in Argentina
                                                               smallholders and forest-dependent communities
         b) changes to project activities as                •	 No indicators were found through the portfolio review or indicators
         a result of consultations (yes/no)                    inventory.
         c) grievances registered related to                •	 Improved access to effective justice/recourse mechanisms                                          FIP
         delivery of project benefits that are              •	 Evidence that infractions in the forest sector are detected, reported,                            FIP
         actually addressed (percent)                          and penalized
                                                            •	 Evidence that laws and regulations in project/programs are being                                  FIP
                                                               implemented, monitored, and enforced and that violations are
                                                               detected, reported, and prosecuted




                                                    Indicator Cluster 7: Effective Project Monitoring and Evaluation

            a) government officials and relevant project staff provided with capacity building support to improve management
                                                 practices to design and implement M&E
                                                                                                   +
                                         b) government officials and project staff regularly conduct high-quality M&E
                                                                                                   +
                             c) predictable, sustainable financing for M&E activities (including after project completion)
                                                                                                   =
                                                   Positive longer-term project ecological and economic outcomes

        Theory of Change: This indicator is based on the assumption that a project with a strong M&E component is more likely to
        result in positive project results over time. Our review of the World Bank forestry projects showed a positive association
        between the quality of project M&E and project outcome ratings. As project M&E scores increased, the project outcome
        rating score increased by nearly one-half a rating category (n=59; p=0.0). Thus, for example, a project with a highly
        satisfactory M&E component was more likely to have a highly satisfactory outcome rating than a project with only a
        satisfactory M&E. This finding further suggests that M&E represents a potentially large return on investment given that
        M&E elements of projects are typically less than 5 percent of overall project budgets.3 Similarly, the World Bank’s Annual
        Review of Development Effectiveness found a “positive correlation between the quality of project-level M&E and better
        project outcomes” (World Bank 2009: 107). This finding on the positive association between quality M&E and improved
        project outcomes finds additional support in literature on the importance of M&E in shaping intervention outcomes and
        impacts (e.g., Stem et al. 2005).

        Our review also underscored the importance of ensuring that relevant client counterparts and/or project staff have the
        capacity to design and implement M&E systems. Consequently, this cluster indicator combines capacity building support
        for M&E with an indicator on regularly conducting M&E. Further, because M&E requires financial and human resources,

        3. We tested this association using Stata and found that the project outcome rating increased by 0.45 units for each 1 unit increase in M&E. The 2009 Annual Review of Development
        Effectiveness found a 0.60 correlation between the quality of project-level M&E and better project outcomes (World Bank 2009: 107).
38   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     the cluster indicator includes an indicator on predictable, sustainable financing for M&E. Collectively, these indicators
     are likely to contribute to effective project M&E and to the persistence of project results over the long term.

     Guidance Notes: The World Bank’s Results Framework and M&E Guidance Note (2014a) proposes indicative citizen
     engagement indicators that can be modified to match particular project contexts, which it notes can be used as both
     intermediate and outcome indicators depending on the project context, scope, PDO, and approaches, among other things.

     The first indicator measures capacity building support provided to government officials and project staff to improve
     their ability to design and implement M&E. The second indicator measures whether government officials and/or project
     staff regularly conduct M&E. The term “high-quality” M&E refers to an M&E system that identifies project indicators and
     targets, evaluates baselines, and tracks and reports on progress toward project indicators and targets on a regular basis.
     High-quality M&E may also include an adaptive management approach, such as revising indicators and targets based on
     changes in the project as necessary. The third indicator on predictable, sustainable financing aims to ensure that there
     are sufficient financial resources to carry out M&E activities over time.


     4.4 Potential Predictive Proxy Indicators with Broad Relevance
     Four of the seven PPIs just described include an indicator on predictable, sustainable financing and secure property rights
     figures as a proposed or potential indicator in several clusters as well. This review suggests that these two indicators can
     enhance many cluster indicators as well as having predictive potential as stand-alone indicators.

                                                    STRENGTHENED LAND TENURE

                                     a) forest area brought under strengthened tenure or use rights
                                                                       =
                                                         strengthened land tenure

     Theory of Change: Users are more likely to invest their own time, resources, and efforts in SFM if they know that their
     access to the area is secure over the long term and that they have the potential to benefit from their investments over
     time. Therefore, formalization of user rights or tenure has the potential to contribute to SFM over time. Evidence from
     the review of the World Bank’s forest portfolio highlights this relationship between secure access and use rights and
     investments in sustainable land use practices, such as SFM. For example, the Forest Protection and Rural Development
     project in Viet Nam (1997–2006; P004839) issued Land Use Rights Certificates (or “red books”) to households in buffer
     zones surrounding national parks. The project ICR emphasizes that the provision of secure, long-term land use rights
     for farmers contributed to increased investment in land by farmers who adopted advanced agroforestry farming models
     introduced by the project.

     Guidance Notes: This indicator includes the total forest area with strengthened tenure in hectares. Table 5 presents
     examples of related indicators, and the range of meaning that “strengthened tenure” may cover has been described
     above. This indicator is one that could be used on its own or combined with other indicators in a cluster.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                 39




        TABLE 5: EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS RELEVANT TO STRENGTHENED LAND TENURE PREDICTIVE PROXY
         General Indicator from PPI cluster Specific example indicators                                                    Source
         a) forest area brought under        •	 Increase in land and resources under legal control and management of       FIP
         strengthened tenure or use rights      indigenous peoples and local communities including through traditional
                                                forest management systems
                                             •	 Increase in area with clear, recognized tenure of land and resources for   FIP
                                                indigenous peoples and local communities
                                             •	 Evidence that the legal framework and implementation practices             FIP
                                                provide for nondiscriminatory land tenure rights and land use systems
                                                and protect the rights of indigenous peoples and local communities
                                             •	 Area of forest under clear, nondiscriminatory tenure and territorial       FIP
                                                rights, including the recognition of traditional rights
                                             •	 Legal rights granted by competent authorities to have access to forest     GEF
                                                resources
                                             •	 Tenure of at least 30 percent of the occupants in national lands in the    P064914 in Honduras
                                                project area regularized through formal, long-term usufruct agreements
                                                or title developed with the assistance of the project
                                             •	 Forest area brought under strengthened tenure                              P132846 in Argentina



                                                  PREDICTABLE, SUSTAINABLE FINANCING

          a) Development, establishment and implementation of a financial mechanism or trust fund to support activities or
        efforts identified as critical for the continued achievement of forest investment objectives, including capacity building
                                 and training to ensure that local actors can manage and disburse funding
                                                                            =
                                                         predictable, sustainable financing

        Theory of Change: Predictable, sustainable financing is necessary to support continued efforts and activities after a
        project intervention. An indicator that measures the amount or percentage of activities funded through local resources
        or through a co-funding arrangement suggests funding that is independent of the project, with the potential to continue
        over the long term. It is also important that local actors have the capacity to manage and allocate financing to ensure
        financing is directed toward intended activities (not siphoned off for corruption) and used in a sustainable manner. In
        the absence of these indicators, forest activities could end due to a lack of resources, or resources could disappear or be
        depleted through corruption or mismanagement.

        Guidance Notes: Financing is a critical component of many indicators and one that can contribute to the indicator’s
        potential to improve long-term impacts over time. Consequently, this indicator is one that has the potential to be used
        both as a stand-alone indicator as well as an indicator used in combination with others as part of a cluster indicator. (See
        Table 6 for specific examples of indicators.) The key characteristic of this indicator is that it implies financing that is
        regularly available and sufficient for desired activities.
40   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     TABLE 6: EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS RELEVANT TO PREDICTABLE, SUSTAINABLE FINANCING PREDICTIVE PROXY
      General Indicator from PPI cluster   Specific example indicators                                        Source
      a) Development, establishment,       •	 Increase capacity to finance SINANPE recurrent costs with       P068250 in Peru
      and implementation of a financial       local resources
      mechanism or trust fund to           •	 Sustainably finance and promote investment in forestry sector   DPOs in Ghana
      support activities or efforts           P102971/P113172/P118188
      identified as critical for the       •	 Mulanje Mountain Conservation Trust established and             P035917 in Malawi
      continued achievement of forest         functioning on income being generated by endowment fund
      investment objectives, including     •	 At least 20 percent of the funds invested at the PA level by    P065988 in Mexico
      capacity building and training          non-environmental agencies are compatible with conservation
      to ensure that local actors can         and/or sustainable use of biodiversity
      manage and disburse funding          •	 At least 80 percent of the development initiatives financed     P065988 in Mexico
                                              by non-environmental agencies have no negative impacts on
                                              biodiversity or include mitigation measures
                                           •	 Establishment of a financial instrument to support easements    P061314/P52009 in Costa Rica
                                              targeting biodiversity conservation in Costa Rica
                                           •	 Sustainable funding mechanisms established, from The Uttar      P035169 in India
                                              Pradesh and Uttaranchal Forestry Project
                                           •	 Area of forest plantations under private management             P057234/ P058706 in Tanzania
                                              agreement (ha)
                                           •	 [Protected areas agency] annual budgetary support from          P131965 in Mozambique
                                              central state treasury ($)




     4.5 The Utility and Importance of World Bank Core Sector Indicators
     The World Bank Core Sector Indicators deserve special mention. Five of the seven forestry CSIs feature as elements in
     the PPI clusters developed in this paper. A sixth, relating to support for policy and regulatory reforms, is also likely an
     important constituent in additional PPI clusters. Thus using CSIs can bring a double benefit of helping to capture in a
     consistent way both end-of-project and longer-term outcomes of forest investments.

     The CSIs for forest investments were launched in July 2012 to help capture some key overarching results the World Bank
     has sought to help its clients to achieve. They are reported in IDA/IBRD project Implementation Status Reports, and
     they are being tracked and aggregated over time. Beyond forestry, several other CSIs, such as those relating to land
     management, biodiversity, civic engagement, and social inclusion, are not listed as forestry CSIs but are very relevant to
     the sector. (See Box 4.) In several cases, these indicators also have potential as PPIs.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                  41




            BOX 4. FORESTRY-RELEVANT CORE SECTOR INDICATORS IN IDA AND IBRD PROJECTS

            The use of Core Sector Indicators in IDA and IBRD projects was introduced in 2012, and experience with their use so far has been
            instructive. The requirement for a project to report on performance against a CSI depends on whether or not its primary objective
            has been coded to reflect its respective sectors. All projects are expected to report on the number of project beneficiaries as well
            as the proportion of beneficiaries who are female. But a forestry project would not necessarily report on biodiversity outcomes
            unless it had been coded accordingly. The following CSIs are indicative of the types of indicators related to forests and trees in
            landscapes that might be monitored and reported.

            FORESTS
            •	 Area restored or re/afforested (ha)
            •	 Forest area brought under management plans (ha)
            •	 People in targeted forest and adjacent communities with increased monetary or nonmonetary benefits from forests (number)
            •	 People employed in production and processing of forest products (number)
            •	 Forest users trained (number)
            •	 Reforms in forest policy, legislation, or other regulations supported (yes/no)
            •	 Government institutions provided with capacity building support to improve management of forest resources (number)

            BIODIVERSITY	
            •	 Areas brought under enhanced biodiversity protection (ha)
            •	 New areas outside protected areas managed as biodiversity-friendly (ha)

            LAND ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT
            •	 Target population with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project (number)
            •	 Target land area with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project (ha)
            •	 Land area where sustainable land management practices have been adopted as a result of the project (ha)
            •	 Land users adopting sustainable land management practices as a result of the project (number).
            •	 Land area brought under a catchment system as a result of the project (ha)

            PARTICIPATION AND CIVIC ENGAGEMENT	
            •	 Participants in consultation activities during project implementation (number)
            •	 Subprojects or investments for which arrangements for community engagement in post-project sustainability and/or
               operations and maintenance are established (percentage)
            •	 Beneficiaries that feel project investments reflected their needs (percentage)

            SOCIAL INCLUSION 	
            •	 Share of vulnerable and marginalized people of the total project beneficiaries (percentage)
            •	 Representatives in community-based decision making and management structures that are from the vulnerable or
               marginalized beneficiary population (percentage)
            •	 Vulnerable and marginalized beneficiary population who participate in nonproject consultations and decision making forums
               (percentage)

            Source: World Bank 2014b.




        To get a better sense of the use of relevant CSIs and potential for further analysis of their relationship to PPIs, we analyzed
        uptake of forestry CSIs since their inception in 2012. We found that their use has improved over time, with 63 percent of
        active forestry projects approved since July 2012 including at least 1 CSI (see Table 7 and Figure 10). The area restored or
        re/afforested was the most frequently used forestry CSI. The remaining CSIs were all used relatively evenly (in four to
        five projects) with the exception of “people employed in production and processing of forest products,” which has not
        been used in any project to date. These broad findings suggests that some ongoing projects may already have in place
        clusters of indicators that may have the capacity to predict longer-term outcomes.
42   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     TABLE 7. UPTAKE OF FORESTRY CORE SECTOR INDICATORS IN WORLD BANK PROJECTS
                                                  AFR                  EAP                     ECA              LAC                  MNA                   SAR                  Total
      May 2015              # of projects         9                    4                       4                6                    0                     4                    27
                            # projects    6                            2                       4                3                    0                     2                    17
                            with forestry
                            CSIs
                            % with                67%                  50%                     100%             50%                  0%                    50%                  63%
                            forestry CSI
      June 2014             # of projects         10                   6                       3                4                    1                     3                    27
                            # projects    1                            4                       3                2                    0                     2                    11
                            with forestry
                            CSIs
                            % with                10%                  67%                     100%             50%                  0%                    67%                  41%
                            forestry CSI
      June 2013             # of projects         9                    4                       2                5                    1                     1                    22
                            # projects    1                            3                       2                0                     0                    0                    6
                            with forestry
                            CSIs
                            % with                11%                  75%                     100%             0%                    0%                   0%                   27%
                            forestry CSI

     Note: Analysis was based on all projects that had a sector or theme code of Forestry (AT). The 2015 data reflect active forestry projects approved since the adoption of the core sector
     indicators by the World Bank in July 2012. Earlier years used all active forest projects.




     FIGURE 10. UPTAKE OF FORESTRY CORE SECTOR INDICATORS BY INDICATOR



                   Total number of projects with forestry code                                                                                               27


                                    Projects using a forestry CSI                                                           17

                            People employed in production and
                                                                           0
                                processing of forest products*
                        Reforms in forest policy, legislation or                   4
                                  other regulations supported
                      Govt institutions provided with capacity                         5
                building to improve mgt. of forest resources*

              Forest area brought under management plans*                              5

                  People in forest&adjacent community with
                                                                                   4
               monetary/non-monetary beneﬁt from forest*

                                              Forest users trained                     5


                                Area restored or re/afforested*                                      10

                                                                      0                    5          10               15                 20            25               30




     *= CSIs that were also identified as potential predictive proxy indicators.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                 43




        4.6 Assessing Monitoring and Evaluation in the World Bank’s
        Forestry Portfolio
        In addition to reviewing the forest portfolio to identify potential predictive proxy indicators, the review also examined M&E
        more generally in the selected projects with an eye toward distilling lessons to inform future project M&E design and practice
        and use of PPIs. A major finding is that, even if shortcomings remain, project M&E has improved over time. For instance, the
        most recent ICRs, usually those published after 2000, contain a project overview that highlights progress on PDO indicators,
        which were not always present in earlier projects. In earlier ICRs, the type of indicators are not always identified clearly; for
        instance, they are often listed in an annex at the back, not discussed in the main body of the report, and appear to be output
        indicators or physical indicators. The earliest PCRs also had a much more limited focus on indicators.

        The majority of ICRs and PCRs addressed M&E (n=74), although several did so in a cursory manner, such as by including a
        list of output indicators in the report annex and not providing substantial discussion on M&E and indicators in the report.
        A smaller set of reports offers lessons learned on M&E and indicators and suggests recommendations for the design and
        implementation of M&E and indicators. The review also includes a few projects that are examples of “turn around” stories—
        projects that were failing initially and improved with significant World Bank attention and supervision. (See Box 5.)


            BOX 5: FROM UNSATISFACTORY TO SATISFACTORY: THE INDIA ECODEVELOPMENT PROJECT

            The India Ecodevelopment project (P036062), which aimed to conserve biodiversity by implementing the government of India’s
            ecodevelopment strategy in and around seven PAs, is an example of a “turn around” story, according to its ICR. The ICR explains
            that the project “had a slow take off and the progress was unsatisfactory in the initial periods.” The project failed to disburse
            funds during its initial year of implementation, suffered from a lack of continuity of task leadership (with four TTLs in the first
            three years of implementation), and was rated as unsatisfactory in its initial evaluations, among other challenges.

            At the MTR, the World Bank decided to restructure the project to focus on implementation of ecodevelopment activities around
            the seven selected PAs and dropped a component on the preparation of future biodiversity projects. Renewed efforts by the
            government, PA staff, local communities, and other stakeholders helped to turn the project around. Consultants monitored project
            progress at all sites from the MTR onwards, providing feedback to the main project office for action. The ICR also highlights the
            World Bank’s “flexibility in adapting the project design and targets consistent with a process oriented and learning approach”
            and using aide-memoires as guidance for adaptive management and monitoring. By project closing, the project had achieved
            its objectives, and several of its activities and approaches are now considered best practice. The ICR notes the following on
            institutional development impact: “The improvement in relationships between PA staff and local communities at all PAs may be
            one of the most significant contributions to long-term sustainability of the PAs and biodiversity conservation in India.”



        Six projects revised their M&E frameworks, indicators, or targets, according to the project ICR or PCR. In addition, some
        projects made minor revisions, such as updating targets to reflect better-than-expected progress or revising targets
        downwards to better align them with project realities.

        The Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in the High Andes Region (P063317) in Colombia is an example
        of a project that substantially revised its M&E framework to include an increased emphasis on outcomes. The project
        originally included a logical framework that focused on activities and outputs, with 40 product indicators. At the MTR,
        the World Bank revised the M&E framework to focus more on measuring achievement of objectives and progress toward
44   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     the GEO. These revisions included focusing supervision on 15 IO indicators that were most representative of the GEO
     aims of increased biodiversity knowledge, conservation, and sustainable use and developing six new outcome indicators
     to capture aggregated improvements in biodiversity knowledge, conservation, and use practices, using the 40 product
     indicators as inputs. However, the ICR notes that the project partners did not incorporate the revised indicators into the
     project’s M&E processes, and the six new indicators were only measured at project closing.

     The Mulanje Mountain Biodiversity Conservation Project (MMBCP; P035917) in Malawi is an example of a project that
     revised its indicators to facilitate improved results measurement while maintaining its original focus. According to the
     ICR, the World Bank, Borrower, and Implementing Agency recognized during implementation that the original project
     indicators were qualitative in nature and difficult to measure. Consequently, they refined the original set of GEO, IO,
     outcome, and output indicators into quantitative proxy indicators and prepared a refined results framework at MTR that
     reflected the new set of quantitative indicators. The ICR emphasizes: “The proxy indicators did not replace nor depart
     from the initial intent or focus of the original set of key indicators; rather they facilitated accurate measurement of what
     had previously been highly descriptive key indicators.”


     Model Projects
     Several projects included exemplary M&E frameworks that are recognized for their detailed design, adaptive nature,
     and focus on impact and quality. This section highlights a few of these projects and particular elements of their M&E
     frameworks, as highlighted by their ICRs.

     The Karnataka Watershed Development Project (P067216) in India highlights several elements of an effective M&E
     system, including detailed design of the system before project implementation. The ICR states the M&E system provided
     a strong tracking and learning mechanism, correcting and realigning the project and pushing for better performance and
     accountability through on-the-ground results. It describes project management as responsive to issues raised and able
     to proactively take corrective actions. The ICR also highlights ongoing analysis during the project as critical in facilitating
     implementation changes that resulted in a sharper poverty focus, opportunities for women and the landless, greater
     equality among small, medium-size, and large farmers and increased cost efficiency in soil and water conservation.

     The Water Conservation Project (P056516) in China praises the World Bank’s focus on impact in its supervision rating.
     It notes: “The Bank maintained a focus on development impact, consistently emphasizing the targeted outcomes and
     the innovations being tested under the project. Bank missions ensured that monitoring and evaluation began early in
     the project period and that the baseline survey was promptly conducted. Aide-Memoires systematically recalled the
     development objectives, and variations from target key indicators were raised as issues.”

     The ICR for the Eastern Anatolia Watershed Rehabilitation Project (P009023) in Turkey describes the project as
     “noteworthy for having focused on quality rather than aiming at simple area targets and showing considerable flexibility
     and resulting in learning by doing.”

     In general, these projects underscore the importance of designing an M&E system before project implementation begins
     and maintaining a focus on monitoring and evaluating indicators throughout the project.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                     45




        Lessons Learned on M&E
        Indicators should support a results-driven process, focus on outcomes, and show a clear link between project activities
        and outcomes, according to the most common lesson learned on M&E. Approximately one-third of project ICRs or PCRs
        include lessons learned on M&E (n=26, or 33 percent). These lessons learned address M&E frameworks, indicators,
        project duration and time considerations, participation and stakeholder involvement, and resources and sustainability,
        among other issues.

        M&E FRAMEWORKS
        Seven ICRs or PCRs explicitly recommend defining the M&E framework at the start of the project, before implementation
        begins. Reports suggest focusing on the development of an M&E framework during project preparation and design
        phases, including the identification of baseline targets and data collection plans. For instance, based on its failure to put
        in place an M&E system, “despite repeated requests from the Bank to design and implement an M&E system,” including
        in aide-memoires and the MTR, the ICR from the Transfrontier Conservation Areas Pilot and Institutional Strengthening
        Project (P001759) in Mozambique stresses the importance of having an M&E system in place at project effectiveness.
        The ICR recommends “future projects should consider not releasing funds until the baseline data for an M&E system has
        been established.”

        Additional recommendations on M&E frameworks include the importance of showing causality, M&E as an adaptive,
        learning, and innovation tool, and the need to match M&E expectations with technical capacity. The Forest Concession
        Management and Control Pilot Project (P060003) in Cambodia argues that the project should have used M&E in a proactive
        manner as a way to track the project’s progress and address its weaknesses early on during implementation. The ICR’s
        lessons learned section explains that “a properly functioning M&E system might have provided the basis for a stronger
        dialogue between the Bank and the Borrower and might have been developed more pro-actively as the ‘learning and
        innovation’ tool,” which could have helped the project to adapt during implementation. The Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal
        Forestry Project (P035169) in India recommends ensuring consistency between M&E, management information systems,
        and technical capacity, noting that the Forest Department staff had a low level of technical expertise on M&E and that
        senior decision makers possessed a low awareness on the importance of M&E benefits. The Cape Peninsula Biodiversity
        Conservation project (P036062) in South Africa, recommends avoiding “overdesign” of indicators to ensure sufficient
        flexibility and innovation during project implementation. (See Box 6.)


            BOX 6: AVOIDING OVERDESIGN: THE CAPE PENINSULA BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION PROJECT

            The Cape Peninsula Biodiversity Conservation project (P036062) in South Africa, a highly satisfactory project, is an example of
            a project that aimed to ensure flexibility in indicator selection and use. According to the ICR, the project design was “robust and
            flexible to address the challenges of being implemented in a rapidly changing legal and institutional environment.” Many of the
            indicators were “fine-tuned” throughout project implementation, as shown in the ICR’s Annex on the log frame matrix. Among its
            lessons learned, the ICR recommends avoiding overdesign, explaining how the project “benefitted significantly from a broad-
            brush Logframe, which clearly set out the objectives and key performance indicators but avoided detail (10 percent design and
            90 percent implementation).” The ICR further emphasizes that this approach facilitated flexibility and innovation approaches and
            solutions during project implementation, saying “a free hand was given to the architects of the project to be innovative and to take
            risks.” This project suggests that, while defining and selecting robust indicators is critical in contributing to project achievements,
            it is also important to ensure flexibility and innovation during project implementation, as needed.
46   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     General lessons learned on M&E also highlight the importance of ensuring independent M&E , ensuring sufficient and
     sustainable financial resources to conduct M&E , involving stakeholders in defining M&E frameworks and assessing
     progress, and ensuring M&E sustainability . For instance, the ICR from the Karnataka Watershed Development Project
     (P067216) in India states “an independent and credible M&E institution can complement M&E functions in the
     implementing agency and provide major contributions to project success,” including through providing complementary
     services such as spatial information or surveys.

     INDICATORS
     Twenty-two projects reflect on the definition and use of indicators in the lessons learned section of their reports. As
     noted, the most common lesson learned emphasizes the importance of focusing on results and ensuring that project
     activities will contribute to project outcomes (n=10). (See Table 8.) For instance, the Mexico Environmental Sustainability
     Development Policy Loan (P095510) describes the importance of measurable and specific indicators, stating that
     “clearly-defined baseline and target values to monitor progress and evaluate outcomes, as well as a relevant set of
     measurable and meaningful outcome indicators, are essential for a results driven process.” Earlier PCRs suggest that
     projects focused too much on output indicators and not enough on outcomes and results-based indicators, with several
     reports noting that the project was implemented before the World Bank began placing emphasis on logical or results
     frameworks. This last point suggests that the World Bank has placed an increased focus on results-driven M&E over time.

     TABLE 8: COMMON LESSONS LEARNED ON INDICATORS
      Indicator should be:                                                                  Number of projects
      Results-driven process and focus on outcomes                                          10
      Measurable, realistic, and specific                                                   4
      Achievable during the project’s lifespan                                              3
      Unaffected by exogenous, confounding factors                                          1
      Useful for management                                                                 1
      Reliable and systematic                                                               1


     Project documents also note that exogenous, confounding factors can limit the achievement of outcomes, and they
     recommend linking project development indicators to project activities. For instance, the Sustainable Forestry Pilot
     Project (P053830) in the Russian Federation included an indicator on “increase in forestry revenues.” The lessons
     learned section of the ICR explains the project assumed that regulations drafted during the project would help achieve
     this indicator. It points out, however, that the project failed to consider the effect of wood product demand or the state of
     the economy, factors over which the project had no control but that affected achievement of the forest revenue indicator.

     Some ICRs discuss the challenges of showing project impacts and outcomes during short time frames, noting that some
     outcomes may not be discernible at project closure even though these outcomes may materialize over time, a common
     challenge for M&E in the forestry and other sectors, as described in the Introduction.. Consequently, some ICRs recommend
     selecting indicators that can be achieved during the project’s lifetime. One project suggests that post-project evaluation
     should be incorporated into the project time frame to account for such results over time. These recommendations fit with
     the overall thrust of this report: that PPIs can be identified that can provide a credible estimate in the near term (during
     project implementation) of longer-term results.

     The Ecomarkets Project (P061314 and P52009) in Costa Rica experienced challenges in demonstrating impacts during the
     project lifetime. The ICR explains that the project did not monitor the actual impact of project activities on the generation
     of specific services. For example, it did not assess the relationship between increased forest cover and increases in
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      47




        biodiversity or water services. The ICR recognizes, however, that monitoring the impact of forest cover on water services
        is not a simple task, explaining that the impacts will likely be experienced over time and over dispersed geographic
        areas. The project is also described as having a weak M&E framework because it did not systematically evaluate the
        extent to which participation in the program changed behavior. Therefore, the ICR explains, “while it can be observed that
        PSA participants have substantially higher levels of forest cover, it is difficult to ascertain how much of this difference
        was due to the project.”

        Defining how M&E data will be gathered and used is also important from the design stage, according to the ICR from
        the Indigenous and Community Biodiversity Conservation Project (COINBIO; P06674) in Mexico. This project document
        explains that the information that needs to be collected for reporting to a global entity such as the GEF is not the same
        type of data that an ejido requires for decision making.

        In addition to the characteristics of indicators highlighted in Table 8, a few other lessons learned emerged from project
        documents. The Third Forestry Development Project (P009582) in Bhutan reflects that the project indicators did not
        capture or show the good professional progress of Bhutanese project partners that resulted from the project’s training
        and technical assistance components. It states: “Such achievements are equally important mosaic pieces as e.g. the
        number of kilometers of forest roads constructed. Would the project be considered as a learning process for initiating
        gentle and sustainable methods of forest management, the assessment would have been better.”

        The First Programmatic Development Policy Loan for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL; P095205)
        in Brazil recommends that projects monitor existing indicators that are already available. Under the lessons learned
        section, the ICR notes: “The lessons learned in this operation points to the need to use existing indicators regularly
        monitored by implementing agencies whenever possible instead of creating program specific ones. This is the case, for
        instance, of the indicator for annual deforestation rate monitored by INPE [the Brazilian Space Agency].” In contrast
        to this project, the Mexico Environmental Sustainability Development Policy Loan (P095510) defined a set of outcome
        indicators for measuring project progress that were also included in Mexico’s 2007–12 National Development Plan, which
        meant that indicators were relevant for measuring progress on both the project and Mexico’s National Development Plan.

        Three projects highlight the importance of defining baselines and targets as part of the development of an M&E system.
        Although this lesson may seem overly simplistic, several projects did not define baselines or failed to adapt project
        targets during implementation. The EcoMarkets project (P061314 and P52009) in Costa Rica reflects that it is difficult to
        evaluate the effectiveness of conservation programs “when such programs are not designed to be tested and measured
        against a clear baseline or ‘control’ case.” The Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier Conservation and Development Project
        (P061314 and P52009) in South Africa states that “a baseline not only helps to measure success, but also disciplines the
        designers to pay attention to realistic and measurable indicators.” It is also important to note that several other projects
        did not define or include baseline or target indicators yet did not specifically reflect on this shortcoming in the lessons
        learned section.

        Another factor that may affect project outcomes relates to project supervision and management. For instance, many
        project ICRs highlighted the challenges that frequent changes in TTLs pose for project continuity and achievement of
        project objectives. (See Box 7.)
48   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




        BOX 7: ANOTHER IMPACT ON PROJECT OUTCOMES? TTL TURNOVER

        The review showed that projects generally have several TTLs, which can negatively affect project continuity, momentum,
        implementation, and achievement of objectives. For instance, the Energy Access Project (P049395) in Ethiopia changed TTLs
        five times over the 10-year implementation period. The Rural Environment Project (P066199) in Azerbaijan had three TTLs in
        four years, which the ICR notes disrupted dialogue between the World Bank and the client and “severely undermined supervision
        efficiency as each new TTL built a learning curve on the Project, stakeholders, and issues.”

        The ICR from South Africa’s Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier Conservation and Development Project (P052368) stressed the
        following lesson learned on TTLs: “Frequent changes in task management during project design and implementation can cause
        serious disruption, when task managers are leaving without finishing important milestone tasks. Examples under this project
        were the finalization and agreement on the logical framework at the design stage, the completion of the restructuring of the
        Project at mid-term or finishing the complex and time consuming design and procurement process of the environmental centre
        at the later stage of the Project.” Similarly, the ICR from the Third Forestry Development Project (P009582) in Bhutan found that
        “frequent turnover of Bank staff handicapped continuity in supervision, with six TTLs over the life of the project and frequent
        turnover of other supervision staff.”

        At the same time, when TTLs carried out their roles effectively, the ICRs, and even the Borrower’s ICRs, note the benefits to the
        project. For example, some ICRs praised projects for selecting TTLs with experience with similar projects in the region, such as
        a TTL with experience on trust funds in Latin America and the Caribbean who worked on several related projects or TTLs who
        lived in the country during at least part of the project implementation. ICRs also commended TTLs who stayed through a critical
        project period or ensured a smooth transition. The Sustainable Forestry Pilot Project (P053830) in the Russian Federation, for
        instance, noted that the project had four TTLs in a 10-year period but ensured continuity and sustained institutional memory in
        the team supervising the project.

        Similarly, two highly satisfactory projects underscored the importance of continuity in World Bank management. The Second
        Loess Plateau Watershed Rehabilitation Project (P056216) in China emphasized consistency in task management and task
        team composition as critical in a strong Bank-Borrower partnership. The Sustainable and Participatory Energy Management
        (PROGEDE; P046768) project in Senegal states that continuity in Bank team staff was a key feature of PROGEDE. The ICR
        explains that, from project preparation to project closing (eight years), there were only minor changes to the core Bank team,
        which resulted in “an uncommon level of knowledge about the sector, the project, the Borrower’s institutions, the actors, the
        issues, and the opportunities.” The ICR recognizes that it may be difficult to replicate such continuity in many other operations
        but stresses “the level and quality of outcomes of the project does provide sufficient grounds to suggest that increasing
        continuity of operational teams could improved the quality and poverty alleviation impact of operations in the Bank.”

        TTL turnover in projects is likely to continue and can bring benefits. However, these findings underscore the importance of efforts
        to ensure continuity in projects when changes in TTLs and other key supervision staff occur.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                   49




        Summary of Key M&E Lessons Learned
        •	 Indicators should support a results-driven process, focus on outcomes, and show a clear link between project
           activities and outcomes.
        •	 Projects should use M&E in a proactive manner as a way to track progress and address weaknesses early on during
           implementation: a well-functioning M&E system can provide the basis for stronger dialogue between the donor and
           client during project implementation.
        •	 Avoid overdesign: projects can benefit significantly from a broad-brush results framework that clearly lays out
           objectives and key performance indicators but avoids restrictive detail. Such an approach can facilitate adaptive
           management, innovation, and—ultimately—better results.
        •	 Clearly define baselines and targets as part of the development of an M&E system and measure them as soon as possible.
        •	 Link project development indicators specifically to project activities in order to help account for exogenous,
           confounding factors that can limit the achievement of outcomes.
        •	 Use existing indicators regularly monitored by implementing agencies where relevant and possible rather than
           creating program or project specific ones. This helps reduce costs, ensures that indicator data will be collected, and
           creates synergies with related institutions and interventions.
        •	 Ensure sufficient and sustainable financial resources to conduct M&E and involve stakeholders in defining M&E
           frameworks and assessing progress.
        •	 Take steps to build client M&E capacity and financial sustainability of M&E in the post-implementation period.
50   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     5. O pportun iti es f or a nd C onst r a i nt s on
     Use of Proxies in Wor l d B a nk Pr oj ects

     5.1 Opportunities
     When designing project indicators, World Bank guidance emphasizes “less is better,” recommending to “limit the number
     of outcome indicators to five or fewer and the overall number of indicators to not more than 15” (World Bank 2014a:
     2). In contrast to this advice, the review of the World Bank’s forest portfolio found that the average number of PDO
     indicators per project was greater than six, suggesting a need to ensure a smaller number of indicators in future World
     Bank projects. The development and use of predictive proxy indicators offer an opportunity to identify a small set of
     indicators that can be used to predict longer-term results. Such indicators can also help facilitate comparison across
     projects, regions, and sectors.

     Participants at the expert workshop in January generally supported the use of PPIs, highlighting different instances in
     which proxies would be useful. In particular, they supported PPIs as valuable in terms of predicting project and longer-
     term outcomes and for easier measurements that would demand less time and resources.

     Participants cautioned, however, that many of the indicators identified through the review of the World Bank forest
     portfolio are useful but may be too specific to the particular project in which they are embedded. The biodiversity and
     the poverty breakout groups expressed support for the CSIs as useful in particular.

     A breakout group on governance also highlighted the importance of ensuring that proxy indicators can be aligned with
     the priorities and capacity of the relevant government agency or agencies in the country in which the project is being
     carried out. They observed that indicators might serve their intended purpose but not be well aligned with a government’s
     ability, capacity, culture, or intention.

     Participants also recommended including the importance of ensuring good, strong baselines on which to monitor future
     progress. Similarly, the portfolio reviewed highlighted the importance of clearly linking goals, indicators, and targets,
     such as through a matrix that shows the relationship among the different goals, indicators, and project components.

     Discussions with TTLs highlighted the need for strong enabling conditions and indicators to measure these conditions.
     Suggestions included large-scale datasets on national governance, market prices, gross domestic product, forestry
     budgets, and national deforestation rates. Some experts interviewed proposed conceptually separating indicators of
     context or enabling conditions from those directly related to a project activity or objective, suggesting there may be
     ways to clarify the different elements in predictive indicator clusters.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                                                                          51




        5.2 Constraints
        One key constraint to the development and use of PPIs is the project incentive structure.4 TTLs and other project staff
        have an incentive to use indicators that are achievable within the project results framework in order to demonstrate
        progress and outcomes. Pressure to produce results within the project time frame and to achieve a high project rating
        may bias project staff to select indicators that focus on outputs or easier-to-achieve outcomes as opposed to more
        ambitious indicators that may be more difficult to achieve during the project period. Some TTLs and project staff may
        also face disincentives to collect and report on data. Further, more ambitious indicators are more likely to produce results
        and outcomes after the project is completed; while these longer-term outcomes are desirable, the current system is not
        necessarily structured to promote these types of indicators. Better understanding of the incentives and disincentives
        faced by World Bank TTLs and other project staff in selecting and using outcome-focused indicators, including PPIs,
        could help to operationalize the use of proxy indicators.

        Discussions with TTLs also underscored the effort and time required to gain client buy-in during project preparation,
        which can lead to a simplifying of indicators. At the same time, clients may sometimes refuse to accept new indicators
        if, for example, they deviate from established government indicators. These factors may also hamper the use and
        development of PPIs in some cases.

        There are also several methodological constraints in the use of indicators, including challenges related to attribution,
        confounding factors, and the time taken to show impacts. Indicators related to forests and poverty in particular face
        challenges related to attribution, with project interventions assuming that supporting SFM would lead to benefits for
        the poor without clearly articulating a theory of change as to how such interventions would deliver these benefits.
        Additionally, indicators related to poverty alleviation are often imperfect measures of whether projects reach the
        poor and most vulnerable (IEG 2013). TTLs also described challenges related to attribution and confounding factors in
        discussions. PPIs, however, are proposed as a means to at least partially address some of these challenges.

        One constraint described by several TTLs is the potential to have to restructure projects if the results framework changes,
        which then presents its own challenges. TTLs also pointed out that good indicators can be accompanied by inappropriate
        targets. In some cases, the lack of appropriate targets may mean that the project needs to be restructured, which again
        results in additional effort, resources, and time. This point underscores the importance of ensuring that potential PPIs
        are matched with clear targets that can be adapted to the project context.

        Additional constraints highlighted by TTLs include the importance of ensuring that institutions and incentives are in place to
        continue to support behavioral change after project completion; TTL turnover, which results in limited responsibility of TTLs
        for the success of their former projects; and the importance of ensuring that indicators can be used or adapted across projects
        and time periods. TTLs also noted that the limited availability of internal World Bank technical expertise on M&E can be a
        constraint to using more appropriate or innovative indicators. Broad policy-level engagement beyond the project level was
        also recommended to facilitate the integration and mainstreaming of data collection, including in national statistics agencies.

        Finally, the cost and feasibility of collecting data, including baseline data, is an important consideration in the selection
        and use of predictive proxy indicators. There is a need, for example, to share surveys and other data collection instruments
        that may have relevance across multiple operations and contain questions that yield data on key indicators, including
        PPIs. While this review, and future efforts, can help to identify good indicators and potential PPIs, such work must also
        consider the relative cost of measuring, tracking, and reporting on the indicators over time.

        4. It is important to note that this incentive structure is not unique to the World Bank but rather representative of development projects in general and the pressure faced by project staff to
        produce results during project periods.
52   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     6. Guidance on Using Proxies

     The results presented in this report suggest that single indicator predictive proxies are likely few and far between. Instead,
     clusters of indicators taken together are more likely to be effective in providing information about potential future
     impacts. It is worth noting, however, that some indicators do seem to be more effective on their own or in combination
     than others, including in many cases the CSIs for forestry and other sectors. Specific guidance on the clusters of potential
     PPIs identified to date is provided in the preceding sections.

     Discussions with World Bank M&E and other technical experts further highlighted potential factors to consider when
     developing proxy indicators, including suggestions on criteria for selecting PPIs and looking beyond World Bank projects
     for examples of proxy indicators.

     As noted earlier, this review did not find any well-accepted criteria to guide the selection of proxy indicators. Consequently,
     PPIs were identified and evaluated using the SMART criteria, theories of change, and expert guidance. The process of
     developing potential predictive proxies has led to innovation in how such proxies may be identified moving forward.
     Specifically, we propose a complement to the well-known SMART criteria for use in assessing potential predictive proxy
     indicators—the FOREST criteria:5

     •	 Focused: the suggested PPI is part of a specific, well-developed theory of change and can be described in a results
        chain
     •	 Outcome-oriented: the suggested PPI seeks to provide information on longer-term outcomes
     •	 Replicable/reliable: the suggested PPI is appropriate for use in different locations and time periods
     •	 Evidence-based: the suggested PPI is developed based on evidence from research and/or practice (qualitative and/
        or quantitative) and can be confirmed in longer-term studies
     •	 Short-term: change in the suggested PPI is discernable and measurable in the near term (typically within two to four
        years) as well as over time while linking to the stated long-term objective
     •	 Timeless: the suggested PPI can be achieved at any given point in time and still link to the stated long-term objective

     The above criteria highlight suggested components that can be used to identify or evaluate potential PPIs. To ensure that
     a given PPI is as effective as possible, it should meet each of these criteria, similar to guidance on the SMART criteria.
     A key first step in considering how PPIs can be used in projects is to develop a results chain and a theory of change
     explaining how activities are expected to lead to outputs, outcomes, and eventual impacts. This report includes three
     illustrative examples of results chains for cluster indicators on poverty and climate. While two indicators in PPI clusters
     are IO indicators, the results chains show that the majority of proposed PPIs are outcome indicators and fall on the right
     hand side of the results chain. It is notable that, depending on the focus of a given intervention, governance indicators
     may be either IO indicators or outcome indicators, as found more generally in a recent review of World Bank forest
     governance interventions (Kishor and de Rijk 2014).




     5. Special thanks to Anders Jensen for this creative formulation and stimulating discussion on the specific criteria included in it.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                       53




        Future work on the identification and use of PPIs should investigate further whether most PPIs are in fact outcome
        indicators or if additional IO PPIs would be beneficial. Regardless of whether PPIs are outcome indicators or intermediate
        indicators, good M&E practice—including early establishment of baselines and tracking and reporting on indicators—will
        be needed from the beginning of any project, program, or policy. In addition, potential sources of data for measuring the
        indicators should be carefully considered in their formulation. Finally, where possible, PPIs should be conceptualized
        and worded quantitatively with specific targets.

        Two indicators appear in multiple PPI clusters and are worth highlighting here as indicators that many more forestry
        projects may wish to consider including in their M&E frameworks: first, secure tenure and property rights and, second,
        sustainable financing mechanisms to take project activities forward. This review has highlighted the importance and
        predictive potential of these two indicators. Consequently, they are recommended at minimum for use as stand-alone
        indicators where appropriate as well as part of a cluster of indicators.

        Finally, as highlighted throughout the report and elsewhere, it is critical that the development of predictive proxy
        indicators be cost-effective. The World Bank has already indicated its commitment to the cost-effective development and
        implementation of such indicators (IEG 2013). The findings on predictive proxy indicators in this report should contribute to
        the further development of this wider World Bank effort as well as more generally in and beyond the forest sector.
54   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     7. C o n c l u s i o n

     7.1 Summary of Key Findings
     This review aimed to increase understanding on the potential of short-term proxy indicators for longer-term impacts
     of forest sector investments and how they may be used in practice. The findings suggest the existence of potential
     proxy indicators within World Bank forests projects as well as other sources. The review also demonstrated an increased
     interest and focus among World Bank staff in M&E and the development of robust indicators to track and measure project
     achievements. This interest underscores the critical importance of careful work to identify a set of PPIs that can be used
     by World Bank staff in future projects. The proposed indicator menu, included as Annex F, is a first step at identifying
     such indicators, illustrating the conditions under which such indicators have been used, and providing guidance on their
     use. The proposed PPI clusters represent an additional step in identifying such indicators.

     As noted in section 6, secure tenure and property rights and sustainable financing emerged as two indicators that
     are recommended for inclusion as part of a cluster or used as stand-alone indicators. This finding is consistent with
     the IEG’s evaluation of the World Bank’s forest strategy, which highlights shifts in the ownership and management
     of forests and underscores the importance of equitable, efficient ownership and management of forests (IEG 2013).
     As reforms transfer forest ownership and management rights to communities and individuals, indicators related to
     secure tenure and property rights are likely to emerge as helpful in predicting the long-term outcomes of forest
     investments. Similarly, as this review highlighted, predictable, sustainable financing is essential to ensure continued
     efforts after project completion.

     This report has also demonstrated improvements in project M&E and indicators over time in forest-related investments
     at the World Bank, based on increased emphasis on M&E and on tracking and evaluating progress on indicators in
     more recent project ICRs compared with project PCRs or earlier ICRs. The analysis showed a positive association
     between the quality of project M&E and project outcome ratings. As project M&E scores increased by category, project
     outcome rating scores increased by one-half a rating category, a finding that underscores the potentially high return
     of investments in project M&E.

     Though rooted primarily in the experience of World Bank forestry investments, this work has broader relevance beyond
     the Bank and beyond the sector. Indicators can play a key role in galvanizing support for focused action on particular
     topics, as shown by the attention of governments, donor agencies, and others on achieving the Millennium Development
     Goals and their associated targets and indicators. As the international community turns its attention to the development
     and implementation of the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals, targets and indicators are likely to play a key
     communications role. Predictive proxy indicators in particular could help to make the case for the likely impacts of
     forestry investments beyond the forestry sector, including on climate mitigation, environmental protection, jobs and
     income, and other areas.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                   55




        7.2 Taking This Work Forward
        There are multiple avenues for effectively taking this work forward. First, there is a need to empirically test the PPIs identified
        through this review. An important component in identifying robust proxy indicators to track and assess the impacts of forest-related
        financing is to validate them empirically to assess their predictive capacity. Few institutions collect post-project data in a systematic
        way, which represents a challenge in evaluating project success and indicators over time. For instance, Buch and colleagues searched
        for post-project evaluations completed by members of the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic
        Co-operation and Development and found that “only the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) has a program in place
        to monitor the impacts of its projects following completion” (Buch, Buntaine, and Parks 2015: 29). There are administrative and
        financial constraints to collecting such data, but it would be useful to explore ways to do so based on existing examples.

        In the absence of such systematic post-project data tracking, it is possible to collect data on key indicators using
        historical data in order to conduct retroactive analysis. A challenging, but key next step in work on this topic will be
        to identify and analyze post-project data to evaluate a select number of projects and indicators over time. This kind
        of analysis might draw inspiration from studies from other fields that can suggest paths for moving forward on the
        development and implementation of PPIs. In the field of paleoclimatology, for instance, proxy indicators are used to
        construct a “window back in time,” to show changes in climate variability over a 400-year period (Mann, Bradley, and
        Hughes 1998) or to reconstruct the makeup of forests and aquatic environments (Deforce, Storme, and Bastiaens 2014).

        Out of the 80 projects included in this review, 26 projects specifically mentioned follow-up projects that were expected
        to continue to work toward the project’s general objectives. Six projects were part of a series of projects included in
        the review. These project ICRs could be used to remeasure project results over time. External sources might include
        academic articles or other publications that are likely to contain data on project outcomes and results after the project’s
        official completion. For example, the Ecomarkets project (P061314 and P52009) in Costa Rica resulted in several formal
        evaluations after the project’s completion that could be used to remeasure results. Several other datasets on relevant
        outcomes are also now available, including from Buch, Buntaine, and Parks (2015) on institutional variables, the World
        Bank’s Living Standards Measurement Studies, and Global Forest Watch.

        A second phase of this work may include development of short a short guidance note, other tailored communications outputs, and
        trainings based on the report and the indicator menu, with the aim of helping World Bank and other donor project staff, country
        clients, and other relevant partners incorporate proxy indicators into project design and carry out other activities identified through
        portfolio review to build capacity to assess impacts in the forest sector. Discussions with World Bank TTLs and partner colleagues,
        including the Food and Agriculture Organization, the Center for International Forestry Research, and the International Union for
        Conservation of Nature, along with the new World Bank corporate strategy, the IEG forestry evaluation, and CODE report, suggest
        strong demand for such efforts. The results will be integrated into the forthcoming World Bank Forest Action Plan. They can also be
        incorporated into ongoing efforts to develop “typical” results chains for the forestry sector and more generally in the context of
        landscape approaches. Innovative use of technology should also be explored in efforts to identify, test, and implement PPIs (see,
        e.g., World Bank 2013). Within the context of the World Bank, the PPIs identified here might also inform future efforts to take stock
        of the performance of the CSIs as well as parallel indicator development efforts such as ongoing work on climate-smart agriculture
        indicators and the nascent activity on results monitoring and impact evaluation for resilience-building operations (P155632).

        Substantively, there is a particular need to develop additional PPIs focused on poverty reduction, economic growth, and
        shared prosperity in relation to forests. Such analysis should consider how such outcomes and their indicators relate to
        environmental sustainability indicators (on climate change and biodiversity, for example) and also indicators from other
        sectors relevant in a landscape perspective. Finally, further analytical work should explore the “portability” or external
        validity of PPIs, investigating specifically if and how context matters in shaping the effectiveness of the indicators.
56   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Annex A: Data and Methods

     Identifying World Bank Forestry Projects for Review
     Prior to beginning the review, a workshop was held with World Bank staff and other experts in June 2014 to share
     experience on previous and ongoing portfolio reviews of investments in agriculture and climate, biodiversity, and forests
     and to develop a data collection strategy and identify possible data sources for the review. Participants underscored the
     substantial time required to adequately review projects. Given resource availability, the review focused on a subset of
     projects from the World Bank forest portfolio rather than the entire portfolio.

     The review began by identifying the full universe of projects that could be considered for analysis. In total, the Bank
     has committed more than $6.2 billion (in current U.S. dollars) to 414 projects coded as forestry since 1950. This study
     examined projects that closed from 1991, the year the Global Environment Facility (GEF) was established, to 2013, the
     last year for which project evaluation data were available. This study period allows variation in lag times between project
     completion and the present, with the aim of forming a potential basis for analysis of the persistence of project outcomes
     as a potential next step in this work. Projects were excluded if forestry represented less than 5 percent of the sector
     focus. In addition, some projects could not be included in the review because the ICRs or the PCRs were not available. This
     process resulted in a universe of 204 World Bank forestry projects.

     Resources were sufficient to enable review of 80 of the 204 possible projects. Projects were selected for inclusion in the
     following manner. First, all projects in the top 11 countries receiving World Bank financing in terms of forest area and/or
     prominence of forest biodiversity were chosen. These countries are: Brazil, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Democratic
     Republic of the Congo, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Mexico, Peru, and the Russian Federation. This focus ensured a
     full sample of the World Bank’s forest portfolio in these countries, or 48 projects. India (n=16) and China (n=10) had the
     largest number of projects included in the review (see Figure A1).

     Next, 32 projects were randomly selected from the remaining universe of projects in the portfolio. Project selection was
     weighted by region so that regions with a proportionately higher number of projects were proportionately represented
     within the review. In addition, at least two projects were selected from each region. This resulted in an additional 14
     projects from Sub-Saharan Africa (AFR); 2 projects from the Middle East and North Africa (MENA); 5 projects from Europe
     and Central Asia (ECA); 4 projects from East Asia and the Pacific (EAP); 4 projects from Latin America and the Caribbean
     (LAC); and 3 projects from South Asia (SAR).
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                          57




        FIGURE A1: REPRESENTATION OF HIGH-FOREST COUNTRIES

        20

                                                                              16
        15

                            10
        10

                                                                                                                6
                 5
         5
                                                                                            3
                                                                  2                                                     2
                                              1         1                                           1                             1
         0
               Brazil      China         Colombia Costa Rica     DRC         India    Indonesia Madagascar    Mexico   Peru    Russian
                                                                                                                              Federation



        Overall, including the projects from high-forest countries and the randomly selected projects, the majority of projects
        are from Latin America and the Caribbean, South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and East Asia and the Pacific, with a smaller
        number of projects from the Europe and Central Asia and Middle East and North Africa regions (see Figure A2).

        FIGURE A2: REGIONAL REPRESENTATION OF PROJECTS REVIEWED


        20                                                             19                           19
                     17             17

        15


        10
                                                       6
         5
                                                                                      2

         0
                 Africa           East Asia       Europe and           LAC           MENA        South Asia
                                 and Paciﬁc       Central Asia




        Data Collection
        ICRs were used for all projects for which they were available. It is important to note that the information included in PCRs
        is not as comprehensive as the information included in present day ICRs; for instance, data on M&E were often missing,
        and some PCRs did not rate the project’s overall performance or only included qualitative descriptions of World Bank
        and Borrower performance rather than the quantitative ranking scale used in ICRs. Further, the more recent ICRs tend to
        include a higher focus on PDOs and indicators than earlier ICRs did.
58   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Descriptive Information on Projects Reviewed

     Project Closing Date
     Projects included in the review closed between 1991 and 2013. The most recent project included in the review is the Energy
     Access Project (P049395) in Ethiopia, which was approved on September 19, 2002, and closed on June 30, 2013, and is the only
     project that closed after 2010. Several projects closed in 1991, including two from India, one from Malaysia, and one from China.

     Several of the projects represent the World Bank’s first intervention in the forestry sector in that country, including projects
     in China, India, and Indonesia. These projects include the West Bengal Social Forestry Project (P010391) in India, the Sabah
     Forestry Technical Assistance Project (P004292) in Malaysia, and the Forestry Development Project (P003430) in China.

     The review also included some projects that represent the first intervention by the GEF in that country, such as the Cape
     Peninsula Biodiversity Conservation Project (P035923) in South Africa. The Table Mountain Fund, established by the
     project, is considered to be a model trust fund to support biodiversity and conservation in the area, while the development
     of the Cape Strategy is considered to be an international best practice.


     Project Budget
     A total of $5,884.28 million was disbursed across 60 projects, with project budgets ranging from $0.9 million for the
     Rural Environment Project (P066199) in Azerbaijan to $1,300 million for the First Programmatic Development Policy Loan
     for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL; P095205) in Brazil. It was not possible to calculate the disbursed
     amount in U.S. dollars for 20 projects.

     The majority of projects disbursed a lower amount than their original commitment amount: 47 of the project budgets did not disburse
     their full commitment, 22 projects disbursed their full commitment amount, and 5 projects increased their budget amounts.6

     It is important to note that some projects appear to have had decreased budgets, although the actual project budget increased
     as a result of fluctuating exchange rates, which makes it appear as though project budgets decreased when they actually
     increased. For instance, the original commitment amount for the Third Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Project (AP Irrigation III;
     P035158) was $477.43 million and the final disbursed amount was $421.87 million. However, the ICR explains that the actual
     project costs increased by about 9.5 percent but that, because the rupee-to-dollar exchange rate changed during project
     implementation, the project costs just appear to be lower. Two other projects carried out in India, the National Social Forestry
     Project (P009848) and the Kerala Social Forestry Project (P009834), also appear to have experienced a decrease in their
     total budget amount because their PCRs report a lower disbursement rate in dollars; however, the overall project cost in
     rupees for both projects increased even though the projects spent less than predicted in dollars.

     Another challenge in estimating project disbursement amount is the inconsistency between reporting project costs in
     U.S. dollars and the Special Drawing Rate (SDR/XDR). In some cases, project documents do not report commitment and
     disbursed amounts in both US dollars and SDR, which makes it more difficult to compare project costs across the range
     of projects included in this review. Furthermore, some project documents, particularly the PCRs and earlier ICRs do not
     include disbursement amounts. Finally, budget amounts on the World Bank project website and the project ICRs were not
     always consistent; in cases where the amounts varied, the ICR was used.

     6. It was not possible to calculate the difference between commitment and disbursed amounts for six projects because complete budget information was not available.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      59




        Project Lending Type
        As shown in Figure A3, most projects included in the review were Specific Investment Loans (n=61).

                                LIL 1
                        SAL 3           TAL 1


                     SIM 4


                DPL 7
                                                      SIL 61




        The majority of the projects were classified under environmental category B (n=43).7 (See Figure A4.) Older projects
        often did not include an environmental category, which is why 20 projects are listed as N/A.


                                         A-3


                     N/A-20



                                                     B-43
               U-5

                      C-9




        Project Outcome Rating
        The majority of projects included in the review received a satisfactory rating as described in the main text. Eight projects
        received highly satisfactory ratings:

        •	 Water Conservation Project in China (P056516), which closed on June 30, 2006
        •	 Second Loess Plateau Watershed Rehabilitation Project in China (P056216), which closed on June 30, 2005
        •	 Cape Peninsula Biodiversity Conservation Project in South Africa (P036062), which closed on June 20, 2005


        7. The World Bank assigns projects a category of A, B, or C, in descending order of environmental and social sensitivity.
60   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     •	 Sustainable and Participatory Energy Management Project (PROGEDE) in Senegal (P046768), which closed on
        December 31, 2004
     •	 Nature Reserves Management Project in China (P003402), which closed on June 30, 2002
     •	 Andhra Pradesh Forestry project in India (P010449), which closed on September 20, 2002
     •	 Tarim Basin Project in China (P003556), which closed on December 31, 1997
     •	 National Afforestation Project (NAP) in China (P003463), which closed on December 31, 1997.

     Eight projects received unsatisfactory ratings:

     •	   Rural Environment Project in Azerbaijan (P066199), which closed on December 31, 2009
     •	   Forest Concession Management and Control Pilot Project in Cambodia (P060003), which closed on December 31, 2005
     •	   Forests and Parks Protection Technical Assistance Project in Haiti P007326, which closed on December 31, 2001
     •	   Solomon Islands Structural Adjustment Credit (P061214), which closed on December 31, 2000
     •	   Environmental Conservation and Rehabilitation Project (CVRD) in Brazil (P006512), which closed on June 30, 2000
     •	   Forest Management and Protection Project In Madagascar (P001518), which closed on January 31, 1996
     •	   Second Forestry Institutions and Conservation Project (FICP II) in Indonesia (P003942), which closed on June 20, 1995
     •	   Second Forestry Project in Nepal (P010192), which closed on June 20, 1992.


     Project Type
     To gain an understanding of the main focus of projects included in the review, PDOs were coded as focusing primarily on
     biodiversity conservation, climate change adaptation and mitigation, good governance, poverty (including the concepts
     of economic growth and shared prosperity), or equally on biodiversity and poverty. Overall, the majority of PDOs (n=44,
     or 56 percent) focused on governance, followed by biodiversity (n=16, or 8 percent) and poverty (n=13, or 16 percent). 8

     The overwhelming majority of GEOs (n=10, or 83 percent) focused on biodiversity compared with climate (n=1),
     governance (n=1), and poverty (n=0), as shown in Figure A5.

              Intitutions 8%



            Climate 9%




                          Biodiversity 83%




     8. One project only included a GEO and no PDO and so was not coded.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                           61




        The project’s area or sector focus was also coded to illustrate the additional range of issues addressed by projects, including
        biodiversity, climate, energy, forests, governance, land, poverty, and water/irrigation. These results are shown in Figure A6.

                              Energy 3%   Other 1%


                                                               Climate 1%
                                           Biodiversity 15%


                        Intitutions 30%

                                                     Forest 24%




                                Poverty 15%
        Water/irrigation 5%
                                                     Land 6%

        In addition, we noted when projects focused on participation (n=30), protected areas (PAs) (n=15), or reforestation (n=4).


        Assessment and Validation of Indicators
        Following the data collection process, all project indicators were evaluated according to the SMART (specific, measurable,
        attributable, realistic, and time-bound) criteria, using a Likert scale from 1 to 5. Indicators were also rated for their
        potential as proxies using the same scale. Indicators were also coded into one of five categories based on their overall
        long-term outcome: poverty alleviation (including economic growth and shared prosperity), biodiversity conservation,
        climate change mitigation, governance, and other.

        The SMART criteria (World Bank 2014a: 7) used to evaluate indicators are as follows:

        •	 Specific means that the indicator measures only the design element (output or outcome), which is intended for
           measurement—not any other elements in the project. For example, if the target output is to construct 20 wells, the
           specific indicator to be measured will be the number of wells constructed.
        •	 Measurable means that there are practical ways of measuring the indicator, being clear and unambiguous in terms of what
           is being measured (for instance, the indicator should avoid words like successful unless it is possible to define exactly what
           successful would mean in the project context). For quantitative proportions or percentages, both the numerator and the
           denominator must be clearly defined. For quantitative whole numbers and qualitative data, a measurable indicator should
           define each term within the indicator such that there can be no misunderstanding as to the meaning of that indicator. This
           criterion is critical for ensuring that data collected by different people at different times are consistent and comparable.
        •	 Attributable means that the indicator is a valid measure of the targeted developmental issue and that the project can
           be credited for the changes in that developmental issue.
        •	 Realistic means that indicators selected must be realistic in terms of their ability to collect the data with the available
           resources. Some indicators present major problems for data collection owing to the cost or skills required (such as
           large-scale sample surveys). Being realistic in planning and identifying collectable information ensures that it will,
           in fact, be collected. This is an important factor to consider and may lead to compromises on other criteria.
        •	 Time-bound has several connotations. First, indicators must be time-bound in terms of the time spent in data
           collection. Second, indicators must reflect the timing of collection, being cognizant of seasonal differences. Third,
           the time lag between activities, outputs, and outcomes must also be reflected in the indicators that are chosen.
62   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Box A1 provides illustrative examples of how the SMART coding system was applied to sample indicators.


        BOX A1. APPLICATION OF SMART CRITERIA

        The following are illustrative examples of how the SMART coding system was applied to three sample indicators, including one of
        the highest and lowest scoring indicators and a relatively highly scoring indicator.

        EXAMPLE 1
        Project: Forests and Rural Productivity Project in Honduras (P064914)
        Indicator: Tenure of at least 30 percent of the occupants in national lands in the project area regularized through formal, long-
        term usufruct agreements or title developed with the assistance of the project
        Target: 150,000 ha; revised to 7,700
        Score: 29 = 5 for specific +5 for measurable + 5 for attributable +5 for realistic + 5 for timebound + 4 for proxy potential
        Notes: This indicator, one of three indicators that received a score of 29, the highest awarded, is specific in its aim and clearly
        links results to actions by the project in the project area. It is also able to be measured and is realistic. Although it does not include
        specific dates or timeframes, it still received a high score on the timebound criteria because it can be assumed that the indicator
        is expected to be achieved within the project timeframe because the title is expected to be developed with project assistance. All of
        these factors contributed to a high proxy potential.

        EXAMPLE 2
        Project: Ecomarkets Project in Costa Rica (P061314 [GEF CR-Ecomarkets] and P52009 [Ecomarkets Projects])
        Indicator: Establishment of a financial instrument to support easements targeting biodiversity conservation in Costa Rica by EOP
        Target: Development of revenue capture mechanisms, including establishment of a trust fund to finance contracts targeting
        biodiversity conservation beyond the life of the project
        Score: 24 = 5 for specific +4 for measurable + 4 for attributable + 4 for realistic + 3 for timebound + 4 for proxy potential
        Notes: This indicator is slightly lower on four criteria and is an example of a strong indicator that scored poorly on one criterion,
        resulting in a lower score. The indicator is specific in its aims, which makes it measurable and realistic, and is somewhat
        attributable to the project but it is not timebound, a common limitation among indicators. The concept of ensuring revenue beyond
        the timeframe of a project is an important one for long-term sustainability, which resulted in the indicator’s high score of 4 for
        proxy potential.

        EXAMPLE 3
        Project: Madhya Pradesh Forestry Project in India (P010506)
        Indicator: Promote conservation of biodiversity: 1) Improved protected area management; 2) Policy framework for ecodevelopment
        Target: None, although it includes notes about the pre-project situation (Threatened biodiversity in protected area; No policy
        framework for eco-development)
        Score: 14 = 2 for specific + 2 for measurable + 3 for attributable + 2 for realistic + 3 for timebound + 2 for proxy potential
        Notes: This indicator, one of two indicators that received a score of 14, the lowest score awarded, is vague and lacks specificity
        on what would constitute improved management and what the policy framework should include, which also makes it hard to
        measure. The indicator does not include any project attribution, such as suggesting that the project would contribute to improved
        management through particular activities. Based on all of these limitations, the indicator is considered to be unrealistic. It also
        lacks information addressing the timebound criteria. It is important to note that many indicators lacked specific details on project
        attribution and timebound criteria and so a score of 3 was considered quite low. The indicator’s low score on all of these criteria
        also resulted in a low score for its proxy potential.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                        63




        After ranking each indicator based on the above criteria, the indicators were sorted from high to low scores to examine
        the distribution of scores across indicators. This distribution and related findings are included in the results section.

        Working criteria for scoring each indicator’s potential as a predictive proxy were developed. In addition to scoring highly
        on the SMART criteria, to be judged as having potential as a predictive proxy the indicator had to meet the following
        minimum requirement:

        •	 The indicator implied a plausible theory of change explaining why it is likely to accurately predict a desired future
           change or state resulting at least in part from a given intervention. A theory of change is a logical description of how
           a given intervention or change process is expected to lead to longer-term outcomes and impacts. Its distinguishing
           feature is an explicit articulation of assumptions thought to connect specific steps to achievement of longer-term
           goals (Schorr and Weiss 1995). For instance, a sustainable financing indicator may be a predictive proxy based on
           a theory of change that arrangements for funding a given intervention over time imply that the intervention will be
           implemented even after project closure, with the assumption that it will continue to generate positive impacts. This
           indicator implies that the necessary funding is secured for a given period of time, that institutional arrangements are
           in place to allocate the funds, and that the use of the funds is effective.

        Two additional criteria were also used:

        •	 Active stakeholder support—The indicator suggests “buy-in” by those whose behavior a given intervention wishes
           to influence such that desired behavior appears likely to persist after the intervention has finished (for example,
           incentives exist for a given action or behavior independent of project funding). Such indicators may relate to the
           strength of forest user groups, social capital or cohesion, and various forms of participation, among others.
        •	 Change in behavior or capacity—The indicator measures a change in capacity to implement actions related to a given
           intervention or a change in behavior to support the intervention’s actions. Examples include an indicator measuring
           an increase in capacity to carry out forest management by a forest department or forest user group or one that
           measures a reduction of community reliance on resources inside a protected area.

        Following our coding of indicators in the World Bank forestry portfolio based on these criteria and a discussion of results in
        various forums, a more comprehensive set of criteria for robust predictive proxy indicators was developed (see section 6).

        Twenty-seven projects included at least one PDO indicator. The number of PDO indicators included in projects ranged
        from 1 to 26, with an average of 6.41 PDO indicators per project. Five projects included 10 or more PDO indicators:

        •	 The MX Programmatic EnvSAL (First Programmatic Environment Structural Adjustment Loan (EnvSAL I; P074539) and
           Second Progammatic Environment Development Policy Loan (EnvDPL II; P079748) in Mexico had 26 PDO indicators.
        •	 The Water Conservation Project (P056516) in China included 16 PDO indicators.
        •	 The Daxinganling Forest Fire Rehabilitation Project (P003550) in China had 12 PDO indicators.
        •	 Forests and Rural Productivity Project (P064914) in Honduras included 11 PDO indicators.
        •	 The First Programmatic Development Policy Loan for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL; P095205)
           included 10 PDO indicators.

        Eleven projects included a GEO indicator, with a range from one to eight indicators per project. Four projects included one
        GEO indicator. The Consolidation of the Protected Areas System Project (SINAP II; P065988) in Mexico included eight GEO
        indicators. In the distribution of PDO indicators according to the SMART criteria, the majority of the indicators (n=80, or
        45 percent) received scores between 21 and 23.
64   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Examples of High-Scoring Projects
     Out of the highly satisfactory projects included in the review, only the Water Conservation project (P056516) in China used
     PDOs and IOs. The remaining seven highly satisfactory projects all used outcome/impact indicators and output indicators.

     The Water Conservation project (P056516) in China included 16 PDOs and 28 IOs, a higher than average number of
     indicators that is in contrast with World Bank advice that fewer indicators are preferable. However, the PDOs were all
     similarly worded, with several of the PDOs only varying by the province in which they were measured, which means
     that the number of substantially different PDOs was much smaller. The PDOs focused on increased grain or cash crop
     production and increased annual farmer incomes in the project provinces. The PDOs received a score of 26 on the SMART
     and PPI criteria, scoring high on the specific and measurable quality. The poverty-focused PDO indicators were noted
     as potentially cost and resource-intensive to measure. The PDOs scored low for their proxy potential, receiving either
     a 2 or a 3, because it was not clear that an increase in grain crop production would lead to longer-term impacts and
     sustainability of achievements.

     The remainder of this section briefly highlights examples of indicators that scored high on the SMART criteria and illustrates
     limitations of some indicators. It also shows how some projects revised indicators to make them more measurable.


     Specific
     Under this criterion, indicators that used terms like increase without specifying the amount of desired increase or the
     desired percentage were rated lower. For instance, the Maharashtra Forestry Project (P010390) in India included the as
     indicators improved biodiversity conservation and improved forest sector management. The failure to specify what the
     desired increase is makes it more difficult to measure if the target is achieved.

     Similarly, words like improved, effective, or sustainable are qualitative in nature and will result in a qualitative evaluation.
     One such example is the indicator to improve the system of forestry education in research and academic institutions, from
     the Forestry Research Education and Extension project (P010448) in India. It aims for improvement without specifying
     how it will be achieved and without specifying metrics on which to evaluate improvement.

     One IO indicator illustrates a similar challenge with the term effective. This IO, creation of effective community
     organizations, with the target (formation of 4,393 area groups; 6,648 self-help groups; and 742 watershed societies)
     from the Karnataka Watershed Development project (P067216) in India does not define effective organizations, which
     makes it less specific and less measurable. The indicator otherwise would have been rated higher, especially because it
     includes a specific number of desired groups as the target.

     An indicator from the Madhya Pradesh Forestry project (P010506) in India shows how the term effective can be elaborated
     upon to be more specific by suggesting what an effective system would entail: area of forestland with effective protection
     system in place, reducing social erosion, improving moisture control, and reducing high pressure on biodiversity. By
     elaborating upon the term effective with specific actions, the indicator shows how the project envisions an effective
     protection system.

     Similarly, the term “success” resulted in a lower score for indicators that did not clearly define it. Examples include a
     GEO indicator from the Consolidation of the Protected Areas Project (SINAP II; P065988) in Mexico: number of projects
     successfully implemented, which does not suggest what the project envisions for “successful” implementation.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                     65




        The Maloti-Drakensberg Transfrontier Conservation and Development project (P052368) in South Africa includes as an
        IO the institutional development of the four conservation agencies that enables them to implement the transfrontier
        plan, which suggests how the concept of capacity building can be specific and attributable.


        Measurable
        Some indicators scored very high on the measurability criterion. One such indicator is a GEO indicator from the
        Consolidation of the Protected Areas System Project (SINAP II; P065988) in Mexico: trends in the rate of habitat
        conversion in PAs included in the project, with the target that 70 percent of the PAs had a reduction in habitat conversion
        from 2002 to 2009, as measured by remote sensing technology. This target is unique in saying it will be measured via
        remote sensing; by including the target on the desired rate of reduction, the indicator becomes more specific. Further,
        the indicator stands out for including a time frame.

        Another GEO indicator from this project (P065988) also has the potential to predict long-term impact: trends in the
        frequency of observations of indicator species selected for each area, with the target that the frequency of observation
        for the majority of indicator species monitored under the project 12 PAs has either increased or remained constant. This
        indicator is also an example of an indicator that local people may be able to collect.

        Two examples highlight how indicators can be revised to become more measurable. The Tanzania Forest Conservation
        and Management project in the Eastern Arc Forestry Conservation and Development project P057234 (and P058706)
        first included as an indicator that forest and woodland cover is brought under effective management by community and
        individuals in project areas. In 2007, at the mid-term review (MTR) the indicator wording was changed, with the aim of
        increasing the measurability of the project. It was revised to the area of forests on Tanzania Mainland managed according
        to approved forest management plans (including community-based forest management (CBFM) and JFM). This makes
        the indicator more clear and specific as well as increasing its similarity to a forest Core Sector Indicator (CSI).

        The project also reworded the indicator “private sector is involved in forest plantation management” to “area of forest
        plantations under private management agreement (hectares),” which is much clearer, more specific, and measurable.


        Attributable
        Overall, indicators tended to score lower on the attribution criterion. Indicators did not regularly make a link between
        project action and desired outcomes and failed to illustrate how the project could be credited for the change described in
        the indicator. Because few projects addressed this criterion, a score of 3 represented a low score.

        One exception is the indicator from the Madhya Pradesh Forestry Project (P010506) in India, in which PAs were assisted
        by project-supported eco-development committees, which scored highly on project attribution because it clearly aims
        to measure PAs that are assisted by the project.
66   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Realistic
     Most indicators scored relatively high on the realistic criterion, although a few were ambitious in their targets, making
     them less realistic. One such example is from the Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Program (DPO-
     1: P102971; DPO-2: P113172; DPO-3: P118188) in Ghana, which included an indicator to strengthen institutions and
     governance in the forestry sector. The original target was 100 percent of timber exports verified as legal. Although
     this target was later revised to a 10 percent increase in legal wood supply to domestic markets and the first Forest Law
     Enforcement Governance and Trade license issued, the original aim of achieving 100 percent verification was likely too
     ambitious, so the indicator received a lower score on the realistic criterion.


     Time-bound
     Indicators generally scored low on the time-bound criterion, with the overwhelming majority of them typically not
     including a specific time frame. Consequently, most indicators received a 3 for time-bound, while those that did
     include a time frame received a score of 5. One such indicator, from the First Programmatic Development Policy Loan
     for Sustainable Environmental Management (SEM DPL) (P095205) in Brazil, is improved effectiveness of government
     agencies in implementing mandated Brazilian environmental and social management procedures, indicated by the
     number of environmental licenses issued per year at the federal level. By including the “per year” timeframe, the
     indicator received a high score on time-bound.

     The Ecomarkets Project (P061314 [GEF CR-Ecomarkets] and P52009 [Ecomarkets Projects]) in Costa Rica included
     several time-bound indicators, specifying that the indicator should be achieved by the end of the project period. These
     indicators included 100,000 hectares of land contracted as conservation easements in priority areas by end of program
     (EOP); a 30 percent increase in the participation of women land owners and women’s organizations in the Environmental
     Services Program (ESP) by EOP; and a 100 percent increase in the participation of indigenous communities in the ESP
     program by EOP. The inclusion of a time frame for these indicators resulted in high scores on the time-bound criterion.

     One project that incorporated a time frame included an indicator with a time frame after the project completion date.
     The Sustainable Forestry Development Project (P064729) and Sustainable Forestry Development Project (Natural Forest
     Protection; P060029) in China includes as the PDO indicator that the project generates 13.3 million cubic meters of
     timber and 2.73 million tons of bamboo by December 31, 2025, and RMB 1.1 billion net income from fruit tree crops by
     2022. Although this indicator received a high score for including a time frame, the indicator is not an ideal example of
     a time-bound indicator because the results are expected after the project completion date, which makes it impossible
     to measure within the project time frame—and therefore unrealistic. At the same time, a good predictive proxy indicator
     aims to capture such forward thinking.
      
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      67




        Annex B. Exploring Potential PPIs in
        Knowledge Programs: The Case of PROFOR 9

        Introduction
        Meeting the growing demand for rigorous evidence of what works and what does not in international development generally
        and in the forestry sector specifically is especially challenging when it comes to knowledge programs. The causal chain
        linking specific knowledge-related activities, including production of reports and other knowledge products and facilitating
        dialogue and exchange, to ultimate impacts on people and the environment is typically long, tortuous, and uncertain. In the
        vast majority of cases, attributing such impacts directly to knowledge-related activities will not be possible.

        For this reason, applied knowledge organizations in the forest sector such as CIFOR, IUCN, PROFOR, and others have
        increasingly sought to identify their contribution to outcomes rather than seeking attribution. PROFOR has thus focused
        its M&E efforts at the intermediate and end-of-activity outcome level while developing plausible narratives about how
        knowledge-related work contributes to broader development impacts. Given this, potential predictive proxy indicators
        for PROFOR and similar knowledge-related programs were not sought linking analytical outputs and processes such
        as those produced through PROFOR activities through to ultimate development impacts. Rather, we sought to identify
        indicators that have potential to predict knowledge uptake. Here we report briefly on our approach to trying to identify
        such indicators and our results. We also provide some guidance for PROFOR and comparable programs searching for
        useful indicators or qualities of indicators to look for during an activity’s design phase.


        Methodology
        To gain insight into indicators used to date and potentially useful as predictive proxies in forest knowledge–related
        efforts we reviewed a subset of activities supported by PROFOR. We focused on activities approved during the period
        2008–14 given greater availability of necessary information on activity outputs, outcomes, and indicators. We randomly
        selected one or two activities for each of PROFOR’s four thematic areas (livelihoods, governance, financing sustainable
        forest management, and cross-sectoral coordination) per year. The total number of activities reviewed was 36.

        Once the sample of activities was selected, the indicators used by each activity were classified and analyzed using the
        SMART criteria as done for the review of World Bank projects. We also coded each indicator using two additional criteria:
        the extent to which it was broadly applicable and it may be a potential proxy for uptake. Each indicator was then given a
        score between 1 and 5 on each element of this “SMARTAP” framework, with 1 being the lowest and 5 the highest. Scores
        were then added to get the indicator’s total score, which was used to rank all indicators. The reasoning for scores was also
        given in each indicator’s Notes section to facilitate subsequent reviews of the dataset.

        Each indicator was also classified as an output indicator or an uptake indicator. As the name suggests, an output indicator
        refers to information on a given activity’s outputs whereas an uptake indicator supplies information on the use and
        application of outputs.

        9. This portion of the study was prepared by Selene Castillo and Daniel Miller.
68   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Results
     Table B1 provides basic information on the indicators reviewed from the PROFOR portfolio.

     TABLE B1: SUMMARY INFORMATION ON PROFOR INDICATORS REVIEWED
      Total number of activities reviewed                                36
      Total number of indicators classified                              112
      Average number of indicators/activity                              3
      Percentage of output indicators                                    28 percent
      Percentage of uptake indicators                                    72 percent

     From the list of 112 indicators, the top 20 percent (25 in all) was extracted and analyzed in more detail (see Table B2).

     Broadly speaking, more than half of the top indicators were associated with uptake (10) and dissemination (3). Uptake-
     related indicators included website hits, number of report downloads, literature citations, collaboration and advice requests,
     and monitoring uptake through progress reports. The outcomes associated with these uptake-related indicators included
     increased awareness, enhanced policy, and increased quality of knowledge. Dissemination was mentioned in the form of
     workshops and trainings; these dissemination-related indicators had as outcomes increased knowledge and capacity.

     Key findings from this review highlight the absence of an explicit theory of change that links outputs with outcomes in the
     majority of surveyed projects, the use of a publication or study as an indicator of achieving the activity’s expected outcome of
     improving forest policy without clearly describing the relationship between the study and improved forest policy, an assumption
     that delivering outputs will result in achieving outcomes, and confusion between definitions of outputs and outcomes.

     Some top scoring indicators that may be worth further consideration include:

     •	 Collaboration with government (for example, through the creation of a joint product). Broad outcome: Strengthened
        policy and increased capacity
     •	 Design and prioritization of client-sustained tools (that is, the client helps in the design of the tool and then takes
        over implementation and upkeep). Broad outcome: Increased capacity
     •	 Written commitment to collaborate (that is, through a network). Broad outcome: Stronger network of practitioners
        with increased access to knowledge exchange
     •	 Meeting notes. Outcomes: Validation of the content and quality of a meeting; commitment to work together.

     Only two indicators emerged as strong potential candidates for providing credible information on post-project uptake:

     •	 Outputs or related dialogue from the project is included in another, independent piece of work (such as literature,
        policy, or external project design).

     Rationale and notes: This indicator provides a direct measure of uptake beyond the project itself. Although this appears
     to be an effective indicator, it provides a relatively high bar in that it will not always be possible for project results
     to be available during project implementation such that another project would use them before the end of the initial
     project. “Second-level” uptake of the original work beyond the initial other project (that is, use of the original work
     due to reference to it) will be more challenging to trace, particularly in the short time period of most applied knowledge
     activities. Citation and other search software may enable easier measure of this indicator at the end of a project and
     beyond, which can also help gauge broader uptake.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                       69




        •	 Written or unwritten agreement to do an activity proposed by the project (ssuch as work collaboratively, implement
           a tool, or share data)

        Rationale and notes: Such an agreement suggests a minimum level of uptake already with a commitment that should lead
        to deeper uptake and/or “second- level” uptake.

        Though other indicators of post-project uptake did not clearly emerge from this exercise, a theory-based approach,
        as taken in the analysis of operational investments, could be taken here. It is suggested that indicator clusters for
        project uptake might be identified using this approach. Special consideration should be given to considering how new
        technologies might better enable understanding of uptake—for example, looking at retweets on Twitter or citation
        analysis, among many possible others.


        Suggestions for Moving Forward
        In the majority of the activities reviewed, a theory of change was not explicitly articulated that links an indicator (for
        example, a study) to the expected outcome (such as enhanced policy). Further, many activities used terms the “output,”
        “outcome,” “impact,” and “indicator” interchangeably. Steps are needed to facilitate clearer understanding of the
        distinctions among output, outcome, and impacts and especially to encourage explicit articulation of theories of changes
        in PROFOR activities. A key step is to define these terms clearly and provide instruction for articulating theories of change
        in PROFOR’s M&E system. The 2015 update to PROFOR’s M&E system should accomplish these proposed improvements.

        Beyond terminology, one important finding was that a large percentage of all indicators (72 percent) and of the top
        indicators (40 percent) were linked to uptake. Having uptake indicators instead of output indicators provides a clearer
        picture of how a knowledge-based activity is planning on achieving its expected outcome after the output (a study
        or workshop, for instance) is completed. Output indicators fall short of providing that information. For example, if
        the expected outcome of an activity is improving policy and the given indicator is the number of studies published on
        the topic (an output of the activity), the person reviewing the activity will not know how the activity jumped from the
        studies to policy. For this reason, it is suggested that PROFOR activity indicators emphasize uptake rather than outputs
        as possible. To aid this process, the creation of a “menu” of indicators that could be adapted to meet the needs of specific
        activities may be useful, as has been done for operational investments.

        This review has been preliminary, but it provides a data source that can form the basis for more in-depth discussion
        within the PROFOR secretariat and PROFOR TTLs as well as partners in the KNOWFOR program to try to develop more
        effective indicators for forest-related knowledge uptake. It would be useful, for example, to convene a workshop to
        share experience and begin to try to develop some theory-based indicators of uptake. This may be especially appropriate
        to do within the context of KNOWFOR, building on the strong M&E-related work that has already been undertaken through
        the program.
70   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




     Table B2: Top 25 Scoring Indicators in PROFOR Indicators Review




                                                                                                                                 Output (0) or Uptake
     Project number10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proxy Potential
                                                                                                                                                                                Attributable
                                                                                                                                 (1) indicator




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Time bound
                                                                                                                                                                   Measurable




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                               Realistic
                                                                                                                                                        Specific




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Score
                        Outcome                                             Indicator
        6               Project partners committed to joint                 Notes of meetings of project partners 1                                      5          5             5             5           5            5             4               34
                        approach and approve detailed                       reflect common understanding and
                        methodology. Key data sets acquired.                capture approved methodology.
        8               The experts’ meeting proved valuable                The opinions of the experts were                      1                      5          5             5             5           5            5             4               34
                        for debating the merits and risks of the            recorded in detail (100+ pages of
                        BACI evaluation method undertaken and               formal notes on the meeting) and
                        for getting constructive ideas on key               were used in the elaboration and
                        research questions and hypotheses, how to           refinement of the methods and
                        approach randomization, and how to build            survey tools.
                        a representative evidence base under tight
                        time and financial constraints.
        6               Increased recognition and understanding of Map launched at Nov 2009 high-                                 0                      5          5             4             5           5            5             4               33
                        the restoration opportunity.               level FLR round table. Refined map
                                                                   launched at UNFCCC COP.
        14              All harvest timber from concession is               Chain of custody reports should                       1                      5          5             5             5           4            4             5               33
                        legally taxed and exported.                         indicate production and revenues
                                                                            and show full compliance of logging
                                                                            companies.
        14 FDA, government of Liberia, and private                          Monthly field performance report                      1                      5          5             5             4           4            5             5               33
           sector capacity is sufficient to operate the                     will provide update on the status
           chain of custody properly and ensure the                         of training and capacity building.
           eventual transfer of the chain of custody                        Workshops and trainings should
           to FDA. Liberia Extractive Industries                            produce report and an evaluation of
           Transparency Initiative publishes full                           the related capacity building.
           forestry sector revenue reports.
       29 Strengthened policy dialogue.                                     Formulation and consensus with                        1                      5          5             5             5           3            5             5               33
                                                                            government on SFE reform map.
       29 Increase capacity of key policy research                          Methodology and capacity developed  1                                        5          5             5             5           3            5             5               33
          institute.                                                        to independently carry out SFE
                                                                            performance assessments and scoring
                                                                            and formulation of reform steps.
       32 The capacity of planners and analysts in                          Planners from the Republic of Congo                   1                      5          5             5             5           4            4             5               33
          key Congo Basin countries to utilize land                         and other Congo Basin countries
          use modeling and other decision support                           participate in the study and take
          tools to mitigate impacts of large-scale                          an active role in writing the reports
          mining investments on deforestation and                           and leading some aspects of the
          forest degradation is improved.                                   workshops.
       35 Areas suitable for commercial reforestation A map showing the most appropriate                                          0                      5          5             5             5           3            5             5               33
          in Colombia have been defined in a          areas for commercial reforestation
          participatory manner.                       has been prepared.




     10. Note: Project number identifies projects in a database available separately, which includes project name, other descriptive information, and notes on coding.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                                                                                                             71




                                                                                                                Output (0) or Uptake
        Project number10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Proxy Potential
                                                                                                                                                               Attributable
                                                                                                                (1) indicator




                                                                                                                                                                                          Time bound
                                                                                                                                                  Measurable




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Applicable
                                                                                                                                                                              Realistic
                                                                                                                                       Specific




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Score
                           Outcome                                      Indicator
           36 Increased company investment in                           Utilization of SCI plans will be         1                      5          5             4             5           4            5             5               33
              communities to increase development                       monitored by IFC consultants as
              impact.                                                   part of this project and subsequently
                                                                        by staff as part of their role in
                                                                        developing clients.
           7               Awareness is raised that laws and            Number of visits on the GLIN website. 1                         5          5             3             5           5            4             5               32
                           regulations in Gabon are accessible
                           through the GLIN system.
           8               Practitioners of REDD+ development and       There will be references to the          1                      5          5             3             5           4            5             5               32
                           independent observers will categorize        typology and the methods we
                           various kinds of projects in terms of the    developed in the literature.
                           typology developed and will recognize the
                           value of a counterfactual approach for
                           measuring the performance of REDD+ in
                           relation to the 3Es and co-benefits. Using
                           this method of evaluation will improve the
                           performance of REDD+.
           8               The Guide will become recognized as a        We will know the impact of the Guide     1                      5          5             3             5           4            5             5               32
                           state-of-the-art approach for conducting     through citations in the literature,
                           research on the socioeconomic and            downloads from the website, and
                           governance dimensions of REDD+. It is        proponents and researchers who
                           expected that both BACI and other methods    approach us to propose collaboration
                           will be applied in the evaluation of REDD+   in the Global Comparative Study
                           and that this will serve to improve the      on REDD+ or to get advice and
                           performance of REDD+ with respect to the     guidance for their own independent
                           3Es and co-benefits.                         evaluation efforts.
           8               CIFOR’s web platform on forests and          Through CIFOR’s Information            1                        5          5             3             5           4            5             5               32
                           climate change will become a “go to”         Services Group we are able to get
                           place for basic information on (at least)    regular reports on downloads of
                           the REDD+ projects in nine key countries     information. We will keep track of
                           encompassing the majority of REDD+           citations of our publications. We will
                           sites in the world. The web platform will    know of individuals and organizations
                           also disseminate our other publications      approaching us for advice and
                           including the Guide, technical guidelines,   collaboration in conducting research
                           survey instruments, etc.                     on REDD+.
          12 Stronger international network of SMFE        Written commitments to continue                       1                      5          5             4             5           3            5             5               32
             support practitioners with clearer vision for to work together as an alliance to
             how to do their work.                         pursue SMFE support and share
                                                           tactics with each other on how best
                                                           to do this.
          19 Increased capacity to design and                           Percentage of REDD+ projects that        1                      5          5             5             5           2            5             5               32
             implement pro-poor REDD+.                                  use Guidance Note in project design.
          20 MFF would operate more efficiently and                     Key findings are taken into account in 1                        5          5             5             5           3            5             4               32
             would be able to accommodate novel                         the redesign of the MFF.
             financing sources.
72   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                 Output (0) or Uptake
     Project number10




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Proxy Potential
                                                                                                                                                Attributable
                                                                                                 (1) indicator




                                                                                                                                                                           Time bound
                                                                                                                                   Measurable




                                                                                                                                                                                        Applicable
                                                                                                                                                               Realistic
                                                                                                                        Specific




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Score
                        Outcome                           Indicator
        21 Knowledge generated and documented is          Stakeholders and farmers in the         1                      5          5             5             5           2            5             5               32
           disseminated to the diverse stakeholder        North West Region use the extension
           audience (wider development community).        bulletins to guide their targeted
                                                          grassroots agro-silvopastoral
                                                          operations.
        26 Better understanding on the part of the        Inception report and detailed           0                      5          5             5             5           5            5             2               32
           study team on the true causes of forest        research design and ongoing
           fires.                                         progress reports; progress reports
                                                          and supervision reports.
        26 Models successfully tested, applying a         Inception report and detailed           1                      5          5             5             5           5            5             2               32
           better understanding of the true causes of     research design and ongoing
           forest fires.                                  progress reports; Progress reports
                                                          and supervision reports.
        30 This product aims to improve development       Bank projects will be monitored to      1                      5          5             5             4           3            5             5               32
           practitioners’ ability to gather, make sense   collect information on the use of
           of, and distribute important information to    ICTs; also, the “hits” on the online
           those involved in the forest and agriculture   database will be monitored to follow
           sectors (including beneficiaries and           how much the information collected
           policy makers) through the harnessing          has been used.
           of ICT tools. The product will help Bank
           staff, external partners, and governments
           select appropriate technologies and
           applications for data collection and M&E;
           will improve the quality of knowledge on
           ICT applications; and will inspire the use
           of these tools in development projects.
           This will lead to better interventions and
           improvements in program and policy
           design, implementation, and output and
           outcome tracking.
        34 The primary outcome by the end of this         Tracking interest and participation     1                      5          5             5             5           4            5             3               32
           activity will be increased understanding       in the expert workshop; uptake
           among policy makers, practitioners, and        of the report on proxy indicators
           applied researchers of potential short-term    (copies mailed and distributed, web
           proxy indicators for longer-term impacts       downloads, etc.); survey of workshop
           of forest sector investments and how they      participants and other potential
           may be used in practice.                       audiences before and after they
                                                          receive the report.
       35 The most promising timber value chains          Timber value chains are assessed in 0                          5          5             5             4           4            5             4               32
          have been identified, taking into account       terms of competiveness, job creation,
          Colombia’s comparative advantages,              and revenue generation. Conditions
          production capacities, as well as objectives    for their sustainable development
          in terms of rural development.                  analyzed.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                                                                                                                     73




                                                                                                        Output (0) or Uptake
            Project number10




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Proxy Potential
                                                                                                                                                       Attributable
                                                                                                        (1) indicator




                                                                                                                                                                                  Time bound
                                                                                                                                          Measurable




                                                                                                                                                                                               Applicable
                                                                                                                                                                      Realistic
                                                                                                                               Specific




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Score
                               Outcome                           Indicator
               36 Improved capacity of local governments         In-service training and educational     1                      5          5             5             5           4            4             4               32
                  and indigenous groups to monitor wood          workshops will be provided to
                  production on transactional (community)        communities and companies. These
                  and regional (indigenous federation) levels.   will result in the development
                  Improved ability of companies to invest in     and implementation of at least 3
                  communities with optimum development           company strategies for long-term
                  impacts.                                       engagement with communities
                                                                 that will be monitored annually by
                                                                 involved parties.
               36 Accurate calculation of operating costs        Operational costs will be tracked       0                      5          5             5             5           4            4             4               32
                  during harvest operations to determine         and appropriate prices established
                  price for wood produced.                       by communities and companies
                                                                 with constant in-service training by
                                                                 consultants.


         
                                                                                                                                                                                                    74




Annex C. Menu of Highly Rated Forest Sector Indicators
 

POVERTY REDUCTION (INCLUDING ECONOMIC GROWTH) INDICATORS
    Indicator                          CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI Indicators               Use Context         Outcome   Notes
                                             Score Potential                                                            Rating
    People in targeted forest          Yes   N/A    5          1. People in targeted forest and     Various projects              CSI. Used in PPI cluster for sustainable forest-related income.
    and adjacent communities                                   adjacent communities have
    with increased monetary or                                 secure access and use rights. 2.
    nonmonetary benefits from                                  Forest activities are aligned with
    forests                                                    biodiversity-friendly management
                                                               practices.
    People in targeted forest and Yes        N/A    5          1. People in targeted forest          Various projects             CSI. Used in PPI cluster for sustainable forest-related income
    adjacent communities have                                  and adjacent communities
    secure access and use rights                               with increased monetary or
                                                               nonmonetary benefits from forests.
                                                               2. Forest activities are aligned with
                                                                                                                                                                                                    UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                               biodiversity-friendly management
                                                               practices.
    Forest activities are aligned      Yse   N/A    5          1. People in targeted forest       Various projects                CSI. Used in PPI cluster for sustainable forest-related income
    with biodiversity-friendly                                 and adjacent communities
    management practices                                       with increased monetary or
                                                               nonmonetary benefits from
                                                               forests. 2. People in targeted
                                                               forest and adjacent communities
                                                               have secure access and use rights.
    Seedling survival rate after             N/A    5          1. Thinning of seedling / young      Various projects              Used in PPI cluster Income from forest over the longer term.
    three years1*                                              trees after three to five years*

    Thinning of seedling / young             N/A    5          1. Seedling survival rate after      Various projects              Used in PPI cluster Income from forest over the longer term.
    trees after three to five years*                           three years*
Indicator                       CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI Indicators   Use Context       Outcome        Notes
                                      Score Potential                                              Rating
At least a 55 percent                 28     5                                   Forests           Moderately     The indicator measures an increase in beneficiaries' income and
increase in the per                                                              and Rural         satisfactory   therefore also captures a contribution to poverty reduction. It is
capita income of project                                                         Productivity                     specific, measurable, attributable, and realistic. The indicator
participants                                                                     Project                          also has high proxy potential. Limitations: The indicator may be
                                                                                 (P064914) in                     expensive to collect, depending on availability of information in
                                                                                 Honduras                         existing surveys, and the desired time frame is not specified.
Average forest-based product          26     5                                   Andhra Pradesh Satisfactory      This indicator measures an increase in beneficiaries' income and
income (cash and kind at                                                         Community                        therefore also captures a contribution to poverty reduction. The
2009 real prices) realized by                                                    Forest                           indicator has high potential as a proxy because it measures livelihood
VSS members resulting from                                                       Management                       benefits from improved forest management, which is likely to result
improved forest productivity                                                     Project                          in long-term impacts and sustained interest by VSS members in
                                                                                 (P073094) in                     ensuring improved forest productivity. Limitations: It may be difficult
                                                                                 India                            to attribute changes to the project and may be time- and resource-
                                                                                                                  intensive to measure. CSI potential: It could be interpreted as a CSI
                                                                                                                  under "Number of people with increased benefits."
Project generates 13.3                29     4                                   Sustainable       Satisfactory   This indicator could be used as an indirect measure of benefits to
million m3 of timber and 2.73                                                    Forestry                         beneficiaries in terms of income or contributions to poverty reduction.
                                                                                                                                                                                             UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




million tons of bamboo by                                                        Development                      The indicator is specific and measurable. Limitations: The indicator
December 31, 2025. RMB 1.1                                                       Project                          uses a time frame that extends beyond the lifetime of the project,
billion net income from fruit                                                    (P064729) and                    making it unrealistic for use. The indicator is also not directly
tree crops by year 2022.                                                         Sustainable                      attributable to the project. CSI potential: It could be interpreted as a
                                                                                 Forestry                         CSI under "Number of people with increased benefits."
                                                                                 Development
                                                                                 Project
                                                                                 (Natural Forest
                                                                                 Protection;
                                                                                 P060029) in
                                                                                 China
                                                                                                                                                                                             75
                                                                                                                                                                                         76



Indicator                     CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI Indicators   Use Context       Outcome        Notes
                                    Score Potential                                              Rating
Sustainably finance and             27     4                                   Natural           Moderately     This indicator aims to measure sustainable financing, an important
promote investment in                                                          Resources and     satisfactory   concept with the potential for ensuring long-term impacts. The
forestry sector                                                                Environmental                    indicator has high proxy potential, particularly with the inclusion
                                                                               Governance                       of its target. The indicator is specific and measurable. Limitations:
                                                                               (NREG)                           The indicator is not directly attributable to the project and does not
                                                                               Program (DPO-                    include a time frame.
                                                                               1: P102971;
                                                                               DPO-2:
                                                                               P113172; DPO-
                                                                               3: P118188) in
                                                                               Ghana
Increase in level of forest         25     4                                   Sustainable       Moderately     The indicator aims to measure sustainable financing, an important
revenue collected                                                              Forestry          satisfactory   concept with the potential for ensuring long-term impacts. The
                                                                               Pilot Project                    indicator has high proxy potential. With the target, the indicator is
                                                                               (P053830) in                     specific and measurable. Limitations: The indicator is not directly
                                                                               the Russian                      attributable to the project and lacks a time frame.
                                                                               Federation



Number of jobs created from   Y     26     4                                   Forests           Moderately     This indicator represents one way of capturing the contribution
                                                                                                                                                                                         UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




project investments                                                            and Rural         satisfactory   of a project to poverty and livelihoods. It is relatively specific,
                                                                               Productivity                     measurable, attributable, and realistic. Limitations: The indicator
                                                                               Project                          could be more clear in terms of what is meant by project
                                                                               (P064914) in                     investments and lacks a time frame.
                                                                               Honduras
20 percent increase in              26     4                                   Community         Satisfactory   This indicator measures the benefits from the project to
net value of forest goods                                                      Forestry II                      beneficiaries in terms of income and contributions to poverty
and services produced by                                                       (PROCYMAF                        reduction and is similar to a CSI. The indicator is specific and
assisted communities and                                                       II; P035751) in                  clearly attributable to the project, as well as easily measured.
ejidos                                                                         Mexico                           The concept has potential as a proxy for long-term impacts;
                                                                                                                communities and ejidos that experience an increase in income
                                                                                                                and benefits are likely to continue to support sustainable forest
                                                                                                                management over time. Limitations: The indicator lacks a time
                                                                                                                frame and may be cost- and resource-intensive to measure.
Indicator                       CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI Indicators               Use Context       Outcome        Notes
                                      Score Potential                                                          Rating
30 percent increase in                26     4                                               Community         Satisfactory   The indicator measures the benefits from the project to beneficiaries
jobs available in assisted                                                                   Forestry II                      in terms of income and contributions to poverty reduction. The
communities vs control                                                                       (PROCYMAF                        indicator is specific and clearly linked to the project, which makes it
                                                                                             II; P035751) in                  easy to measure. It has some potential as a proxy indicator based on
                                                                                             Mexico                           the assumption that increases in employment can reduce pressure
                                                                                                                              on natural resources and contribute to support for biodiversity
                                                                                                                              and other aims. Limitations: The indicator measures availability
                                                                                                                              of jobs rather than an increase in employment or jobs gained; the
                                                                                                                              availability of jobs does not guarantee that communities will gain
                                                                                                                              employment or experience an increase in income. The indicator
                                                                                                                              could be rephrased to capture employment, similar to how the CSOs
                                                                                                                              measure it. The indicator is therefore less realistic and also lacks
                                                                                                                              a time frame. CSI Potential: It could be interpreted as a CSI under
                                                                                                                              "Number of people employed through forest products."
Forest fire control: stumpage         26     4                                               Daxinganling      Satisfactory   The indicator measures the value of forest products saved through
value saved (million yuan)                                                                   Forest Fire                      proactive control of fire management. It has some potential as a proxy
                                                                                             Rehabilitation                   because it links the concept of fire control with financial benefits. The
                                                                                             Project                          indicator is specific and measurable. Limitations: The indicator is not
                                                                                                                                                                                                          UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                             (P003550) in                     clearly attributed to the project and lacks a time frame.
                                                                                             China
Decline in seasonal                   25     4                                               Andhra Pradesh Satisfactory      The indicator measures a decrease in migration for employment,
outmigration for employment                                                                  Community                        which indirectly captures a potential increase in employment potential
                                                                                             Forest                           in the project area and therefore increases in income and poverty
                                                                                             Management                       reduction. The indicator has high proxy potential by using outmigration
                                                                                             Project                          as a substitute for increased opportunities in the project area.
                                                                                             (P073094) in                     Limitations: The indicator is not clearly attributable to the project and
                                                                                             India                            lacks a time frame. If the indicator is not captured through an existing
                                                                                                                              government survey, it may be time- and cost-intensive to collect.
Poverty reduction: Per                25     4          1. People in targeted forest and     Forestry          Satisfactory   This indicator measures poverty reduction among project
capita income of project                                adjacent communities have            Development                      beneficiaries. It is specific, measurable, and attributable to the
beneficiaries increased by                              secure access and use rights. 2.     in Poor Areas                    project. The concept of improved livelihoods and poverty reduction
percentage                                              Forest activities are aligned with   Project                          among project beneficiaries has high proxy potential. Limitations:
                                                        biodiversity-friendly management     (P046952) in                     The indicator lacks a time frame. Outcome from PPI cluster:
                                                        practices.                           China                            Sustainable forest-related income.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          77
                                                                                                                                                                                        78



Indicator                      CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI Indicators   Use Context      Outcome        Notes
                                     Score Potential                                             Rating
Poverty reduction: Incidence         24     4                                   Forestry         Satisfactory   The indicator measures poverty reduction among project
of poverty decreased from 40                                                    Development                     beneficiaries. The indicator is specific, measurable, attributable
percent in 1996 to [project                                                     in Poor Areas                   to the project, and includes a time frame. The concept of poverty
end date]                                                                       Project                         reduction has potential as a proxy. Limitations: "Incidence" of
                                                                                (P046952) in                    poverty may be harder to measure than other measures of poverty
                                                                                China                           and may be less likely to be collected through existing surveys.
Cropping pattern diversified         24     4                                   Karnataka        Satisfactory   The indicator indirectly captures the concept of livelihood
to high-value crops                                                             Watershed                       diversification, which can be important in increased incomes
                                                                                Development                     and poverty reduction. The indicator is specific and measurable.
                                                                                Project                         Limitations: The indicator is not attributable to the project and the
                                                                                (P067216) in                    time frame could be more specific (as the phases included in the
                                                                                India                           target are not defined within the target). It may also be challenging
                                                                                                                or time- and resource-intensive to measure.
Annual incremental revenue           22     4                                   Sustainable and Highly          The indicator measures an increase in revenue among project
to villages                                                                     Participatory   satisfactory    beneficiaries and can therefore be considered a proxy for poverty
                                                                                Energy                          reduction. The concept of benefits for project communities is an
                                                                                Management                      important one for proxy indicators. The indicator is specific and
                                                                                Project                         somewhat measurable and attributable. Limitations: "Incremental
                                                                                (PROGEDE)                       revenue" is a less common term that may not be included in
                                                                                                                existing surveys. The indicator is only vaguely attributable to the
                                                                                                                                                                                        UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                                project, at best, and lacks a time frame.
BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION INDICATORS
Indicator                                CSI    SMART   PPI       Related PPI       Use Context        Outcome   Notes
                                                Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
Predictable, sustainable financing       Yes    N/A     5         1. Forest area    Various projects             This indicator was judged to have strong potential as a PPI for
                                                                  brought under                                  positive biodiversity (and other environmental) impacts.
                                                                  adaptive,
                                                                  biodiversity-
                                                                  friendly
                                                                  management
                                                                  plans. 2.
                                                                  Functioning
                                                                  institutions to
                                                                  enforce rules and
                                                                  resolve conflict.
Functioning institutions to enforce rules Yes   N/A     5         1. Forest area    Various projects             This indicator was judged to be a key element in an indicator
and resolve conflict                                              brought under                                  cluster with strong potential as a PPI for positive biodiversity
                                                                  adaptive,                                      impacts.
                                                                  biodiversity-
                                                                  friendly
                                                                  management
                                                                                                                                                                                    UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                  plans. 2.
                                                                  Predictable,
                                                                  sustainable
                                                                  financing.
                                                                                                                                                                                    79
                                                                                                                                                                                                  80



Indicator                               CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI         Use Context           Outcome          Notes
                                              Score   Potential Indicators                                Rating
Forest and woodland cover is brought          26      5         1. Predictable,     Forest Conservation   Moderately       This indicator measures the area of forests under sustainable
under effective management by                                   sustainable         and Management        unsatisfactory   management, with improved management plans. The improved
community and individuals in project                            financing. 2.       Project and the                        wording after the MTR makes the indicator more specific and
areas. [To measure the impact of the                            Functioning         Eastern Arc Forest                     similar to a core forest sector indicator. The indicator has a high
project, the indicator wording was                              institutions to     Conservation                           proxy potential because of the assumption that the management
changed in the 2007 restructuring                               enforce rules and   and Development                        of an area according to an approved management plan, and by the
to read: Area of forests on Tanzania                            resolve conflict.   Project (P057234                       community, will lead to sustainable impacts over the long term.
Mainland managed according to                                                       and P058706) in                        Limitations: The indicator became less attributable to the project
approved forest management plans                                                    Tanzania                               with the revision and lacks a time frame. Outcome: Positive
(including CBFM and JFM).]                                                                                                 environmental impacts (biodiversity-related).




Private sector is involved in forest          26      5                             Forest Conservation   Moderately       This indicator measures forest area under private management.
plantation management [Reworded                                                     and Management        unsatisfactory   The indicator was revised at the MTR, which made it more specific
in 2007 to enable measurability; area                                               Project and the                        and measurable. The indicator has high proxy potential because
of forest plantations under private                                                 Eastern Arc Forest                     of the assumption that a private management agreement will
management agreement (hectares).]                                                   Conservation                           be sustainable and lead to long-term impacts. Limitations: The
                                                                                                                                                                                                  UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                    and Development                        indicator is not attributable to the project and lacks a time frame.
                                                                                    Project (P057234
                                                                                    and P058706) in
                                                                                    Tanzania
Indicator                               CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context            Outcome        Notes
                                              Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
13 Nature Reserves management                 28      5                       Sustainable Forestry Satisfactory     The indicator uses an external measure, the WCPA Framework, to
improved by 1.5 points by end of                                              Development Project                   measure improved management of nature reserves. The indicator
project (Scores are qualitative self-                                         (P064729) and                         is specific, time-bound, and uses a particular methodology for
assessments. Project followed scoring                                         Sustainable Forestry                  measuring improvement, which makes the term less subjective
system of World Commission on                                                 Development Project                   and easier to be measured. The indicator has high proxy potential
Protected Areas (WCPA) Framework)                                             (Natural Forest                       because of the assumption that management will contribute to
                                                                              Protection; P060029)                  long-term impacts and because the measurement is likely to be
                                                                              in China                              more objective because it is an external measure. The indicator
                                                                                                                    will also be able to be broadly compared with other areas, which
                                                                                                                    makes it attractive as a proxy. Limitations: The indicator lacks
                                                                                                                    attribution to the project.


Reduction in average annual rate of           27      4                       First Programmatic     Satisfactory   The indicator measures reduction in deforestation. The indicator
deforestation in the Amazon for the                                           Development Policy                    is specific, measurable, and time-bound. It has a high proxy
period 2008–10 to 20 percent below                                            Loan for Sustainable                  potential, which would have been higher if the indicator were
2005–07 average annual rate of                                                Environmental                         clearly linked to project. The indicator is also somewhat similar to
deforestation (14,800 km2)                                                    Management (SEM                       the core forest sector indicator on area reforested. Limitations: As
                                                                              DPL; P095205) in                      mentioned above, the indicator could be more clearly linked to the
                                                                                                                                                                                           UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                              Brazil                                project.
                                                                                                                                                                                           81
                                                                                                                                                                                          82



Indicator                                CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context            Outcome        Notes
                                               Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
1. Maintain Mulanje Mountain                   25      4                       Mulanje Mountain       Moderately     This indicator measures the management of the mountain
ecosystem, including globally                                                  Biodiversity           satisfactory   ecosystem, increased awareness of the ecosystem's value, and
significant biodiversity and vital                                             Conservation Project                  improvements in sustainability. The indicator includes several
ecological services. 2. Increase                                               (MMBCP; P035917)                      components but each is specific and connected to the general aim
awareness, understanding and                                                   in Malawi                             of maintaining the ecosystem's biodiversity and services. These
appreciation of the value of the                                                                                     concepts are all strong ones for a proxy because of the potential
Mulanje Mountain ecosystem at                                                                                        for longer-term impacts. It also has good proxy potential because
local and national levels. 3. Improve                                                                                it shows the potential of resources to be co-managed, which could
sustainability of biological resource                                                                                be important for long-term impacts. Limitations: The indicator
use and enhance the value of the                                                                                     is not attributable to the project nor is it time-bound. Some of
Mulanje Mountain ecosystem to                                                                                        the indicators, such as appreciation and trust, may need to be
local communities. 4. Establish                                                                                      measured through a project-specific survey, which will be more
long-term income stream and                                                                                          time- and cost-intensive.
institutional capacity to ensure
continuation of items 1–3; Mulanje
Mountain Conservation Trust (MMCT)
appreciated and respected by
stakeholders at local, national, and
international levels. Demonstrate the
appropriateness of Conservation Trust
Fund as financing mechanism for
                                                                                                                                                                                          UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




biodiversity conservation.
Forest fire control: Forest area saved         26      4                       Daxinganling Forest    Satisfactory   This indicator measures the amount of forest area saved through
(million m3)                                                                   Fire Rehabilitation                   control of forest fires, which includes an implicit measure
                                                                               Project (P003550) in                  of improved capacity. The indicator is specific and therefore
                                                                               China                                 measurable. It has relatively high potential as a proxy because
                                                                                                                     saving forest areas could contribute to longer-term forest
                                                                                                                     sustainability and longer-term impacts. Limitations: The indicator
                                                                                                                     is not attributable to the project and lacks a time frame.
Indicator                                  CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context            Outcome        Notes
                                                 Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
Annual deforestation reduction impact            25      4                       Sustainable and        Highly         This indicator measures annual reduction in deforestation. The
                                                                                 Participatory Energy   satisfactory   indicator could be considered a parallel to the forest core sector
                                                                                 Management                            indicator on area reforested/afforested. The indicator has high
                                                                                 Project (PROGEDE;                     proxy potential because a reduction in deforestation (and its
                                                                                 P046768) in Senegal                   impacts) is likely to continue to produce long-term impacts over
                                                                                                                       time. The indicator is specific in terms of the desired reduction and
                                                                                                                       measurable. Limitations: The addition of the term "impact" is a little
                                                                                                                       odd and makes the indicator slightly less clear, but it still remains a
                                                                                                                       strong indicator. The indicator lacks attribution to the project.
Replanting: Upkeep of about 55,000               24      4                       Forestry Sector        Satisfactory   This indicator measures replanting and establishment of
ha of existing forest plantations and                                            (P001168) in Côte                     new plantations. The indicator is specific, measurable, and
the establishment of 9,000 ha of new                                             d'Ivoire                              attributable to the project since the project will be involved in the
plantations to complete the planting                                                                                   planting. The indicator has relatively high proxy potential because
program of the 1st and 2nd Forestry                                                                                    the establishment of plantations has the potential to contribute
Projects                                                                                                               to longer-term forestry outcomes and ensure forest sustainability
                                                                                                                       over time. Limitations: The indicator lacks a time frame.
Area under sustainable NRM                       24      4                       Sustainable and        Highly         The indicator measures the area under sustainable natural
                                                                                 Participatory Energy   satisfactory   resource management, somewhat similar to the core forest sector
                                                                                                                                                                                                 UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                 Management                            indicator on area under management plans or area reforested. The
                                                                                 Project (PROGEDE;                     indicator is relatively specific, although the term "sustainable"
                                                                                 P046768) in Senegal                   could be more clearly defined. The indicator is easily measurable.
                                                                                                                       The indicator has relatively high proxy potential because of
                                                                                                                       the potential for an area under sustainable NRM to continue
                                                                                                                       to contribute to long-term impacts over time. Limitations: The
                                                                                                                       indicator is not attributable to the project and lacks a time frame.

Improved forest cover profile in project         23      4                       Andhra Pradesh         Satisfactory   The indicator measures improvements in forest cover profiles in
VSS areas (sq. km.)                                                              Community Forest                      areas managed by forest user groups. The indicator's concept has
                                                                                 Management Project                    high potential as a proxy because of the potential for forest cover
                                                                                 (P073094) in India                    to be maintained over the long term and contribute to continued
                                                                                                                       impacts. Limitations: The indicator is less specific because of the
                                                                                                                       use of the term "improved" and the lack of a target to improve
                                                                                                                       clarity on what is meant by improved, which makes the indicator
                                                                                                                       more difficult to objectively measure. The indicator also lacks
                                                                                                                       attribution to the project and a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 83
                                                                                                                                                                                                  84



Indicator                                  CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context            Outcome        Notes
                                                 Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
Strengthen and expand the                        22      4                       Central Asia           Satisfactory   The indicator measures the strengthening and expansion of
zapovednik (strict nature reserves)                                              Biodiversity GEF                      nature reserves with the aim of conserving plants and animals.
network in the West Tien Shan to                                                 Project (P042573)                     The indicator has relatively high proxy potential because of the
conserve unique plant and animal                                                 in Central Asia                       potential for strengthened and expanded nature reserves to
communities, including wild relatives of                                         (Kazakhstan, the                      continue to conserve plants and animals over time. Limitations:
domesticated species                                                             Kyrgyz Republic, and                  The indicator uses the term "strengthened," which is subjective,
                                                                                 Uzbekistan)                           particularly in the absence of a target, so scores low on specificity
                                                                                                                       as well as measurability. It is also not clearly attributable to the
                                                                                                                       project nor time-bound.
Environmental management: Rate of                22      4                       Forestry Development Satisfactory     The indicator measures increased forest cover. The indicator is
forest coverage increased, percent                                               in Poor Areas Project                 specific because it includes a desired target rate for the increase,
                                                                                 (P046952) in China                    making it measurable and realistic. The concept of increased
                                                                                                                       forest cover has potential as a proxy because of the potential of
                                                                                                                       increased forest cover to continue to generate impacts over time.
                                                                                                                       Limitations: The indicator is not attributable to the project and
                                                                                                                       lacks a time frame.

Annual sustainable woodfuel                      22      4                       Sustainable and        Highly         The indicator measures the area of sustainable woodfuel
production                                                                       Participatory Energy   satisfactory   production. It is relatively specific, with the inclusion of the target,
                                                                                 Management                            although the term "sustainable" is subjective and could be more
                                                                                 Project (PROGEDE;                     clearly defined, which would increase the measurabilty of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                  UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                 P046768) in Senegal                   indicator. By including the tons/per year target, the indicator
                                                                                                                       is one of the few that includes a time frame. The indicator has
                                                                                                                       relatively high proxy potential because annual sustainable woodfuel
                                                                                                                       production is likely to continue to contribute to long-term results.
                                                                                                                       In addition, although the indicator does not specify it, sustainable
                                                                                                                       woodfuel production may involve behavioral change over woodfuel
                                                                                                                       users; if so, the potential for long-term impacts is even higher.
                                                                                                                       Limitations: In addition to the limitations mentioned above, the
                                                                                                                       indicator does not indicate a desired change or increase, although
                                                                                                                       it does specify a desired area. The indicator may also be time-
                                                                                                                       intensive to measure and it is not attributable to the project.
Indicator                                 CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context            Outcome        Notes
                                                Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
Mechanisms to increase forest cover             21      4                       Uttar Pradesh and      Satisfactory   The indicator measures a positive trend in forest cover area.
established (Output 2): Upward trend in                                         Uttaranchal Forestry                  The indicator has relatively high potential as a proxy because
area of forest cover                                                            Project (P035169)                     of the potential for upward trends in forest cover to continue to
                                                                                in India                              generate impacts over time. Limitations: The indicator could be
                                                                                                                      more specific on the desired amount or percentage of increase,
                                                                                                                      particularly by including a target, although it still generally
                                                                                                                      captures the idea of positive forest cover trends. The indicator is
                                                                                                                      also not clearly linked to the project and lacks a time frame.

Improved degree of biodiversity                 19      4                       Peruvian National      Satisfactory   This indicator measures improved biodiversity conservation in
conservation in Project ANPs                                                    Trust Fund for                        protected areas. Although the indicator scores poorly on the
                                                                                PAs-Programme                         SMART criteria, it was still rated as having relatively high proxy
                                                                                for a Participatory                   potential because the concept of biodiversity conservation
                                                                                Management of PAs                     in project areas has potential for long-term impacts. Still,
                                                                                Project (P068250)                     the indicator would likely need to be revised before it could
                                                                                in Peru                               be recommended as a proxy. Limitations: The indicator lacks
                                                                                                                      specificity; for instance, the term "improved" could be more
                                                                                                                      specific and conservation could also be defined--more species
                                                                                                                                                                                             UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                                      numbers? fewer threatened species? greater forest cover? The lack
                                                                                                                      of specificity may also make the indicator difficult to measure.
                                                                                                                      The indicator is somewhat linked to the project through the target
                                                                                                                      on programs in national parks and activities but it may be hard
                                                                                                                      to show how these activities contributed to improvements in
                                                                                                                      biodiversity conservation. The indicator also lacks a time frame.

Forest fire control: Fire damage area/          25      3                       Daxinganling Forest    Satisfactory   This indicator measures the control of forest fires by measuring
total area (percent)                                                            Fire Rehabilitation                   the percent of damaged areas. The indicator has some limited
                                                                                Project (P003550) in                  potential for a proxy as currently written because it is not clear
                                                                                China                                 how the percentage of area saved will contribute to long-term
                                                                                                                      impacts and does not include variables that suggest the project
                                                                                                                      is likely to be on track to achieve results over time. The indicator
                                                                                                                      is specific and measurable. Limitations: The indicator is not
                                                                                                                      attributable to the project and is not time-bound.
                                                                                                                                                                                             85
                                                                                                                                                                                           86



Indicator                              CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context            Outcome        Notes
                                             Score   Potential Indicators                           Rating
Sustainable Natual Forest Management         23      3                       First Programmatic     Satisfactory   The indicator measures the expansion of sustainable forest
of private and public areas expanded                                         Development Policy                    management areas. The concept of expanding sustainable forest
from 27,000 km2 to 50,000 km2                                                Loan for Sustainable                  management areas has potential as a proxy because such areas
                                                                             Environmental                         may contribute to longer-term impacts. However, the expansion
                                                                             Management (SEM                       of areas alone may not be enough to ensure longer-term impacts;
                                                                             DPL; P095205) in                      because the indicator does not suggest the involvement of actors
                                                                             Brazil                                in maintaining this area or other factors, it was rated lower.
                                                                                                                   Limitations: The indicator is specific, but the use of the term
                                                                                                                   "sustainble" is somewhat subjective, which resulted in a slightly
                                                                                                                   lower score. The indicator also lacks attribution to the project and
                                                                                                                   a time frame.
Improved habitat and wildlife                18      3                       Transfrontier          Satisfactory   This indicator measures improved habitat and wildlife
management in three TFCAs                                                    Conservation                          management in conservation areas. It has potential as a proxy
                                                                             Areas Pilot and                       because of the potential for improved habitat and wildlife
                                                                             Institutional                         management to generate long-term impacts. However, the
                                                                             Strengthening                         indicator's low score on the SMART criteria suggests that the
                                                                             Project (P001759) in                  indicator requires revision before it can be recommended.
                                                                             Mozambique                            Limitations: The indicator lacks specificity: what is meant by
                                                                                                                   improved, particularly in the absence of a target? Consequently,
                                                                                                                   the indicator is harder to measure and less realistic. It also lacks
                                                                                                                   attribution to the project and a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                           UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




Enhance biodiversity conservation            18      3                       Forest Resource        Satisfactory   The indicator measures enhanced biodiversity conservation in
through the protection of nature                                             Development and                       nature reserves. The indicator has relatively low proxy potential
reserves                                                                     Protection Project                    as currently written because of its poor score on the SMART
                                                                             (P003557) in China                    criterion, although the general concept of enhanced conservation
                                                                                                                   and protection has potential for long-term impacts. Limitations:
                                                                                                                   The indicator appears to state an aim and then an indicator,
                                                                                                                   which makes it less specific than if it just focused on protection of
                                                                                                                   nature reserves. It lacks a target, which could have increased its
                                                                                                                   specificity, making it less measurable and realistic. It also lacks
                                                                                                                   attribution to the project and a time frame.
Indicator                                CSI   SMART   PPI       Related PPI   Use Context             Outcome          Notes
                                               Score   Potential Indicators                            Rating
Develop improved models for watershed          18      3                       Forest Resource         Satisfactory     This indicator measures the relationship between protected
management through establishment of                                            Development and                          forests and improved watershed management. The proxy potential
protection forests                                                             Protection Project                       is low because of the indicator's poor score on the SMART criteria
                                                                               (P003557) in China                       and a weak articulation of the relationship between protection
                                                                                                                        forests and watershed management models, which makes the
                                                                                                                        indicator less clear. Limitations: In addition to the ones mentioned
                                                                                                                        above, the indicator is not specific, using terms such as "improved
                                                                                                                        models," which could be interpreted in different ways, and not
                                                                                                                        including a target, which makes the indicator less measurable.
                                                                                                                        The indicator also is not clearly attributed to the project and lacks
                                                                                                                        a time frame.
Production of nonarable lands improved         17      2                       Karnataka Watershed Satisfactory         The indicator measures the improvement in production of
[PAD adds: Forest cover, and forest                                            Development Project                      nonarable lands. The indicator has low proxy potential because of
produce increased, output from                                                 (P067216) in India                       its low SMART score and because it is not clear how production
revenue lands increased]                                                                                                will lead to impacts over time. Limitations: The indicator is not
                                                                                                                        specific, not easy to measure, not attributable to the project, and
                                                                                                                        lacks a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                                UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




Promote conservation of biodiversity:          14      2                       Madhya Pradesh          Satisfactory     The indicator measures the biodiversity conservation and related
1) Improved PA management; 2) Policy                                           Forestry Project                         activities, such as management and policy frameworks. The
framework for ecodevelopment                                                   (P010506) in India                       indicator has limited potential of a proxy because of its low
                                                                                                                        SMART score; it is simply not clear enough to be recommended as
                                                                                                                        an indicator that could suggest long-term impacts and measure
                                                                                                                        change over time. Limitations: The indicator lacks specificity and
                                                                                                                        will be hard to measure, particularly in the absence of a target. It
                                                                                                                        is also not attributable to the project and lacks a time frame.


Area currently under forest concession         22      1                       Forest Concession       Unsatisfactory   The indicator measures area under forest concessions. The
in Cambodia                                                                    Management and                           indicator is specific and measurable. It has low proxy potential
                                                                               Control Pilot Project                    because information about the current area does not provide
                                                                               (P060003) in                             information on change over time as a result of the project.
                                                                               Cambodia                                 Limitations: The indicator lacks attribution to the project and a
                                                                                                                        time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                                87
                                                                                                                                                                                    88



CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION INDICATORS
Indicator                            CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI             Use Context   Outcome   Notes
                                           Score Potential   Indicators                            Rating

Forest area brought under            Yes   NA     5          1. Functioning          Various                 CSI. Indicator used for two different outcomes potentially: Positive
adaptive, biodiversity-friendly                              institutions to         projects                environmental impacts (climate change–related) OR Increased carbon
management plans                                             enforce rules and                               stocks.
                                                             resolve conflict.
                                                             2. Predictable,
                                                             sustainable
                                                             financing. OR
                                                             1. Predictable,
                                                             sustainable
                                                             financing. 2.
                                                             Area restored or
                                                             reforested (ha).
Predictable, sustainable financing   Yes   NA     5          1. Forest area          Various                 CSI. Indicator used for two different outcomes potentially: Positive
                                                             brought under           projects                environmental impacts (climate change–related) OR Increased carbon
                                                             adaptive,                                       stocks.
                                                             biodiversity-friendly
                                                             management plans.
                                                             2. Functioning
                                                             institutions to
                                                                                                                                                                                    UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                             enforce rules and
                                                             resolve conflict. 1.
                                                             Forest area brought
                                                             under adaptive,
                                                             biodiversity-friendly
                                                             management plans.
                                                             2. Area restored or
                                                             reforested (ha).
Indicator                             CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI             Use Context       Outcome        Notes
                                            Score Potential   Indicators                                Rating

Functioning institutions to enforce         NA     5          1. Forest area          Various                          Part of PPI cluster with outcome of positive environmental impacts
rules and resolve conflict                                    brought under           projects                         (climate change–related)
                                                              adaptive,
                                                              biodiversity-friendly
                                                              management plans.
                                                              2. Predictable,
                                                              sustainable
                                                              financing.
60,000 terajoules per year to be            29     4                                  First             Satisfactory   This indicator measures the production of renewable energy and energy
produced by renewable energy                                                          Programmatic                     efficiency. The indicator has relatively high proxy potential based on the
sources or saved by energy                                                            Development                      assumption that renewable energy will be produced each year over the
efficiency projects supported                                                         Policy Loan for                  long term, with the potential to contribute to longer-term impacts in
by BNDES, once they are fully                                                         Sustainable                      energy savings. The indicator is specific, measurable, and attributable to
operational                                                                           Environmental                    the project.
                                                                                      Management
                                                                                      (SEM DPL;
                                                                                      P095205) in
                                                                                      Brazil
                                                                                                                                                                                                      UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




Net CO2 emission reduction                  24     4                                  Sustainable       Highly         The indicator measures reductions in carbon dioxide emissions. The
                                                                                      and               satisfactory   indicator is specific. It has relatively high potential as a proxy indicator
                                                                                      Participatory                    because of the potential for reduction each year, with the potential for
                                                                                      Energy                           a long-term contribution to carbon dioxide emissions. Limitations: The
                                                                                      Management                       indicator may be difficult to measure and attribute to project.
                                                                                      Project
                                                                                      (PROGEDE;
                                                                                      P046768) in
                                                                                      Senegal
                                                                                                                                                                                                      89
                                                                                                                                                                                          90



Indicator                          CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context       Outcome        Notes
                                         Score Potential   Indicators                      Rating

Increased planned signed                 22     3                        First             Satisfactory   The indicator measures reductions in emissions from CDM and other
reduction of emissions from                                              Programmatic                     projects. The indicator is specific in its aims, though could be more
CDM projects, from other BNDES                                           Development                      specific in terms of what is included in "other actions," and measurable.
projects, and from other actions                                         Policy Loan for                  The indicator has some potential as a proxy because the planned
monitored under National Climate                                         Sustainable                      emissions reductions per year could continue to contribute to emissions
Change Action Plan.                                                      Environmental                    reductions, but the indicator could benefit from some revision in wording
                                                                         Management                       to make it more specific and linked to the project. Limitations: In addition
                                                                         (SEM DPL;                        to the limitations mentioned above, the achievement of the indicator may
                                                                         P095205) in                      be difficult to attribute to the project.
                                                                         Brazil
Woodfuel stoves promotion                18     3                        Sustainable       Highly         The indicator measures the promotion of woodfuel stoves. The indicator
                                                                         and               satisfactory   lacks specificity, which makes it difficult to measure. The indicator
                                                                         Participatory                    also has relatively low proxy potential because it simply captures the
                                                                         Energy                           promotion of stoves without considering their adoption or uptake by
                                                                         Management                       target groups or other actions that could contribute to ensuring long-term
                                                                         Project                          impacts. Limitations: In addition to the limitations mentioned above,
                                                                         (PROGEDE;                        the indicator will not be easy to attribute to the project as it is currently
                                                                         P046768) in                      worded and it lacks a time frame.
                                                                         Senegal
Kerosene stoves promotion                18     3                        Sustainable       Highly         The indicator measures the promotion of kerosene stoves. The indicator
                                                                                                                                                                                          UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                         and               satisfactory   lacks specificity, which makes it difficult to measure. The indicator
                                                                         Participatory                    also has relatively low proxy potential because it simply captures the
                                                                         Energy                           promotion of stoves without considering their adoption or uptake by
                                                                         Management                       target groups or other actions that could contribute to ensuring long-term
                                                                         Project                          impacts. Limitations: In addition to the limitations mentioned above,
                                                                         (PROGEDE;                        the indicator will not be easy to attribute to the project as it is currently
                                                                         P046768) in                      worded and it lacks a time frame.
                                                                         Senegal
Indicator                          CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context    Outcome       Notes
                                         Score Potential   Indicators                   Rating

Promote investment in climate            18     3                        Natural        Moderately    The indicator measures the promotion of climate change adaptation
change adaptation and mitigation                                         Resources and satisfactory   and mitigation. The indicator has relatively low proxy potential because
                                                                         Environmental                it will be difficult to show how the promotion of investment will lead to
                                                                         Governance                   investment that will contribute to long-term impacts as the indicator is
                                                                         (NREG)                       currently worded. Limitations: In addition to the limitations mentioned
                                                                         Program (DPO-                above, it will be hard to measure the promotion of something—
                                                                         1: P102971;                  measuring a percentage or amount increase in investment would be
                                                                         DPO-2:                       more clear and would have improved the indicator. The indicator is also
                                                                         P113172; DPO-                not clearly linked to the project. The targets are more specific but the two
                                                                         3: P118188) in               targets (original and revised) go in different directions. The indicator also
                                                                         Ghana                        lacks a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                      UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS
                                                                                                                                                                                      91
                                                                                                                                                                                    92



GOVERNANCE INDICATORS
Indicator                           CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI           Use Context         Outcome   Notes
                                          Score Potential   Indicators                                Ratings
Proportion of citizens who consider Yes   N/A    5          1. Changes to         Various projects              Indicator can be used to meet World Bank Group citizen engagement
that design and/or implementation                           project activities                                  requirements.
of project subject to consultation                          as a result of
is responsive to their views                                consultations (yes/
(percent)                                                   no). 2. Grievances
                                                            registered related to
                                                            delivery of project
                                                            benefits that are
                                                            actually addressed
                                                            (percent).
Grievances registered related to    Yes   N/A    5          1. Proportion          Various projects             Indicator can be used to meet World Bank Group citizen engagement
delivery of project benefits that                           of citizens who                                     requirements.
are actually addressed (percent)                            consider that
                                                            design and/or
                                                            implementation
                                                            of project subject
                                                            to consultation is
                                                            responsive to their
                                                            views (percent). 2.
                                                                                                                                                                                    UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                            Changes to project
                                                            activities as a result
                                                            of consultations
                                                            (yes/no).
Forest area brought under                 N/A    5                                Various projects              Key indicator in multiple PPI clusters.
strengthened tenure or use rights
Indicator                            CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI           Use Context           Outcome        Notes
                                           Score Potential   Indicators                                  Ratings
Changes to project activities as a         N/A    5          1. Proportion         Various projects                     Indicator can be used to meet World Bank Group citizen engagement
result of consultations (yes/no)                             of citizens who                                            requirements.
                                                             consider that
                                                             design and/or
                                                             implementation
                                                             of project subject
                                                             to consultation is
                                                             responsive to their
                                                             views (percent).
                                                             2. Grievances
                                                             registered related to
                                                             delivery of project
                                                             benefits that are
                                                             actually addressed
                                                             (percent).
Increase capacity to finance               29     5                                Peruvian National     Satisfactory   The indicator measures increased capacity for financing, which has
SINANPE recurrent costs with                                                       Trust Fund for                       high potential as a proxy indicator because financing is a critical
local resources                                                                    PAs-Programme                        component in ensuring sustainability of project activities and
                                                                                                                                                                                                 UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                   for a Participatory                  long-term impacts. The indicator, with the inclusion of the target, is
                                                                                   Management                           specific, measurable, attributable to the project, and includes a time
                                                                                   of PAs Project                       frame, all of which contribute to a realistic and robust indicator.
                                                                                   (P068250) in Peru

Enactment of legislation designed          27     5                                Economic Recovery Satisfactory       The indicator measures the development of legislation as a first
to reinvigorate the mining                                                         Credit (P057293)                     step in reforming the legal and regulatory framework for mining
sector, including first steps for                                                  in DRC                               operations. The indicator is specific with the target information and
restructuring Geacamines, the                                                                                           will be easy and cost-effective to measure. The indicator has high
mining parastatal                                                                                                       proxy potential because the development of legislation can play a key
                                                                                                                        role in ensuring sustained long-term impacts.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 93
                                                                                                                                                                                        94



Indicator                           CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context         Outcome        Notes
                                          Score Potential   Indicators                        Ratings
Enactment of legislation            Yes   27     5                        Economic Recovery Satisfactory     The indicator measures the development of legislation as a first
supporting reform of the forestry                                         Credit (P057293)                   step in reforming the legal and regulatory framework for forestry
sector                                                                    in DRC                             operations, with the aim of ensuring good governance in forest
                                                                                                             management operations. The indicator is specific with the target
                                                                                                             information and will be easy and cost-effective to measure. The
                                                                                                             indicator has high proxy potential because the development of
                                                                                                             legislation can play a key role in ensuring sustained long-term
                                                                                                             impacts.
Transparency International Index          26     5                        Economic           Satisfactory    This indicator uses an external measure to show improvement. It has
                                                                          Management                         a high potential as a proxy because it has the potential to capture a
                                                                          and Governance                     change in governance and related concepts that have the potential to
                                                                          Reform Grant                       contribute to sustaining long-term impacts. Other benefits of using
                                                                          (EMGRG; P106458)                   an external measurement is that the indicator will be cost-effective
                                                                          in Central African                 to measure and will provide a measurement that is not biased by the
                                                                          Republic                           project. The indicator is also specific and realistic. Limitations: The
                                                                                                             indicator is not clearly attributable to the project and lacks a time
                                                                                                             frame.

Number of functioning forest user         26     5                        Andhra Pradesh      Satisfactory   This indicator measures forest user groups that are implementing
groups (VSS) undertaking forest                                           Community Forest                   forest management plans. It has high proxy potential because of
management tasks according                                                Management                         the assumption that active inclusion and involvement of local forest
                                                                                                                                                                                        UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




to microplans and operating                                               Project (P073094)                  users in forest management will contribute to sustainable, long-term
according to their covenants and                                          in India                           impacts. The indicator is clear and specific and able to be measured.
agreed procedures                                                                                            Limitations: Measurement could be time-consuming and resource-
                                                                                                             intensive, as the indicator is unlikely to be captured in government
                                                                                                             or existing surveys. The indicator also lacks attribution to the project
                                                                                                             and a time frame.

Tenure of at least 30 percent of          29     4                        Forests and Rural   Moderately     The indicator measures the formalization of land tenure in project
the occupants in national lands                                           Productivity        satisfactory   areas with the assistance of the project. The indicator has relatively
in the project area regularized                                           Project (P064914)                  high proxy potential because of its potential to capture long-
through formal, long-term                                                 in Honduras                        term impacts. The indicator is specific, measurable, and clearly
usufruct agreements or title                                                                                 attributable to the project, which makes it realistic. Limitations: The
developed with the assistance of                                                                             indicator lacks a time frame.
the project
Indicator                            CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context           Outcome        Notes
                                           Score Potential   Indicators                          Ratings
150,000 hectares under                     27     4                        Indigenous and        Satisfactory   The indicator measures the area under community and sustainable
community conservation in                                                  Community                            use, which is somewhat similar to the core sector indicator on
different ecozones in the project                                          Biodiversity                         area brought under management plans. The indicator is clear,
area and 150,000 hectares                                                  Conservation                         attributable to the project by noting the project areas, and should be
of complementary area under                                                Project (COINBIO;                    relatively cost-effective to measure. It has high potential for a proxy
sustainable use                                                            PO66674) in                          indicator because of the assumption that community involvement in
                                                                           Mexico                               management can contribute to long-term impacts. Limitations: The
                                                                                                                indicator lacks a time frame and uses the term "sustainable," which
                                                                                                                can be defined and interpreted in different ways.


Share of the projects                      26     4                        First Programmatic Satisfactory      The indicator measures the submission, approval, and monitoring of
submitted directly to BNDES                                                Development                          projects submitted, therefore capturing more than just the existence
screened, approved, and                                                    Policy Loan for                      or development of projects but the implementation as well. The
monitored according to the                                                 Sustainable                          indicator has relatively high potential as a proxy with the potential
new Environmental and Social                                               Environmental                        to achieve long-term impacts, though it would be even higher if it
Institutional Policy                                                       Management (SEM                      were more clear how the projects would address long-term impacts
                                                                           DPL; P095205) in                     and projects aims. The indicator is specific, measurable, and
                                                                           Brazil                               attributable. Limitations: Although the indicator is generally realistic,
                                                                                                                                                                                            UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                                achieving 100 percent seems like a difficult target and so it is rated
                                                                                                                slightly lower. It also lacks a time frame.
Increased participation of                 26     4                        Peruvian National     Satisfactory   The indicator measures participation of women at different stages,
women in planning, managing,                                               Trust Fund for                       which is important. The indicator has high proxy potential because
monitoring, and evaluating Project                                         PAs-Programme                        of the assumption that participation will lead to sustainable, long-
ANPs                                                                       for a Participatory                  term impacts; further, because beneficiaries are participating in the
                                                                           Management                           planning, managing, monitoring, and evaluating of project ANPs,
                                                                           of PAs Project                       they are more likely to feel a sense of ownership and investment in
                                                                           (P068250) in Peru                    long-term outcomes. The indicator is specific, especially with the
                                                                                                                inclusion of the target, and measurable. Limitations: The indicator
                                                                                                                lacks a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                            95
                                                                                                                                                                                          96



Indicator                             CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context          Outcome        Notes
                                            Score Potential   Indicators                         Ratings
6900 villages benefiting from               26     4                        Sustainable          Satisfactory   The indicator aims to capture the benefits to villages from project
participation in project activities                                         Forestry                            activities and is unique in including a time frame. The indicator is
by 12/31/07                                                                 Development                         also attributable to the project. The indicator has relatively high
                                                                            Project (P064729)                   proxy potential because of the assumption that receiving benefits
                                                                            and Sustainable                     from the project will contribute to project support and longer-
                                                                            Forestry                            term impacts. Limitations: The indicator does not specify how the
                                                                            Development                         villages will benefit (financial? improved livelihoods? improved water
                                                                            Project (Natural                    sources? other?), which makes it less specific and measurable. CSI
                                                                            Forest Protection) -                Potential: This could be interpreted to fulfill: "Number of people with
                                                                            P060029 in China                    increased monetary or nonmonetary benefits from forests."
Establishment of a financial                24     4                        Ecomarkets Project Satisfactory     The indicator measures the establishment of a financial instrument
instrument to support easements                                             (P061314 [GEF                       to support biodiversity conservation, which is an important concept
targeting biodiversity conservation                                         CR-Ecomarkets]                      for ensuring sustainable and longer-term impacts, making this
in Costa Rica by EOP                                                        and P52009                          indicator have a high proxy potential. The indicator is specific and
                                                                            [Ecomarkets                         somewhat attributable to the project. The indicator also includes a
                                                                            Projects]) in Costa                 time frame, which is rare among the indicators. Limitations: The
                                                                            Rica                                indicator could be more specific in terms of the desired level of
                                                                                                                financing.
Water quality monitoring and                25     4                        First Programmatic Satisfactory     This indicator measures the monitoring and evaluation of water
evaluation for 90,000 km of main                                            Development                         quality, with the aim of using results for improvement. The indicator
                                                                                                                                                                                          UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




rivers being executed and publicly                                          Policy Loan for                     also suggests government commitment to improving water quality
released on a regular basis, with                                           Sustainable                         and ensuring public access to information. The indicator has high
results used for prioritization of                                          Environmental                       proxy potential because it encompasses multiple actions necessary
investments for improved water                                              Management (SEM                     to ensure water quality over the long term, such as prioritization
quality                                                                     DPL; P095205) in                    of water quality activities and commitment to provide information.
                                                                            Brazil                              The indicator is specific and relatively measurable. Limitations: The
                                                                                                                indicator may be difficult to measure because it will be necessary
                                                                                                                to define how results have been used to prioritize improvements,
                                                                                                                or will at least involve specific measurements that will have to be
                                                                                                                carried out, which increases the cost and time of measurement. The
                                                                                                                indicator could also be more clearly attributable to the project and
                                                                                                                include a time frame.
Indicator                           CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context          Outcome        Notes
                                          Score Potential   Indicators                         Ratings
70 organizationally advanced              24     4                        Indigenous and       Satisfactory   The indicator measures community involvement in conservation,
communities (Category 3 and 4)                                            Community                           using defined categories. The indicator is specific, particularly
with active conservation (and                                             Biodiversity                        with the inclusion of a way to categorize communities, and is
integrated resource use) on                                               Conservation                        attributable to the project. It has high proxy potential because of the
communally owned land of high                                             Project (COINBIO;                   potential for communities who are involved in managing resources
biodiversity in Oaxaca, Guerrero,                                         PO66674) in                         to support their sustainable use and contribute to long-term
and Michoacan.                                                            Mexico                              impacts. Limitations: The indicator lacks a time frame. It also uses
                                                                                                              the concept of "active" conservation, which could be more clearly
                                                                                                              defined.

Technical capacity of staff in FD   Yes   23     4                        Uttar Pradesh        Satisfactory   The indicator measures improved technical capacity among two
and local communities in forest                                           and Uttaranchal                     target groups through the development and implementation of
management improved                                                       Forestry Project                    a training plan. The indicator has relatively high proxy potential
                                                                          (P035169) in India                  because of the assumption that improved capacity of these target
                                                                                                              groups will contribute to improved forest management, which will
                                                                                                              contribute to longer-term impacts. Limitations: The indicator may
                                                                                                              be difficult to measure because it does not include a baseline of
                                                                                                              capacity or a way to evaluate improved capacity. The indicator can
                                                                                                                                                                                        UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                              be assumed to be attributable to the project, although it does not
                                                                                                              explicitly show the link. It also lacks a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                        97
                                                                                                                                                                                     98



Indicator                           CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context         Outcome        Notes
                                          Score Potential   Indicators                        Ratings
Increased coordination at a               23     4                        MX Programmatic Satisfactory       The indicator measures increased coordination among sectors,
multisectoral level, as evidenced                                         EnvSAL (First                      which has relatively high potential as a proxy indicator because of
by preparation of policy packages                                         Programmatic                       the assumption that coordination and consensus can contribute to
that are based on consensus                                               Environment                        longer-term, sustainable impacts. The addition of "as evidenced
among key stakeholders                                                    Structural                         by" is a nice example of how an indicator can be made to be
                                                                          Adjustment                         more specific and shows how something like coordination can be
                                                                          Loan (EnvSAL                       elaborated upon. The indicator is measurable through the policy
                                                                          I) and Second                      packages, although it could be more specific on the desired amount.
                                                                          Progammatic                        Limitations: The indicator lacks a target and a time frame.
                                                                          Environment
                                                                          Development Policy
                                                                          Loan (EnvDPL
                                                                          II) (P074539 for
                                                                          EnvSAL I and
                                                                          P079748 for
                                                                          EnvDPL II) in
                                                                          Mexico
Management plans (ha):             Yes    24     4                        Forestry Sector     Satisfactory   The indicator measures both the preparation and implementation
Preparation and implementation of                                         (P001168) in Côte                  of forest management, including the desired area of forests under
management plans for 700,000 ha                                           d'Ivoire                           these plans, which is similar to the core sector indicator on forest
                                                                                                                                                                                     UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




of these forests, of which 500,000                                                                           area brought under management plans. The indicator is specific and
ha would be managed by private                                                                               elaborates upon components of a management plan, which makes
companies under long-term                                                                                    it measurable. The concept has relatively high potential as a proxy
contracts; the preparation of a                                                                              because of the assumption that management plans will lead to long-
detailed land use and agricultural                                                                           term management. Limitations: The indicator includes many different
development plan for the buffer                                                                              components, making it somewhat less specific and more difficult
zone of 1 gazetted forest; and                                                                               to measure. The indicator also lacks attribution to the project and a
incremental agricultural inputs to                                                                           time frame.
help farmers intensify agriculture
in the buffer zones
Indicator                          CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context          Outcome          Notes
                                         Score Potential   Indicators                         Ratings
Strengthen the operating                 22     4                        Forest Resource      Satisfactory     The indicator measures strengthened technical support to the forest
efficiency of technical support                                          Development and                       sector. It has relatively high proxy potential based on the assumption
services in the forest sector,                                           Protection Project                    that increased support will contribute to longer-term impacts.
particularly planting materials,                                         (P003557) in                          Limitations: The indicator could be more specific; "strengthened" is
research, and extension programs                                         China                                 not specific, especially in the absence of a target, which makes it
                                                                                                               more difficult to measure the indicator. It is not clearly linked to the
                                                                                                               project and lacks a time frame.
Sustainable funding mechanisms           22     4                        Uttar Pradesh        Satisfactory     The indicator measures the establishment of sustainable funding
established                                                              and Uttaranchal                       mechanisms. The concept is important for proxies, which resulted in
                                                                         Forestry Project                      a relatively high proxy rating, but the indicator could be more specific
                                                                         (P035169) in India                    in terms of what the desired mechanism is, amounts of percentages
                                                                                                               that would ensure sustainability, etc. Limitations: As noted above,
                                                                                                               the indicator could be more specific, which would make it more
                                                                                                               measurable. It also lacks attribution to the project and a time frame.
Number of hectares of forests            22     4                        Energy Access        Moderately       This indicator measures the area under participatory management,
brought under participatory                                              Project (P049395)    unsatisfactory   which is somewhat similar to the core sector indicator on areas under
management                                                               in Ethiopia                           management plans. The indicator has relatively high proxy potential
                                                                                                               because participatory management is considered important in
                                                                                                                                                                                          UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                               ensuring sustainable, long-term impacts. Limitations: The indicator
                                                                                                               could be more clear; participatory management is somewhat
                                                                                                               subjective and could be defined in different ways by different users.
                                                                                                               The indicator is also not attributable to the project and lacks a time
                                                                                                               frame. CSI potential: This could be interpreted as: "Forest area
                                                                                                               brought under management plan."
                                                                                                                                                                                          99
                                                                                                                                                                                      100



Indicator                          CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context        Outcome       Notes
                                         Score Potential   Indicators                       Ratings
Strengthen institutions and              22     4                        Natural Resources Moderately     This indicator measures strengthened forest governance and
governance [in forestry sector]                                          and Environmental satisfactory   suggests a commitment to increased legality in the forest sector.
                                                                         Governance (NREG)                These concepts have potential as proxies because of the assumption
                                                                         Program (DPO-1:                  that stronger institutions, governance, and legal supplies of timber
                                                                         P102971; DPO-2:                  will lead to sustainable, long-term impacts. It is important to
                                                                         P113172; DPO-3:                  note, however, that the target was revised, resulting in a different
                                                                         P118188) in Ghana                direction, though still generally on forest legality issues. Limitations:
                                                                                                          The indicator uses the term "strengthened," which could be more
                                                                                                          specific. The indicator is somewhat unrealistic, because the original
                                                                                                          target aims to achieve 100 percent legality, which is a high bar that
                                                                                                          may not be achievable. The indicator is not clearly attributable to the
                                                                                                          project and lacks a time frame.
Reduce social conflict issues in         22     4                        Natural Resources Moderately     The indicator measures reduction in social conflicts in mining
mining communities and improve                                           and Environmental satisfactory   communities. The target helps to elaborate on the concept of social
support to small scale miners                                            Governance (NREG)                conflict. The reduction of social conflict in general has potential
(SSM)                                                                    Program (DPO-1:                  as a proxy indicator because of the assumption that reduced
                                                                         P102971; DPO-2:                  social conflict can contribute to consensus on decision making or
                                                                         P113172; DPO-3:                  management and a generally stronger community environment in
                                                                         P118188) in Ghana                which to realize project achievements. Limitations: The revised
                                                                                                          target does not seem to link as clearly to the indicator as the original
                                                                                                                                                                                      UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                          target; for instance, it is not clear what the survey aims to do and
                                                                                                          how a survey will reduce social conflict. The indicator is not specific
                                                                                                          in how social conflict will be reduced with the revised target and
                                                                                                          lacks attribution to the project and a time frame. The indicator may
                                                                                                          also be difficult to measure, as a reduction in social conflict could be
                                                                                                          a subjective measurement without clear baselines and targets.
Indicator                          CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context        Outcome        Notes
                                         Score Potential   Indicators                       Ratings
Number of firms in breach of             22     4                        Economic           Satisfactory   This indicator measures compliance with forest regulations, a
national regulations in forestry                                         Management                        concept that can substitute for improved forest governance. The
                                                                         and Governance                    indicator has potential as a proxy for institutional aspects of
                                                                         Reform Grant                      forestry because of the potential for firm compliance on regulations
                                                                         (EMGRG; P106458)                  to contribute to long-term impacts. The indicator is very clear and
                                                                         in Central African                specific. Limitations: The indicator may be difficult to measure if
                                                                         Republic                          transparency or reporting are limited and it could be time-consuming
                                                                                                           to measure. The indicator is also somewhat unrealistic, because
                                                                                                           achieving 100 percent compliance may be too ambitious. The
                                                                                                           indicator also lacks attribution to the project and a time frame.

Number of firms in compliance            22     4                        Economic           Satisfactory   This indicator measures compliance with oil regulations, a concept
with new regulations in the oil                                          Management                        that can substitute for improved oil governance. The indicator has
sector                                                                   and Governance                    potential as a proxy because of the potential for firm compliance
                                                                         Reform Grant                      on regulations to contribute to long-term impacts. The indicator is
                                                                         (EMGRG; P106458)                  very clear and specific. Limitations: The indicator may be difficult
                                                                         in Central African                to measure if transparency or reporting are limited and it could
                                                                         Republic                          be time-consuming to measure. The indicator is also somewhat
                                                                                                                                                                                   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




                                                                                                           unrealistic, because achieving 100 percent compliance may be
                                                                                                           too ambitious (although the small number of firms makes it more
                                                                                                           realistic). The indicator also lacks attribution to the project and a
                                                                                                           time frame.
Significant increase in social           22     4                        Community          Satisfactory   The indicator measures increased social capital among project
capital in assisted communities                                          Forestry II                       communities. Social capital is considered an important factor in
                                                                         (PROCYMAF II;                     sustainable community management of resources, so the concept
                                                                         P035751) in Mexico                in general has strong proxy potential, although the indicator would
                                                                                                           likely need to be reworded, especially because "significant" is not
                                                                                                           specific. By including the term "assisted" communities, the indicator
                                                                                                           includes a link to the project. Limitations: As noted above, the term
                                                                                                           "significant" could be more clearly defined with a clear amount,
                                                                                                           desired increase or baseline. This limitation makes the indicator
                                                                                                           harder to measure. The indicator also lacks a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                   101
                                                                                                                                                                                             102



Indicator                               CSI   SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context          Outcome        Notes
                                              Score Potential   Indicators                         Ratings
Increase forest cover and                     22     4                        Madhya Pradesh       Satisfactory   The indicator measures multiple components of forest management,
productivity through development                                              Forestry Project                    including increased forest cover and productivity. Although the
of participatory processes for                                                (P010506) in India                  indicator is complex, the components fit together as steps of a
management and use of forest                                                                                      whole. Several of the concepts in the indicator, including JFM and
resources, taking special account                                                                                 participatory management processes, contribute to the indicator's
of the interests of tribals and                                                                                   relatively high proxy potential. Limitations: The indicator aims to
other disadvantaged groups 1)                                                                                     measure too many issues through one indicator, which makes it less
JFM approach established; 2) PRA                                                                                  specific and clear and more difficult to measure. The indicator also
based microplanning methods                                                                                       lacks attribution to the project and a time frame.
established; 3) silvicultural
practices adapted to multiple
objectives of JFM; 4) restoration
techniques for degraded areas
based on natural regeneration
tested; 5) measure tribal interests
in planning; 6) measure interest
of other disadvantaged groups,
scheduled castes and women,
landless
Forest fire control: accuracy of fire         21     4                        Daxinganling         Satisfactory   The indicator indirectly measures improved capacity to forecast fires
                                                                                                                                                                                             UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




forecast (percent): a) developed                                              Forest Fire                         by measuring the percentage increase in accuracy of forecasts. This
areas; b) undeveloped areas                                                   Rehabilitation                      indicator has potential as a proxy because it implicitly shows how
                                                                              Project (P003550)                   human resource investments in improved capacity can contribute
                                                                              in China                            to a long-term outcome and therefore a measure of "improved"
                                                                                                                  institutional effectiveness. Limitations: The indicator will depend on
                                                                                                                  having good data for measuring, which may be difficult. Although
                                                                                                                  the indicator is implicitly attributable to the project, the link is not
                                                                                                                  explicit. The indicator also lacks a time frame.
Indicator                          CSI    SMART PPI         Related PPI   Use Context          Outcome        Notes
                                          Score Potential   Indicators                         Ratings
Forest fire control: time for             21     4                        Daxinganling         Satisfactory   The indicator indirectly measures improved capacity to discover
discovering fire, a) developed                                            Forest Fire                         forest fires by measuring the time to discover fires. This indicator
areas (minutes); b) undeveloped                                           Rehabilitation                      has potential as a proxy because it implicitly shows how human
areas (minutes)                                                           Project (P003550)                   resource investments in improved capacity can contribute to a long-
                                                                          in China                            term outcome and therefore a measure of "improved" institutional
                                                                                                              effectiveness. Limitations: The indicator will depend on having good
                                                                                                              data for measuring, which may be difficult. Although the indicator
                                                                                                              is implicitly attributable to the project, the link is not explicit. The
                                                                                                              indicator also lacks a time frame.
Reinvestment by VSS in forest             21     4                        Andhra Pradesh       Satisfactory   This indicator measures local investment in forest management.
areas from generated funds                                                Community Forest                    The indicator concept has relatively high potential as a proxy based
(number of VSS)                                                           Management                          on the assumption that investment by forest user groups in forest
                                                                          Project (P073094)                   areas signifies interest in the long-term sustainable management
                                                                          in India                            of forests. Limitations: The indicator could be more specific in terms
                                                                                                              of what reinvestment means and the desired percent increased.
                                                                                                              The absence of a target also makes this indicator more difficult to
                                                                                                              measure. The indicator further lacks attribution to the project and a
                                                                                                              time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                         UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




Increase in local government's      Yes   21     4                        Sustainable          Satisfactory   This indicator measures local government capacity to conduct
capacity to supervise, monitor,                                           Forestry                            conservation activities. The indicator has relatively high potential
and implement conservation and                                            Development                         as a proxy because of the assumption that improved capacity in the
sustainable resource use activities                                       Project (P064729)                   specified areas will contribute to sustainable impacts over time.
                                                                          and Sustainable                     The indicator captures different components of increased capacity,
                                                                          Forestry                            rather than a single component, making it a more robust indicator.
                                                                          Development                         Limitations: The indicator could be more specific on the desired
                                                                          Project (Natural                    increase in capacity, such as by including a baseline and target. This
                                                                          Forest Protection;                  limitation also makes the indicator more difficult to measure. The
                                                                          P060029) in China                   indicator lacks attribution to the project and a time frame.
                                                                                                                                                                                         103
                                                                                                                                                                                                           104



OTHER INDICATORS
    Indicator                                        CSI   SMART   PPI         Related PPI Indicators                                             Use       Outcome   Notes
                                                           Score   Potential                                                                      Context   Rating

    Government officials and relevant project        Yes   N/A     5           1. Government officials and project staff regularly conduct                            Likely key PPI indicator useful in
    staff provided with capacity building                                      high quality M&E. 2. Predictable, sustainable financing for                            different contexts.
    support to improve management practices                                    M&E activities (including after project completion).
    to design and implement M&E

    Government officials and project staff           Yes   N/A     5           1. Government officials and relevant project staff provided                            Likely key PPI indicator useful in
    regularly conduct high-quality M&E                                         with capacity building support to improve management                                   different contexts.
                                                                               practices to design and implement M&E. 2. Predictable,
                                                                               sustainable financing for M&E activities (including after
                                                                               project completion).

    Predictable, sustainable financing for           Yes   N/A     5           1. Government officials and relevant project staff provided with                       Likely key PPI indicator useful in
    M&E activities (including after project                                    capacity building support to improve management practices                              different contexts.
    completion)                                                                to design and implement M&E. 2. Government officials and
                                                                               project staff regularly conduct high-quality M&E.

    Development, establishment, and                  Yes   N/A     5                                                                                                  Likely key PPI indicator useful in
    implementation of a financial mechanism                                                                                                                           different contexts.
    or trust fund to support activities or efforts
    identified as critical for the continued
                                                                                                                                                                                                           UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




    achievement of forest investment
    objectives, including capacity building and
    training to ensure that local actors can
    manage and disburse funding

(Footnotes)
*
    Denotes Intermediate Outcome (IO) indicator.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                      105




        A n n e x D. G l o s s a r y

        Activity. Actions taken or work performed through which inputs, such as funds, technical assistance, and other types of
        resources are mobilized to produce specific outputs (DAC 2002). Related term: development intervention.

        Attribution. The ascription of a causal link between observed (or expected to be observed) changes and a specific
        intervention. Attribution refers to that which is to be credited for the observed changes or results achieved. It represents
        the extent to which observed development effects can be attributed to a specific intervention or to the performance
        of one or more partners taking account of other interventions, (anticipated or unanticipated) confounding factors, or
        external shocks (DAC 2002).

        Counterfactual. The situation or condition that hypothetically may prevail for individuals, organizations, or groups were
        there no development intervention (DAC 2002). By definition, a counterfactual cannot be observed. Therefore it must be
        estimated using comparison groups.

        Development intervention. An instrument for partner (donor and non-donor) support aimed to promote development.
        Examples include policy advice, projects, and programs (DAC 2002). Related term: activity.

        Impacts. Positive and negative, primary and secondary long-term effects produced by a development intervention,
        directly or indirectly, intended or unintended (DAC 2002). Impacts represent the ultimate result of an outcome, which
        may often only become evident several years or more after project completion (World Bank 2014a). Related term:
        longer-term outcome.

        Indicator. Quantitative or qualitative factor or variable that provides a simple and reliable means to measure achievement,
        to reflect the changes connected to an intervention, or to help assess the performance of a development actor (DAC
        2002). An indicator is a variable that measures a phenomenon of interest. The phenomenon can be an input, an output,
        an outcome, a characteristic, or an attribute.

        Inputs. The financial, human, and material resources used for the development intervention (DAC 2002).

        Intermediate outcome. A result that is proximate to an intended final outcome but often more achievable and measurable
        during a project’s lifetime than an intended final outcome (World Bank 2014a).

        Longer-term outcome. Outcomes that are typically not visible at project closure and may not be apparent until 5–25 years
        after a project closes (World Bank 2014a). Related term: impacts.

        Proxy indicator. An indirect measurement of a variable lacking direct information (IEG 2012) and a substitute for an
        indicator that is hard to measure directly and may reveal performance trends, potential problems or areas of success
        (World Bank 2014a).
106   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




      Predictive proxy indicator. Or predictive proxy; a specific type of proxy indicator, which seeks to provide information
      about the future. This study has developed this term to refer to a measure taken during implementation of a project,
      program, or policy that stands in for impacts, often ones that take a long time to materialize.

      Outputs. The products, capital goods, and services that result from a development intervention; may also include changes
      resulting from the intervention that are relevant to the achievement of outcomes (DAC 2002).

      Outcome. The likely or achieved short-term and medium-term effects of an intervention’s outputs (DAC 2002). Related
      terms: results, outputs, impacts.

      Results. The output, outcome, or impact (intended or unintended, positive and/or negative) of a development
      intervention (DAC 2002).

      Results chain. The causal sequence for a development intervention that stipulates the necessary sequence to achieve
      desired objectives, beginning with inputs, moving through activities and outputs, and culminating in outcomes, impacts,
      and feedback (DAC 2002). It describes how particular inputs will likely lead to intended outcomes (World Bank 2014a).

      Results framework. The program logic that explains how the development objective is to be achieved, including causal
      relationships and underlying assumptions (DAC 2002).

      Sustainability. In the context of development evaluation, sustainability refers to the continuation of benefits from a
      development intervention after major development assistance has been completed. It also denotes the probability of
      continued long-term benefits and the resilience to risk of the net benefit flows over time.

       
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                   107




        References

        Agrawal, A. 2001. “Common Property Institutions and Sustainable Governance of Resources.” World Development 29
        (10): 1649–72.

        Blundell, R., L. Dearden, and B. Sianesi. 2005. “Evaluating the Effect of Education on Earnings: Models, Methods and
        Results from the National Child Development Survey.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A 168 (3): 473–512.

        Buch, B., M. Buntaine, and B. Parks. 2015. Aiming at the Wrong Targets: The Difficulty of Improving Domestic Institutions
        with International Aid. AidData Working Paper No. 4.

        Cawley, J. 2004. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” The Journal of Human Resources 39 (2): 451–74.

        CIFOR (Center for International Forestry Research). 2015. “Evidence-Based Forestry.” Available at http://www1.cifor.
        org/ebf/about.html. Accessed 14 April 2015.

        CODE (Committee on Development Effectiveness). 2013. Report to the Board from the Committee of Development
        Effectiveness: Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Group Experience
        and Draft Management Response. Washington, DC: World Bank.

        DAC (Development Assistance Committee). 2002. Glossary of Terms in Evaluation and Results-Based Management.
        Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

        Deforce, K., A. Storme, and J. Bastiaens. 2014. “Middle-Holocene Alluviual Forests and Associated Fluvial Environments:
        A Multi-proxy Reconstruction from the lower Scheldt, N. Belgium.” The Holocene 24: 1550–64.

        FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2014. State of the World’s Forests 2014: Enhancing the Socioeconomic Benefits
        from Forests. Rome: FAO.

        Global Environment Facility (GEF). 2014.  Combating Land Degradation in Production Landscapes: Learning from GEF
        Projects Applying Integrated Approaches. Washington, DC: World Bank.

        Huselid, M. 1995. “The Impact of Human Resource Management Practices on Turnover, Productivity, and Corporate
        Financial Performance.” The Academy of Management Journal 38 (3): 635–72.

        IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2012. Designing a Results Framework for Achieving Results: A How-To Guide.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.

        ———. 2013. Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Group Experience.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
108   UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS




      Kishor, N., and M. A. de Rijk. 2014. Assessing Impacts of Forest Governance Interventions: Learning from World Bank
      Experience. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      Kishor, N., D. C. Miller, J. Virdin, and C. Wahlén. Forthcoming. “The Contribution of Tenure Reforms to Sustainable
      Management of Forests and Fisheries.” In Looking Back and Looking Ahead: The World Bank’s Experience with Land
      Tenure Projects, ed. J. Munoz et al. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      Lawry, S., C. Samii, R. Hall, A. Leopold, D. Hornby, and F. Mtero. 2014. “The Impact of Land Property Rights Interventions
      on Investment and Agricultural Productivity in Developing Countries: A Systematic Review.” Campbell Systematic
      Reviews 10.1.

      Levin, K., B. Cashore, S. Bernstein, and G. Auld. 2012. “Overcoming the Tragedy of Super Wicked Problems: Constraining
      Our Future Selves to Ameliorate Global Climate Change.” Policy Sciences 45(2): 123–52.

      Mann, M., R. Bradley, and M. Hughes. 1998. “Global-Scale Temperature Patterns and Climate Forcing over the Past Six
      Centuries.” Nature 392: 779–87.

      Mendelsohn, R. 1994. “Property Rights and Tropical Deforestation.” Oxford Economic Papers 46: 750–56.

      Miteva, Daniela A., S. K. Pattanayak, and P. J. Ferraro. 2012. “Evaluation of Biodiversity Policy Instruments: What Works
      and What Doesn’t?” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 28.1: 69–92.

      Morrone, Adolfo, Noemi Tontoranelli, and Guilia Ranuzzi. 2009. How Good Is Trust? Measuring Trust and Its Role for the
      Progress of Societies. Paris: OECD Statistics Working Paper.

      OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 1993. OECD Core Set of Indicators for Environmental
      Performance Reviews. Paris: OECD.

      ———. 1994. Environmental Indicators. Paris: OECD.

      Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Iinstitutions for Collective Action. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
      University Press.

      Ostrom, E., and E. Schlager. 1996. “The Formation of Property Rights.” In Rights to Nature: Ecological, Economic, Cultural,
      and Political Principles of Institutions for the Environment, ed. S. Hanna and C. Folke, 127–56. Washington, DC: Island
      Press.

      Psacharopoulous, G. 1994. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update.” World Development 22 (9): 1,325–43.

      Sayer, J., T. Sunderland, J. Ghazoul, J. Pfund, D. Sheil, E. Meijaard, M. Venter et al. 2013. “Ten Principles for a Landscape
      Approach to Reconciling Agriculture, Conservation and Other Competing Land Uses.” Proceedings of the National
      Academy of Sciences 110 (21): 8349–56.

      Schorr, L., and C. Weiss. eds. 1995. New Approaches to Evaluating Community Initiatives: Concepts, Methods, and
      Contexts. Washington, DC: Aspen Institute.
UNDERSTANDING LONG-TERM IMPACTS IN THE FOREST SECTOR: PREDICTIVE PROXY INDICATORS                                                   109




        Scriven, Michael. 1991. Evaluation Thesaurus. Newbury Park: Sage.

        Shyamsundar, Priya. 2002. Poverty-Environment Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.

        Smith, D., B. Larson, M. Kelty, and P.M. S. Ashton, eds. 1997.  The Practice of Silviculture: Applied Forest Ecology. New
        York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

        Stem, C., R. Margoluis, N. Salafsky, and M. Brown. 2005. “Monitoring and Evaluation in Conservation: A Review of Trends
        and Approaches.” Conservation Biology 19 (2): 295–309.

        Stuart, S., and B. Collen. 2013. “Conserving Biodiversity in a Target-Driven World.” In Biodiversity Monitoring and
        Conservation: Bridging the Gap between Global Commitment and Local Action, ed. B. Collen, N. Pettorelli, J. Baillie, and
        S. Durant. New York: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd.

        Thomson, V., and X. Luo. 2011. “Overlooked Links in the Results Chain.” IEG Evaluation Brief 14. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.

        Weiss, C. H. 1995. “Nothing as Practical as Good Theory: Exploring Theory-Based Evaluation for Comprehensive
        Community Initiatives for Children and Families” In New Approaches to Evaluating Community Initiatives, ed. J. Connell
        and A. Kubisch. Washington, DC: Aspen Institute.

        ——. 2000. “Theory-Based Evaluation: Theories of Change for Poverty Reduction Programs.” In Evaluation and Poverty
        Reduction, ed. O. Feinstein and R. Picciotto. Washington, DC: Operations Evaluation Department, World Bank.

        Woolcock, M. 2013. “Using Case Studies to Explore the External Validity of ‘Complex’ Development Interventions.”
        Evaluation 19 (3): 229–48.

        World Bank. 2009. 2009 Annual Review of Development Effectiveness: Achieving Sustainable Development. Washington,
        DC: World Bank.

        ———. 2013. ICT FOR DATA COLLECTION AND MONITORING & EVALUATION:
        Opportunities and Guidance on Mobile Applications for Forest and Agricultural Sectors. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

        ———. 2014a. Results Framework and M&E Guidance Note. Washington, DC: World Bank.

        ———.2014b. Core Sector Indicators and Definitions. Washington, DC: World Bank.

        Wunder, S., A. Angelsen, and B. Belcher. 2014. “Forests, Livelihoods, and Conservation: Broadening the Empirical Base.”
        World Development 64: S1–S11.
