                                                                              101996


Remarks by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim at the
Opening Press Conference of the
World Bank/IMF Annual Meetings
2015
October 8, 2015

World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Opening Press Conference of the World Bank/IMF Annual Meetings 2015Lima, Peru

As Prepared for Delivery


Good morning. Welcome to the 2015 World Bank Group-IMF Annual Meetings. It’s great to
be in Lima. Peru has been a wonderful host and we’re grateful for all it has done to prepare
for our arrival.

Just a few days ago, we announced that for the first time the percentage of people living in
extreme poverty around the world will likely fall to under 10 percent this year, to 9.6 percent
globally. This is the best story in the world. Our goals at the World Bank Group are to end
extreme poverty by 2030 and to boost shared prosperity for the bottom 40 percent in
developing countries. While we remain confident of ending extreme poverty, the final stretch
will be extremely difficult because we are in the midst of a period of slow global growth, the
end of the commodity super-cycle, pending interest rate hikes, and continued flight of
capital out of emerging markets.

After a decade of strong growth and tremendous social progress, Latin America, like other
regions, is facing these headwinds. We forecast that the region will experience -0.3 percent
growth for 2015 with a slight improvement to 1.1 percent in 2016. The slowdown poses a
threat to hard-won social gains, and countries must now adapt. Countries in Latin America
need to increase productivity, access to quality education, and ensure that the state is more
efficient in providing social services.
The region can promote inclusive growth through reforms that enable it take advantage of
its openness to global trade. The recently completed Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations
could be very good news for the region, even with Mexico, Chile, and Peru as the only Latin
American countries taking part. The TPP’s potential influence on the world economy could
help boost the region’s growth.

I have two other issues to talk about – the first on the impact of changing demographics. We
released our Global Monitoring Report yesterday, which shows that governments must
overcome a growing demographic divide to make future progress. Half of the world lives in
countries where populations are relatively young and growing, but are poor with little access
to quality education. The other half lives in countries where populations are contracting,
aging and retiring; these countries drive most of the world’s economic activity, but their
economic growth is at risk as birth rates and the numbers of workers decline.

These demographic realities can be a golden opportunity for both poor and rich
countries. An influx of working-age refugees or migrants into a country with an aging
population can ultimately reap benefits for everyone – but as we have been witnessing for
the past few years due to the ongoing conflict in Syria the flow of refugees can lead to
tragedy as well. Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey have taken in several million Syrians in recent
years, generously providing shelter, schooling, and other services. Now, hundreds of
thousands of mostly Syrian refugees have been pouring into Europe. This has tested
Europe’s leaders and its people, as it did Syria’s neighbors, and we admire the outpouring
of help and generosity from many across Europe. For all involved, the refugee crisis is an
immensely difficult challenge. The World Bank Group has been assisting the host
communities of the refugees in Lebanon and Jordan for the past few years, and now we’re
exploring new ways to increase our help for Syria’s neighbors.

The second topic is climate change. Climate change affects every nation and every person,
but it hits poor people the hardest. The world must cut emissions and invest in greater
resilience now. At the Paris conference in December, countries must show real ambition.
Political will for urgent action is critical. We believe there are politically credible pathways to
deliver $100 billion dollars a year in climate financing for developing countries by 2020.
Meeting this commitment will build the trust and confidence necessary for credible
emissions’ reduction targets. Much of that $100 billion dollars is already flowing, with
multilateral development banks providing critical financing.
The World Bank Group stands ready to scale up its support to meet increasing demand
from countries. The world must act now to put a price on carbon, end fossil fuel subsidies,
increase access to renewable energy and improve efficiency, build cleaner and more livable
cities, and invest in climate-smart agriculture. We will be having active discussions with our
shareholders in the coming days to do all we can to help the world find solutions that are
equal to the challenge of climate change.

Thank you very much. I’ll now take your questions.
