                                                                              101919


World Bank Group President
Jim Yong Kim Remarks at Davos
Press Conference
January 23, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Press Conference at the World Economic Forum
Davos, Switzerland

Transcript

MR. KIM: [In progress]--in the recent disagreement.


And we all have to remember, there's a number of organizations in the European Union
have an extremely diverse set of views on this particular issue. So, his ability to bring the
Union together, I think, is a very important signal for all of us.

A year ago, I said at this meeting that we needed a plan for tackling climate change, a plan
fit for the challenge that we face. A year later, we've seen great leadership on climate from
countries and companies, but emissions are still rising and the poor are still suffering.

We don't have a plan yet and the bits we do have are not equal to the size and challenge.

The UN Secretary-General has called for a leadership summit and we all should be very
grateful to him for having done so. This gives us the opportunity to organize our collective
leadership.

This is the year to take action on climate change. There are no more excuses. If we fail, our
children and grandchildren will ask us why we didn't act when it was still possible to do so.

We need leaders who are not thinking about short-term returns or election cycles. We need
leaders who are thinking foremost about taking care of the most vulnerable in this
generation and the generations ahead.
The good news is that there is action we all can take to turn economies around so they're
investing in what is clean and healthy and there are innovations that will bring future growth,
jobs, and competitiveness.

Through policy reforms, we can divest and tax that which we don't want, the carbon that
threatens development gains over the last 20 years.

First things first: Many have called for a price on carbon. Now, we must act. Governments
must put a price on pollution. Putting a price on carbon through either taxes or market-
based instruments are key. Can we be ready by September to set target dates for
implementation? We should set performance standards for buildings, cars, appliances,
transport systems, and drive efficiency to encourage investment away from high-carbon
growth and towards innovation and cleaner, greener growth.

We called for a phase-out of harmful fossil fuel subsidies. Act now. The $1.9 trillion in
subsidies can be redirected to support investment in clean growth. This challenges the
notion that responding to climate change is not affordable.

Financial regulators need to lead, as well. Sooner rather than later, they must address the
systemic risk associated with carbon-intensive activities in their economies, made clear, of
course, by price signals. Start now by enforcing disclosure of climate risk and requiring
companies and financial institutions to access their exposure to climate-related impacts.

The so-called "long-term investors" must recognize their fiduciary responsibility to future
pension holders who will be affected by decisions made today. Corporate leaders should
not wait to act until market signals are right and national investment policies are in place.

Be the first mover. Use smart due diligence. Rethink what fiduciary responsibility means in
this changing world. It's simple self-interest. Every company, investor, and bank that
screens new and existing investments for climate risk is simply being pragmatic.

The release of the green bond principles this month is welcome, but we need to seize the
opportunity, one that many financial leaders have been calling for. Let's use appetite for
green bonds to expand the universe of investors who are investing in green assets. Let's
create demand for those assets even faster.

Can CEOs in energy, infrastructure, and agribusiness come to New York in September with
their green bond issue in hand or underway? And institutional investors should commit to
purchasing specific significant amounts of green bonds for their portfolios.
So, as a first step, we should aim to double the green bond market and reach $20 billion by
the September summit, and at least $50 billion by the time of the Paris meeting.

In the face of the science and the risk associated with climate volatility and the social
volatility of inequality, the question isn't why we should act but rather it's why aren't we
acting? We have to help poor countries in this transition. We have to reduce the risk of
low-carbon investment, especially in developing countries, but we can do it. Development
finance institutions can leverage their capital and use the green climate fund to reduce their
risk and catalyze new investments in resilience.

Finally, to heads of state: Announcing your commitment to capitalize the green climate fund
at the time of the Secretary-General's summit will build trust and important momentum.

In 20 years, all of us will be asked a question: What did you do to fight climate
change? The leaders here in Davos, both from the private sector and from government,
have it in their power to act in substantial ways. Now is the time to act for future
generations before it's too late.

Thank you.

QUESTION: Thank you, President Kim.


Indeed, 2014 is a crucial year for engagement in climate change. What is different about
today's climate change debate versus 2006/07?

MR. KIM: [In progress]--three main things that are very different from [unclear 0:00:04].
The fact that the Secretary-General has made battling climate change one of the very top
priorities is extremely important, but we also see changes in the United States, a much
stronger commitment to tackling climate change and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

China has one of the most ambitious plans to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, an
ambition that they need, given that they're the largest emitter, and then, President Barroso;
so the three top emitters, the European Union, China, and the U.S., are all in a very
different place right now than they were even two or three years ago. So, that's the first
thing, political leadership.

Second thing is the private sector. I see a completely different view among private sector
companies and CEOs of the largest firms in the world talking to us, talking to me
particularly, about the possibilities of green bonds and how they can use their capital to
facilitate the movement toward renewable energy.

And finally, the technology is different, and it's changing all the time. Concentrated solar,
for example, was a dream several years ago and now the possibilities are much better, and
that's only going to accelerate over time. But to get the kind of investment in new
technologies that we need, the market signals have to be very strong.

And so, the combination of commitments from the government and from leaders like
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and the new and growing approach of the private sector--
the private sector, I think, will lead to the new technologies and we can bring in the virtuous
circle that we've all been waiting for.
