                                                                               101994


Speech by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim at the
United Nations General Assembly
September 25, 2015


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
70th Session of the United Nations General Assembly
New York City, United States

As Prepared for Delivery


Thank you, your Excellency, for the opportunity to address this historic Summit.

Together, we have reached an important milestone in adopting the Agenda 2030 for
Sustainable Development. Its goals and targets represent our commitment to a more
ambitious agenda for international development in the next 15 years. They reflect our dream
for a world in which everyone, everywhere can reach their full potential. And they seek to
preserve our planet – what Pope Francis called our “common home’’ -- for all future
generations.

At the World Bank Group, we pledge to use our comprehensive experience and knowledge
of financing development. We’ll adapt the financial tools of the rich to serve the poor.

As we discussed two months ago in Addis Ababa, the multilateral development banks
together plan to provide financial support of more than $400 billion dollars for the first three
years of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. In addition, the World Bank and the
IMF have launched a joint initiative to strengthen tax systems in developing countries; our
aim is to assist lower-income countries to increase their taxes by at least 2 to 4 percent of
GDP. These actions are the first essential steps toward raising the resources needed for
the Sustainable Development Goals – moving from billions to trillions of dollars in
development assistance.
We also will bring our best global development knowledge to tackle the world’s toughest
challenges. We have over 50 years of development experience helping countries grow their
economies, invest in their people and insure them against falling into poverty. More than
ever, we know what has worked and what hasn’t when it comes to development. Working
with the priorities set by developing countries, we’ll tackle challenges and create strategies
to resolve them.

Based on our experience with the Millennium Development Goals, we also know that the
Sustainable Development Goals will change the way we work. They will ensure we’re doing
all we can, as effectively as we can, and as fast as we can to help the poor and the
vulnerable.

I’ve experienced the power of setting goals and putting the poor first throughout my career.
In the suburbs of Lima, Peru, my organization, Partners In Health, worked to provide poor
people the standard of healthcare available in developed countries. When I was director of
the WHO’s HIV/AIDS Department in Geneva, we set a target of treating 3 million people
infected with HIV/AIDS in less than three years. And at the World Bank Group, we’ve
committed to ending extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared prosperity.

In each instance, clear goals focused our wills, our minds and our actions. They made us
look carefully at whether what we were actually doing helped those in need. They also
made us work differently; they ensured that our strategy had a clear focus with expected
outcomes.

For too long, our low aspirations for the poor have often turned out to be their worst enemy.
We have not been bold enough in helping them lift themselves out of misery. The poverty of
our imagination has prevented us from building a more just and more prosperous world. But
the Sustainable Development Goals give us an agenda that is more ambitious than any
before it.

I believe we are up to the task. The multilateral development banks and the IMF will work
closely together to substantially increase the amount of financing available to meet our high
aspirations. We are building on a record of great accomplishment – over the last 15 years,
close to 1 billion people have lifted themselves out of extreme poverty. Such progress
shows that even seemingly impossible development goals are entirely possible. We are
now the first generation in history that can end extreme poverty. We must not turn away
from this challenge. We must seize this moment and use all of our knowledge and grit to
reach these new goals. We will succeed. Together, we will make the world a more just and
prosperous place for generations to come. Thank you very much.
