                                                                                 101961


World Bank Group President
Jim Yong Kim's Q&A with Media
at G20 Meeting
November 14, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
G20 Meeting
Brisbane, Australia

Transcript


DR. KIM: I am very thrilled and delighted to be here in Australia. The G20 meeting is
tackling very important topics. First, I really welcome the focus on growth. Setting a clear
target for growth and then looking carefully at the plans for each of the G20 countries to be
able to increase growth by an additional two per cent has been extremely helpful. We'll see
what the results are but we're already encouraged. We think that if the countries will go
through with the kinds of structural reforms that they've committed to we could see a real
bump in growth.


We're also very pleased with the focus on infrastructure. It's been an emphasis for us at the
World Bank Group as well. The need for infrastructure just in the developing world is more
than $1 trillion a year. All the multilateral development banks, together with the World Bank,
the Asian Development Bank, African Development Bank and the Inter-American
Development Bank plus others, together we supply about $100 billion in support for
infrastructure, but that's really still a tiny fraction of the additional resources needed for
infrastructure.

The Australian presidency's focus on not only putting together the funds to support
infrastructure development but to build the hub in Sydney we think is a very important step
and will be a strong contribution of this meeting.

So with that I'd be happy to take some questions if you have any.
FACILITATOR: If you could just say where you're from, that'd be great.


QUESTION: I'm Ian from Reuters, hi.


DR.KIM: Yes, hi Ian


QUESTION: I was wondering, in terms of the G20 members in their efforts to fight Ebola,
I'm just wondering, are you happy with what they've done?


DR.KIM: Well, right now the Ebola crisis is still not under control. We see some
encouraging numbers out of Liberia but we have to remember that even in Liberia we're still
not to the point of being able to mount a full public health response. In other words, we're
not tracing all the contacts of the people who died with Ebola. So even though the numbers
are better in Liberia there's going to be much, much more to do. The numbers are getting
worse in Sierra Leone and in Guinea we also don't see much improvement recently.
So the response was late. And we all know that. And the thing that we all have to get our
heads around is that this is just the first part of the response. We need to stop the rapid rise
in new infections and then we have to get about the business of getting to zero. Ebola's not
a disease where you can leave a few cases and then say that you've done good enough,
you've really got to get every country to zero. So in order to get every country to zero you're
going to have to see the kinds of responses that we saw in Nigeria, in the United States, in
Germany, in places where we found every single person who had contact. If we want to get
to the end game that's where we have to go. That's still quite a way away.

So I'm encouraged by the announcements that the Australians have made. I'm encouraged
especially by the tremendous response of both the United States and the UK. But I would
still say that despite the pledges and the goodwill that has been expressed we still need
much, much more commitment. We've committed $1 billion, both for public and private
sector support, and that represents about a third of all the global commitments. With the
announcement of the United States, if that is passed in the Congress, that will, of course, be
a huge - an important addition. But this is going to require many billions of dollars to get to
zero in each of those three countries.

QUESTION: So…
QUESTION: What has been the response to your proposal for a contingency fund to
prevent future outbreaks?


DR. KIM: There's been quite a bit of interest. We've spoken with many different ministers of
finance and also I've spoken with Christine Lagarde of the International Monetary Fund and
others. You know, it’s a fairly straightforward idea. The idea is that we have funds to protect
from other kinds of downside risks to the global economy. I just want to stress that
pandemics, epidemics, are in fact very real downside risks to the global economy. They are
also human tragedies. They're public health emergencies. But what we've seen is that the
fear that results from outbreaks like Ebola have a very serious and widespread effect on
economies.


I was just in East Africa and Ethiopia, where there still has been no cases, has seen a 20
per cent drop in the flights coming in from Ethiopian Air. In Kenya, which is very far from the
epidemic, they've seen very serious drops in tourism as a result of Ebola being on the
continent, not even in Kenya.

So what we're proposing is a fund that would not disburse until there was an emergency. In
other words, we're not asking for huge amounts of money up front, what we're asking is that
all the countries would get together and prepare to respond to the next outbreak. It would
require putting together something like a global public health corps, people from all over the
world who'd be ready to respond at a moment's notice; a fund that would disburse millions
and then also many billions of dollars if necessary. If we had a flu pandemic that would
move very quickly and potentially kill millions, we would need many billions disbursed right
away.

This kind of mechanism could also provide a very important advanced market signal to
vaccine and drug makers, for example, if they knew that any vaccine or drug that they
would produce would have a fund that would pay for it if the next epidemic hit. I think that
would be - that very well could bring more manufacturers into producing the necessary
vaccines and medicines whereas right now with no such fund it's very hard for a drug
company or a vaccine maker to find the motivation to develop those kinds of instruments.

So we've already raised it. I've talked about it on many instances with many of the finance
ministers and even central bank governors. There's a clear understanding that a
mechanism like this could protect the global economy from the potential downside risk and
the shock of another epidemic. It's now a matter of just working out the details of what it
would look like.

QUESTION: Realistically, how long would it take to get this fund set up and how much
would you want in it?


Jim Yong Kim: Well, you wouldn't - because it would be a contingent fund - in other words,
this is not money that you would put into a fund, that's not what we're talking about. What
we're talking about is almost like an insurance policy that when the World Health
Organization declared a global health emergency; when they invoked what's called the
International Health Regulations, then and only then would this fund disburse. And you
could raise those funds on the international bond markets and then pay them back over a
longer period of time.

This is something that we do all the time anyway inside the World Bank Group and it's a
way of utilizing all of our technical capacity to help provide a buffer - virtual buffer for the
global economy and for poor countries that don't have sufficient public health infrastructure
should an epidemic break out.

So I think that there are other instruments already that we have that do similar things. So in
the next six months to a year I think we could get a full concept plus some details of how
this would work in front of the global community.

QUESTION: Dr. Kim Look, what should the developing countries like India expect from this
time at the G20 summit, Sir?


DR. KIM: Well, I think that growth strategies in infrastructure are important for every
country and especially for developing countries. India itself has a huge infrastructure deficit
and our hope is that the commitment that will come out of this meeting around both growth
strategies and also commitment to increasing funding for infrastructure could be very helpful
for India.


FACILITATOR: Okay, so let someone else have a question, anyone else?


QUESTION: You mentioned you're a fan of the growth target. Would you like to see some
targets for reducing inequality to get a larger proportion of poor people benefitting from this
growth?
Jim Yong Kim: Well, as you may know, at the World Bank Group for the first time in our
history we are now measuring inequality every year. So we follow the income growth of the
bottom 40 per cent and compare that to the income growth of the rest of the population.
Every single country that I visit is concerned about inequality. In other words - finding ways
of creating jobs that will bring the poorest and the most marginalized into the economy;
finding ways of creating better jobs, of higher quality jobs; of jobs that bring people from the
informal sector into the formal sector. This is something that is a concern in just about every
developing country I've ever visited. So every nation that hosts the G20 decides on what it
wants to emphasize. My suspicion is that inequality will, in the future, be on the agenda.

QUESTION: Do you think Turkey will be pressing that? Do you expect to see more focus
on developing countries under Turkey next year?


DR. KIM: I'm not sure but my suspicion is that Turkey would focus more on developing
country issues.


QUESTION: Is GIF in competition with AIIB and would GIF invite China to join?


DR. KIM: Right. So the Global Infrastructure Facility, which is one of the outcomes of the
G20 process is really a platform. What the Global Infrastructure Facility does is it brings
some of - some financial resources from not only the World Bank but other multilateral
development banks. But then it utilises our technical capacity. For example, right now the
multilateral development banks have a lot of capacity to do project preparation. AIIB right
now doesn't have it because it's just getting started.


So we've already been in very close talks with the people who are leading Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank and our hope and our expectation is that some of the very
first projects that we launched through the Global Infrastructure Facility we will - be very
inviting. We hope that the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank utilises the Global
Infrastructure Facility immediately.


FACILITATOR: Okay, we've got one more. Sorry, let…


QUESTION: Are you planning some pandemic…
FACILITATOR: He's answered that.


DR. KIM: We already did that, yes.


QUESTION: About the banking [grey] area that Europe called point Luxembourg, about the
pushing the big companies to…


FACILITATOR: Okay, we'll just…


QUESTION: …is the banking a problem?


DR. KIM: Not sure about that.


FACILITATOR: Okay, well that's different. Nothing else?


DR. KIM: One more question. Any…


QUESTION: Sir, what about climate change. It hasn't been on the agenda here, there's
been growing calls for it to be on the agenda. Do you welcome the China-US pact and do
you think climate change should be high on the agenda?


DR. KIM: The China-US pact is an extremely important new development. In preparation
for the COP21 meetings in Paris next December the fact that Europe has set such an
ambitious target for itself very recently and that China and the United States now have set
such ambitious targets I think it makes us all much more optimistic going into COP21.
Those are the three largest emitters - Europe, China and the United States. The fact that
we've been able to reach that kind of agreement I think is very encouraging. I'm going to be
heading down to Lima for a COP20, the meeting just before the one in which we hope to
reach an agreement.


Another thing that happened recently was the statement that we were able to make on a
price on carbon. You know countries representing more than half the global population,
including China, signed a statement saying we need a price on carbon. This is the first time
that public sector entities and just - and more than half of global GDP in terms of nation
states - have agreed that we need to move forward on a price on carbon.
So there is a lot happening. I'm more optimistic now that we'll have an agreement than I've
ever been and to a greater extent because of the US and China. I think that in the lead up to
COP21 in Paris climate change will be on everyone's agenda.

FACILITATOR: All right, thank you very much.


DR.KIM: Thanks very much.
