                                                                               101928


A Conversation with Al
Jazeera’s Ali Velshi and World
Bank Group President Jim Yong
Kim
April 9, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim, Al Jazeera's Ali Velshi
World Bank/IMF Spring Meetings
Washington, DC

Transcript

MR. VELSHI: Welcome, everybody, to the Spring Meetings, the kickoff of the Spring
Meetings. I don't need to introduce my guest, for once in life. I'm Ali Velshi, from Al
Jazeera. And Dr. Kim, what a pleasure to be here on your home turf to have a conversation
about the important work that's going on at the World Bank for the audience that's watching
us on the Web and our television audience. You know, I know there's some articles about
this "End Poverty" campaign. I'm very proud to be wearing one of these badges. And we're
going to talk about that, but before we talk about that, I want to sort of get an understanding,
given that you're launching a new campaign, what the role of the World Bank is. I know
you're about 40 percent into your five-year term and you have been thinking about this and
working on this and figuring out what the World Bank is in terms of its own structure and
what it does and in terms of the changes in the world and what its relevance is. So, let's
start by talking about the role of the World Bank, as you see it now.


DR. KIM: Well, the World Bank is part of a multilateral system that was created in the
1940s, and the great thing about it is that we have 188 Governors. We have 188 member
countries. And so, all the problems in the world, but also all the possibility for collaboration
in the world sort of happens right in this building and then out in the 140 countries that we
work in. And so, this is an effort of 188 of the governments in the world to come together to
try to see if we can help countries to develop their economies, and that's pretty specific
these days. It's investing in health, education, roads, energy, all the things that it takes for
people to lift themselves out of poverty, but also join the group of people who have
education and who have the global middle class, if you will. So, we're focused on
prosperity. We're focused on a prosperity that is shared by everyone, and we're very now
focused on lifting the billion or so people living in extreme poverty out of that condition so
that they can have those things that everybody in the world seems to want.


MR. VELSHI: Based on current global growth, people are, in fact--the number of people in
extreme poverty has been reduced--is being reduced on an ongoing basis. And I'm going
to talk to you in more detail on that in a moment, but here in America, we tend to be
consumed by the idea that we're hollowing out our middle class. We're getting into a
dangerous situation, we're bifurcating an economy into haves and have-nots, and in fact
that's happening in a lot of the world, but what's your perspective in the middle class in the
world? Is it growing? Is it healthy?


DR. KIM: Well, one of the things that we're looking at for the first time, as far as we know,
that the World Bank has been doing this is we're actually tracking the income growth of the
bottom 40 percent. Now, there's a lot of really good data that suggests that the higher
levels of inequality is actually a drag on economic growth. So, even if all you care about is
economic growth, then you've really got to be focused on inequality. The other thing that we
know, and of course you know, we've learned this most clearly in the Arab Spring is that, if
you have GDP growth but you ignore a large proportion of your population, you are building
political instability into your country. And so, now, both from a political perspective and an
economic perspective, we can say very clearly that you've got to really be aware of this
problem of inequality and you've got to move on it. And so, I think that you know, we are
now very much in unison on this message with the IMF. Christine Lagarde has said some
very important things recently about the importance of inequality for growth or fighting
inequality for growth. So, we're on to this issue, and I think many, many political leaders are
beginning to understand that they cannot afford, even for their own political lives, they
cannot afford to ignore that bottom 40 percent.


MR. VELSHI: We struggle with this when we report, for instance, on GDP growth, and
people get very frustrated because we say, "Oh, GDP growth is up. We're in this sort of fair
to middling level," and people say, "But I still feel like I'm in a recession. I still feel like
things are really badly off." Are we in a world where there is such inequality--are we in
danger of measuring the wrong thing when we talk about economic growth in countries, if
inequality is as big a problem as it is?
DR. KIM: Well, I think measuring GDP growth is still very important, but we need to now
measure other things. So, for example, one of the things we know is that, if you want to
grow your economy, a healthier population is really important for you. There was just a
study in The Lancet that suggested between 2000 and 2011, fully a quarter of the economic
growth of the emerging market--of the developing countries was due to better health. So,
we've never had this kind of powerful evidence that says that investing in your people so
that they can have health care, they can have education, is actually critical to growing your
economy. Now that we have all this evidence, we at the World Bank Group are going to
move very, very aggressively, in saying, "Look, we now know inequality is bad for
growth. We now know that, unless you invest in your people, you're not going to see the
economic growth in the medium and the long term, maybe even the short term."


MR. VELSHI: You, before you were here at the World Bank, you were the President of
Dartmouth, and before that you were involved with Partners in Health. You were involved in
many cases with AIDS research and HIV transmission research and alleviation. You're
trying to take some of those experiences and apply them to this mission to alleviate extreme
poverty in the world. First of all, when you say eliminate extreme poverty by the year 2030,
what are we talking about when we mean extreme poverty? I know that there are more
people than we would think who live on less than $1.25 a day, and even more when you get
to about $2.00 a day, you're talking about 80 percent of the world's population.


DR. KIM: Yeah. You know, we're talking, in the case of extreme poverty, when the
concept was first introduced by Robert McNamara in the 1970s, it was a dollar a day; now
it's increased to $1.25 a day. But he described that condition as a state of depravity that
almost goes beyond human imagination, and it still almost goes beyond human
imagination. I've worked with many people living on less than that, and it's a condition that
we should not tolerate any more on this earth. And so, in setting that target, what we mean
is we want to lift everybody out of that condition of living on less than $1.25 a day and bring
that level to below 3 percent of the global population. Now, the reason we say 3 percent is
because there are always going to be disasters and people are going to be going in and out
of poverty and we don't think we can get it much lower than 3 percent, but right now the
levels are--17.7 percent is the last number we have globally. And to get there, we're going
to have to lift almost 50 million people a year out of extreme poverty.
MR. VELSHI: Between now and 2030.
DR. KIM: Between now and 2030, a million a week, Ali, that's what we're going to have to
do. So, if the global growth happens in just the same way that it's happened in the previous
20 or 30 years, we're not going to get to 3 percent; we're going to get to about 7-7.5
percent. We have work to do. Economies have to grow, but also we have to think about
how to invest in people, how to bring in programs that will actually lift more people. Going to
7.5 percent is assuming that the same level of distribution of wealth is going to persist. If
that distribution of wealth changes and more is invested in the bottom 40 percent, then
we're going to be able to reach that target.


MR. VELSHI: You know, we've been getting people to tweet in their questions. They really
want to talk to you, because I told them that I'm going to ask you questions, and I've had a
lot of responses. And you know, I've organized them so that they're written down, but I got
this one about an hour ago from somebody who said, "No man can end poverty unless we
kill politics."


MR. VELSHI: So, I thought that was worthy of not writing that--I thought I would just ask
you that. Your view on that?


DR. KIM: Yeah, so, by our Constitution, we are not supposed to be involved in politics. So,
maybe we are the right organization after all to tackle the end of poverty. You know, I see a
shift in the political realm, in the sense that I think many, many more politicians are very
much aware that they cannot ignore the poor, they cannot ignore the poorest. So, you
know, one of the things that I've been talking a lot about is I was in Bolivia and President
Eva Morales said, "I want to meet you. I want to spend the day with you, but you're going to
have to go fly with me to 14,000 feet to play soccer." Literally, he said this to me. So, I
went there, we went to a little small community, and it was the last community in Bolivia that
spoke the original Bolivian language, a community of about 4,000 people. It was in the
middle of nowhere. We took a helicopter, it was so isolated, and as we were landing they
took pictures of us with their smart phones. He had put Internet access--they didn't quite
have 4G yet, but they were going to get it. And in India, I went to Uttar Pradesh, and in the
community—


MR. VELSHI: Which is the poorest state.
DR. KIM: The poorest state in India, and people were watching Korean soap operas on
their smart phones. So, the fundamental thing that's changed, and this is really in the last 5
to 10 years, is the poor know how the rich live. The poor know what they are aspiring to,
and they're not going to back down from this. They've got the smart phones. They know
how to organize, now. I mean, to start a social movement 30 years ago was incredibly
difficult. You had to make posters and signs, and I'd done that, so I know how difficult it
was. Now, it's much, much easier. So, I think the fundamental difference is that people
know that the poorest of the world are not going to tolerate their situation. And so, the time
is now to think about positive ways of moving in a direction where we grow economies and
we also, at the same time, increase the participation of everyone.


MR. VELSHI: Tell me about your experience with HIV/AIDS programs that you think might
have some application in ending poverty.


DR. KIM: Well, you know, one of the most important things about the AIDS movement is
that people who received a death sentence--I mean, in the early and the mid-1980s, even
up through the early 1990s, HIV infection was thought of as a death sentence. And so, you
had this group of people, mostly gay men--mostly gay White men, frankly, who started
saying, "Okay, we've lost everything. We've lost our friends. We are HIV positive. We are
going to do whatever it takes to get a drug, get a treatment, get a cure." And so, they sat
back and said, "What is everything we need to do to actually get to where we want to get
to?" So, they, instead of sort of just marching on the streets, they stepped back and said,
"The first target has to be basic scientific research." So, they went after NIH, the National
Institutes of Health, here, that does more basic science research than any other institution
in the world. They went after that group, got the funding increase. Then, they sat back and
said, "Now, we've got to take all of these scientific findings, get them into industry." They
made it easier for scientific findings to get into industry. Then, they thought, "Oh, my
goodness, the Food and Drug Administration here in the United States takes too long to
approve drugs." They shortened the time it takes to approve drugs. In other words, they
did everything you need to do to get to where you want to get to. And so, that's what we're
trying to do with poverty. What are all the things we need to do to actually get to the end of
poverty by 2030? The other really important lesson I learned is they knew how to set really,
really huge goals and then go after it with a clear deadline. And that's what we did when I
was at the World Health Organization, we set a target of treating 3 million people in the
developing world within a two-and-a-half year period. A couple hundred thousand were on
treatment when we started. Everyone said, "Oh, my God. This is impossible." So, what we
learned was that setting goals that may seem impossible but are compelling, are
important. Treating people who are dying of HIV is compelling and important, lifting people
out of poverty is compelling and important. When you set that goal and you set a deadline,
people then have to step back and say, "Oh, my God. They're serious about this." And so,
if we're going to reach that, what are all the things we have to do? That's what I hope we
can learn from the HIV movement.


MR. VELSHI: There was an article a couple of days ago in The Financial Post, a little bit
critical of the World Bank, but it does actually serve to tell people, if they're reading it, what
the World Bank sort of does or the mandate it's struggling with. But it, like any major
organization, is an organization. It has structures and bureaucracies in place that some
people, particularly on the receiving end of the work that you are trying to do feel impedes
the type of work you’re going to do. So, when you combine the structure and the bigness of
the World Bank, you've got thousands of people who work here, with the fact that you're
trying to get money and resources and loans to businesses and individuals in some cases,
in countries that are full of bureaucracy and corruption, one wonders how effective you can
be with the simple slogan, "End Poverty."


DR. KIM: Yeah. Well, Ali, when I came into this job, there was a chorus of public opinion,
and the questions they were asking were fundamental ones: Is the World Bank Group
relevant anymore? I came quickly to the conclusion that, not only are we relevant, but if we
can get quicker, if we can move knowledge more effectively, if we can reduce our own
bureaucracy, our relevance could skyrocket. And here's what I learned from the people
inside the World Bank Group: I walked around this building and I met with people from all
over our country offices, and I just asked them two simple questions: When have we been
at our best and when have you been most proud of working at the World Bank Group? And
then, two, what prevents us from being at our best all the time? And the stories I heard
were that, in an emergency, when we get our best people who know all the other best
people working on a particular issue, we are phenomenal. We have transformative
impact. And so, the question was, why can't we be that way all the time? Everything we're
doing is to try to get us into a position where we can be at our best every day, all the
time. Now, you know, the change process here has been difficult, and it's been especially
difficult for our staff, and you know, as I am sitting back watching, I empathize tremendously
with the difficulty of uncertainty. But the whole point is that I think there are huge needs in
the world of development that are not being met. For example, we want to be the
organization in the world that captures all the great innovations in development and then
can move them anywhere where they might be needed. So, for example, if something great
is happening, say, in climate smart agriculture in Costa Rica, we want to be sure that folks
in Africa, in Asia know about it right away. We weren't really structured to be able to do that,
but this is what we're going to be. We're going to be the organization that, if you come to
the World Bank Group, we're going to know about all the great innovations, and we're going
to know how they were implemented--not just what to do but how they did it. And if we can
provide that to every country in the world, then I think the demand for our services will
grow. Also, if we can be quicker, if we can move more quickly, and we're working very hard
now to reduce our bureaucratic processes so that people in the countries feel a
difference. This is about, very specifically, helping countries to end poverty and boost
shared prosperity.


MR. VELSHI: Typically speaking, though, in order to receive financing and support from
the World Bank, countries have to--like anybody who is getting a loan have to do certain
things. You are in a world now where there's so much money floating around that there are
others who are willing to make money available--probably not at lower interest rates, but
with fewer rules. For instance, China, which, by the way, also is a client of the World Bank--
so, how do you square that, first of all, that China is getting money from anybody, and that
China goes into places like Africa and is able to provide funds for countries--governments
that want to do things, without too many strings attached?


DR. KIM: Well, first of all, China is a very important client of the World Bank Group. And
China continues to come back to us and work with us and, indeed, take loans, because they
know that if they work with us we will do immaculate project preparation. We will do all the
analytic work before we start in on a project, and then we will do the analysis of what the
impact was after we do the project. So, with China, we are almost a kind of partner that
tackles important pilot projects. And what we've noticed is that when China decides that
something is really working and worthwhile, they will scale it up. But for us, we also have a
huge stake in this, because when we work with China, we learn things about how to do
development that we then share with everyone in the world. I mean, there's the Loess
Plateau Project that we worked with the Chinese that was brilliant. And we are now taking
the lessons from that project and sharing them with everyone else. So, we very much hope
that China will continue to be our partner. Now, in terms of the availability of money, there's
no question, and we're actually in very deep discussions with the Chinese to see how we
can work more effectively together, because they are investing in those countries. But
here's the great secret that everybody in the developing world knows but most people in the
outside world don't know, and that is that even with very--at a time when we had historically
low interest rates, access to long-term finance for infrastructure was still really difficult to
get. Over the last three or four G20 meetings, this is all we've talked about, how can we
possibly you know, develop sources of long-term financing for infrastructure. You know, all
of official development assistance, all of foreign assistance is about 125 billion a year, but if
you look at the needs, Africa itself has 100 billion in infrastructure needs. India, over the
next five years, a trillion in infrastructure needs. So, the official development assistance
money available will never meet those needs. And so, we need to then find a way of us
providing that long-term financing in some cases, but I think even more importantly one of
the things we're talking about is can we leverage our dollars to crowd in private capital so
that we can put together what we call the bankable projects so that you look at them and
think, "Okay, this is long-term finance for central--someplace in Central Africa." It's going to
have an impact on many countries at once and, on the face of it doesn't look bankable. We
think that we at the World Bank Group, we have so much experience in making these
projects bankable that we think we can create all new sets of partners who will be interested
in those kinds of projects, because still it is necessary. I mean, just look at energy in
Africa. I mean, energy in Africa, for the entire continent of Africa, about 150 gigabytes [sic]
of installed capacity. That's just about the amount of electricity that, for one billion people,
that Belgium offers to its 11 million people. I mean, we need to move on this. There's just
no way we're going to be able to end poverty and boost shared prosperity if we don't move
on these projects. And I still--when people talk about easy access to capital, tell that to the
people who are trying to build infrastructure in Africa.


MR. VELSHI: There was some criticism of a project in Lesotho, a hospital, and you know,
obviously, a lot about health care, where it's a public-private partnerships that you describe,
but the criticism is that so much energy has gone into this particular hospital that it's taking
up about two-thirds of Lesotho's entire health budget. And someone’s offered that as a
criticism of public-private partnerships gone awry. What is your take on that?


DR. KIM: Well, I'm looking at this particular project very carefully. It's not two-thirds in the
terms of the number that we know, but it's a reflection of a much, much bigger problem. So,
every single country that I have visited, every single country I have lived in, including this
one, has a problem with health care. And in most middle-income countries, the problem
looks like this: It's a half First World problem and a half Developing World problem. The
First World problem is that in almost every emerging market country, costs in the cities are
skyrocketing. Again, everyone has a smart phone, everyone knows Grey's Anatomy. They
watch, know how these great hospitals work, that's what they expect, and they're getting
that in the cities and costs are going through the roof and the Ministers of Finance are
deeply concerned about it. But then, they're also having trouble getting health care to their
most rural and most sort of outward regions. So, this problem exists everywhere. We know
that there is going to be a role for the private sector and we know that the public sector is
going to play a critical role in every country in the world. And so, for Lesotho, like every
other country, this is what we're trying to figure out: What's the right mix of public and
private? Lesotho was a very innovative project when it happened. Now, do we need to go
back and make some tweaks to make sure that it works out?


MR. VELSHI: Just tell our viewers what the project was.


DR. KIM: It's a project--it's to bring a private sector operator into a public sector
hospital. And so, the hospital is really beautiful, it's a nice hospital, but I think there are
fundamental questions we have to ask about the right mix of public and private in Lesotho
as in everywhere else, and we have to understand much more clearly you know, sort of
nerdy issues like capitation and shared risk and population health. Those things we have to
take on. And I'll tell you, Ali, this is a great opportunity with our reorganization, because
we've—you know, we recently named one of the great thinkers in health systems, Tim
Evans, to be lead in that group, and we are going to be the group where you come to us,
we're going to be able to say to you, "Here's how public-private have worked out in 100
countries in the world. Now, we're not sure which of these models is going to work for you,
but we'll work with you to find the right mix to get the system working as effectively as it can.


MR. VELSHI: Are you believer that the smart phone is going to revolutionize the access to
health care for rural impoverished people?


DR. KIM: There's no question. I mean, I think--you know, one of the things they're talking
about even in China is that they used to have the barefoot doctor, and they moved away
from that, but now they may have the iPad doctor. And the level of resolution and the ability
to do diagnosis, the ability to take video, it's pretty stunning. I think that's going to have a
huge impact.


MR. VELSHI: I want to ask you about--I know it doesn't fall entirely into your basket, but
the daily developments between Russia and Crimea. One of the most important ones is that
the activities are slowing down Russia's economy dramatically. I remember when this first
started, people were talking about, if Russia were to go into recession, and it didn't seem
likely at the time, it's entirely possible at this point. I mean, this is a country that was
growing very, very well, was fully integrated in the world, remains integrated in the world as
an exporter of goods and a trader. What do you see happening?


DR. KIM: Well, you know, we've recently done a reassessment of our prospects for growth
for Russia, and if the situation in the Ukraine has a limited and short-term effect, we think
that growth this year will be around 1.1 percent, which is about half of what we had
predicted some time ago. But if the effect is more--is deeper and if the effect is broader and
lasts longer, we think that this year Russia's economy could contract as much as 1.8
percent. We think they would go back to growth in 2015, but this is a serious situation. We
continue to work with both Russia and the Ukraine; we will continue to work with both
Russia and the Ukraine. We're working right now to prepare a very large package with the
Ukrainian Government right now.


MR. VELSHI: I want to go to questions that we've taken from social media and the
Web. We've been recruiting questions, and as I said, people really do want to ask you
questions. Michael in the United States asks, "What type of technical or financial authority
or tool that the World Bank now lacks do you think would be most useful for its mission and
for the health of the global economy?"


DR. KIM: Hmm, that's a--well, one of the--it's partly a tool but it's partly people, we're really
thinking hard about how we're going to be able to do just what I said, which is to capture
innovation in one place and share it with people in another place. Now, there are all kinds
of great ways of doing this. I mean, Sal Khan revolutionized teaching with his very simple
use of technology. And so, we're trying—


MR. VELSHI: He's the one from the Khan Academy.


DR. KIM: The Khan Academy. And what we're trying to now understand is, how do you do
that? How do you take things that are often tacit knowledge? I mean, it's not--when you
get to a thing--when you get to the point of saying, well, what should you do? We have
great books and textbooks and evidence-based primers on that, but when you get to the
question, so, how do you do that given complex political economy and the specificities of
particular Regions, that's much harder. So, if we can find a way to use technology to link
people together so that someone who has solved a problem somewhere can help someone
solve a problem in another place, then I think we would be really on the path to being the
kind of what we call solutions bank that we want to be.
MR. VELSHI: I want to ask you this question--by the way, when you played soccer with
President Morales, are you a good soccer player?


DR. KIM: I'm not. I've never played in my life.


MR. VELSHI: Because there are apparently a lot of pictures of it.


MR. VELSHI: I want to ask you this question because I want to add something to it. Arnaud
from the Netherlands says, "I see the enormous debt of the United States as a major threat
to the future economic stability of the world." And I know the issue of U.S. interest rates
creates problems for a lot of developing nations. Give me your take on this.


DR. KIM: Well, first of all, we're very optimistic about growth in the U.S. economy. We
think the numbers look good. We think that this will be sustained. And the growth in the
U.S. economy is going to be very good for everybody. Now, the issue for us is as the U.S.
Fed begins to taper the unconventional monetary policies, the question is, what will happen
to interest rates. Now, there are two forces going on. So, the growth of the U.S. economy is
great for exports for many of the emerging market countries, but then the increase in the
interest rates is going to make it difficult, more difficult, to get capital. So, as long as the
taper is smooth, and every indication suggests that it will be, the overall capital flows into
the developing countries--right now, it's about 4.6 percent of GDP. We think that, over the
next couple of years, that will go down gradually to about 4 percent, as long as the tapering
is smooth. So, if the tapering is smooth, we're fine, because the growth in the First World
economies is going to offset the rising interest rates in a very-in areasonable way. What
we're all hoping for is not some sort of spike that will throw everything off, because if there
is, then we could be trouble in the developing world.


MR. VELSHI: This next question is from Shafiqur in India, and it's meant to create trouble
between you and Christine Lagarde: "Is there any need for the IMF? What is special with
the IMF which the World Bank cannot deal?"


DR. KIM: A trillion dollars is the biggest difference. You know, Christine and I have worked
very, very closely together. And, you know, their instrument is to help countries with
balance of payments, and that's critically important. I mean, look at the situation in
Ukraine. They're talking about something like a $14- to $18 billion package that's been in
the news. That's going to be critically important for the Ukraine, and I frankly think there will
always be situations like this. And the other thing that I'm especially grateful for is that
Christine has really pushed the boundaries of the IMF. She started talking about climate
change. I mean, you know, global economic stability will be affected by climate change,
that's why it makes perfect sense and it took great courage for her to do that, but it's great
that she's doing it. Christine is talking about inequality. And again, she's saying, "We're
talking about global economic stability." And inequality does have an impact. So, I think
there's a hugely important role, there will continue to be, and you know, as they deal with
the big issues around balance of payments, you know, the broader financial system, and I'll
just illustrate: So, they'll come in and they'll help immediately with a large package and
they'll help with just having access to capital for Ukraine. We're going to go in and work on
things like health programs and education programs and you know social protection
programs. So, I think it's a very good one-two sort of punch, and you know, we’ll never be
as big as the IMF, and what we learned during the European economic crisis is that they
played a critical role. And I'll tell you, Christine herself played a critical role, first as Minister
of Finance of France and then as the head of the IMF.


MR. VELSHI: I want to go back to this inequality thing. You've seen this Oxfam report that
says that the 85 richest people in the world have more wealth than the bottom 3.5
billion. And I've seen something that says that the 400 richest Americans have the same
wealth as the bottom half of the entire American population. And then, you see statistics
that indicate that, wow, that can be true. Those sound like outrageous statistics. When
you talk about inequality in income or in assets, it implies to those with the money that we're
talking about redistribution of wealth, which may actually be what we're talking about, but
you know, around here, that's a bad word. What is the--draw me a picture of this. Is this a
really serious issue that--I mean, are we seeing a hollowing out of this global middle
class? I know you're trying to push people into it.


DR. KIM: So, you know, one has to step back, Ali, and one has to say, so, for the
wealthiest people in the world, what kind of world do they want to see? Do they want to see
a world in which the economy is growing and in which there are more consumers to buy
their products if they make products? Do they want to see a world in which there is less
conflict? Do they want to see a world in which more people get to participate? Or do they
want to see a world in which the economies are shrinking, but they're maintaining their
piece of it? Now, for the people who say, "We don't care if the economy grows or shrinks,
we just want to keep our piece of it." You know, I think we at the World Bank Group would
say, fundamentally, we disagree with you. So, if the wealthiest people in the world want to
see a world that's both growing and also, at the same time, including more people, then I
think we have a lot of ideas about what we need to do. First of all, you need to invest--first
of all, we need to figure out a way to stop conflicts before they happen. I've been working
very closely with the UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon. We've been traveling
together. We're trying to get to a point where we're saying security issues and development
issues go hand in hand. And if we can begin development programs early in the process of
a conflict, maybe that development, the possibility of jobs, the possibility of health care,
education, will actually lessen the possibility of further conflict. We are trying to do that. But
then, we know things like investing in health and education of--especially among the
poorest is the surest way to invest in people in a way that will grow the economy. These
are things that we now know. This is not an ethical or moral position. You know, as you
know, Ali, I've been working on this issue and arguing that health care for the poor is a
moral issue. Now, we have evidence and no less than Larry Summers is telling us that
investing in education is one of the best things you can do for economic growth So, I would
tell the richest people in the world this very message, and people you know, like Bill Gates
and Warren Buffett, they're doing that right now. That's what they're trying to do. They're
trying to put their riches to focus on things like health and agriculture and education and I
think that's the right message.


MR. VELSHI: What do you say to people like Tom Perkins who argue that this kind of talk
just inflames people against the rich?


DR. KIM: Well, I think that the access to media, the access to media at 14,000 feet in
Bolivia, that job has been done and it's not us doing it. The access to what's happening in
the world and who has what and who has a share of what is not something that I can ever
stop or that he could ever stop.


MR. VELSHI: You mentioned climate change. Marco from Slovenia asks, "How is climate
change going to affect the World Bank's goal of ending extreme poverty by 2030?"


DR. KIM: It could stop it completely. Right, so, what we know is that if the current levels of
carbon emission continue and if we don't invest in both mitigation and adaptation, this is
going to be one of, if not the major impediment to our reaching the goal. So, this is why
we're working so hard on climate change. And you know, you asked about the lessons
from HIV. When I first took this job and started learning about climate change, I asked the
same question. I said, "Do you have a plan to attack the problem of climate change that's
as good as the plan we had to tackle HIV?" And unfortunately, most of the leaders in this
field said, "Well, what do you mean? And what do you mean, a plan?" And so, I went
through the whole thing, basic science, industry, testing, getting it out and going to scale,
and there really wasn't a plan. So, we've been working very closely with leaders in this field
and we're trying to come up with a plan but, my goodness, we have a long way to go. We're
doing a summit here with the Secretary-General, with Christine Lagarde, with Mike
Bloomberg in the next day or two, and we're going to try to make the point that this is a
critical task that we've got to just jump on right now.


MR. VELSHI: We have one question that says, "As the World Bank watches the end of the
working class via austerity, will they infuse capital to improve conditions?" This is a variant
on many questions, right?


DR. KIM: Yeah.


MR. VELSHI: There are a lot of questions that say organizations like yours, including the
IMF, impose conditions in some cases that cause the poor to get hurt more in the process
of fixing an economy.


DR. KIM: So, Ali, you know, I said this to you before, I think, my first trip to Washington
after college was to come to Washington to protest the World Bank Group, and back in
those days, you know, the thing that we talked about most was that you're focusing so
much on GDP growth but you're not focusing enough on investing in people. And so, that
position has changed fundamentally, both based on experience and based on
evidence. We now know that investing in people is critically important. So, is fiscal
discipline important? Of course it's important. I mean, getting your spending and your
public finance and your expenditures in order, investing in the right things and not the wrong
things--for example, investing in health and education and removing fuel subsidies. These
are things that every country has to do. Do you have to manage your debt effectively? Of
course you do. There are basic macroeconomic fundamentals that every country just has
to pay attention to. But the fundamental difference in where the World Bank is today versus
20 years ago is we are now at the front cheerleading about investing in people because we
know it’s what's critical for growth.
MR. VELSHI: But one of the other differences is you look at the IMF package for Ukraine,
for instance, and what one could argue they're competing with is the financial influence of
Russia, or you look at some African nation where you might be negotiating something,
knowing that China is lurking there in the background with available money that may not
have the same conditions. So, you're competing with others for the resources that you want
to contribute.


DR. KIM: Well, again, so, it's easy to step back and say, "Well, you're competing with
China everywhere." But then, I would just remind you that all of Africa has as much energy
as Belgium. So, there's plenty of work to go around for everybody, and our role is to--
because we have such a close and strong relationship with China, because we have such a
close and strong relationship with African countries, with the United States, with everyone
else, we want to be the people in the middle who make those deals happen. How are we,
for example, going to fund the Grand Inga Project that could double the amount of electricity
that currently exists in Sub-Saharan Africa? What do we need to do? That, without
question, is going to be a multi-group, public-private, you know, China, the United States,
many, many groups that will have to be involved to make that happen. We want to be in the
middle because of our unique multilateral organizational structure to make those things
happen.


MR. VELSHI: There's a good question here: What are the top five drivers of inequality or
poverty in the world?


DR. KIM: So, I think still the most devastating is conflict. I mean conflict is a huge driver of
poverty. But then, you know, all the things I've talked about already, lack of access to
electricity, infrastructure, this is a really, really important one. Investing in human beings,
this is really a critical aspect of it. But then, at the end of the day, all those things, the
investments in infrastructure and human beings have to lead to growth. And so, you know,
what are the ways for us to spur the kind of inclusive growth, as we talk about it--and we're
asking that question right now: What have we learned that suggests to us that certain kinds
of investments lead to more inclusive growth versus the growth of just particular industries
or enrich particular individuals. We're asking ourselves that question right now and, as we
go forward, we really want to be the organization that is the champion of those kinds of
investments that lead to a more inclusive growth.
MR. VELSHI: When you talk about inclusive growth and you talk about inequality and
ending extreme poverty by 2030, I suppose if your threshold is $1.25, it's not going to cost
the world all the much to do, but does this involve some sort of wealth distribution? And
Ronald has asked this question on Facebook, this is translated from French: "The main
obstacle to ending poverty is the inequality of wealth distribution." What do you do to
address that?


DR. KIM: Well, so, in the poorest countries, we've had very specific projects. Both Brazil
and Mexico showed us that something that we call conditional cash transfers have had a
huge impact. Not only have they lessened the poverty of the household, but they've
increased attendance in schools. They've improved even sort of weight for age for young
children. So, these programs have been shown to work. And so, simply moving cash,
literally, to some of the poorest households and in the countries who can manage the
bureaucracy of measuring, putting conditions on it, has had a huge impact. And countries
that are so poor that they cannot even manage tracking whether they go to the public health
institute, whether they go to school, just giving unconditional cash transfers have also been
very effective. So, we would say that that kind of redistribution, the evidence is
overwhelming, these are good programs. These actually help societies to grow. Now, you
know, there's no simple answer here. So, you know, the answer in France is different from
the answer in Lesotho or Malawi, and you have to look at, relatively speaking, what kind of
programs you put in place and what you don't. Now, one of the things that we're very good
at is assessing the quality of public expenditures. So, you go into a country and, for
example, one like Egypt where 8 percent of GDP was devoted to subsidies, right? And this
is not a good way of spending money. So, in that case, we would say stop spending
money on subsidies and invest it elsewhere. That's really the issue. It's not austerity
versus investment—


MR. VELSHI: It's the return on the investment.


DR. KIM: It's the return on the investment, and every country in the world can get better at
that, including the richest countries.


MR. VELSHI: Including the United States. I mean, that's the issue. We talk about it in
terms of real tax rates, but in fact, if one could argue that you're getting a better return for
this investment than another, people might be happier.
DR. KIM: Well, we don't provide advice to the United States, but we've got some awfully
good people in the World Bank Group and I think they'd have ideas about ways of
improving public sector expenditures. I mean, that's the whole point. Look, the
competitiveness of the future--what is going to make a country competitive going into the
future? If you are not asking yourself that question intensively, every day, I think you're,
relatively speaking, going to be in trouble. So, countries like Korea and Singapore, China,
Japan, they're asking themselves this question all the time, and I think the leadership here
is asking that question all the time, but you see an entire sort of public conversation about
competitiveness in Korea. I mean, this is the country I was born in. South Korea was the
part of the peninsula that had no natural resources, it was the agricultural part. And so, they
have an incredible sense of paranoia about whether they're going to be able to continue to
be able to grow. So, they're looking at every possible way of investing in people, of spurring
innovation. That's what everyone has to do. It's going to be a major issue going forward for
every country in the world.


MR. VELSHI: That's a perfect note on which to end it. I want to thank you, President Kim,
for having us and Al Jazeera here at the World Bank and for the work you want to do, and I
wish you, and all of you at the World Bank, the greatest success. We will all be around to
celebrate in 2030 when you have eradicated extreme poverty in the world.
