                                                                             101958


Transcript of Development
Committee Press Conference
October 11, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim, IMF Managing Director Christine Lagard
IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings 2014
Washington, DC, United States

Transcript

MODERATOR: Hi, everyone. Thank you for coming to the closing press conference of the
2014 World Bank-IMF Annual Meeting. We’ll have comments from all three principles,
starting out with Chairman Belka.


CHAIRMAN BELKA: Thank you. Welcome to the press briefing on the just-concluded
Development Committee meeting. The focus of the meeting was shared prosperity, the
idea that the poorest 40 percent of people in developing and developed countries can share
in the gains from global economic growth. While significant progress has been made in
extending shared prosperity over the last two decades of strong economic growth, this
progress has not taken place everywhere for all people, and about 1.2 billion people still live
in extreme poverty.


The discussion took place in the context of concern about the slowing and uneven pace of
global economic growth and its impact on the poor, especially unemployment, as well as
implications for economic, social, and environmental sustainability. We also discussed
among other things the Ebola crisis, which I single out for obvious reasons. We welcomed
the World Bank’s and IMF’s rapid response to the crisis, and we supported additional
measures from the international community to prevent its spread and protect countries in
the medium and long term.

You can read the meeting communique for more detail on the conclusions of our
discussions. The papers that were distributed for our meeting are publicly available on the
Bank and Fund Websites. So let me just turn to Jim and Christine to elaborate on our
meetings today.

DR. KIM: Yes, we had a very good discussion during the Development Committee
meeting, first on energy during the lunch period and also then on the problem of global
inequality. But on the meeting as a whole, there are three major highlights that I wanted to
touch upon. First, we had a signing ceremony and now the Global Infrastructure Facility of
the World Bank is now a reality. Companies and countries have committed to building this
platform in which we would bring the expertise of not only the World Bank, but the IMF and
other multilateral development banks, to prepare projects and bridge the gap in what is a
market failure. There’s trillions of dollars on the sideline waiting and looking for a good
return. There are many, many very bankable infrastructure projects that for lack of project
preparation, for lack of identification, are not attracting the kind of capital that they
deserve. This new platform, in collaboration with the Australian G-20 leadership’s efforts on
an information center for global infrastructure, we think could begin to bridge the divide.
The second issue I want to talk about is climate change. At the U.N. General Assembly
now I think two weeks ago we presented a statement on carbon pricing. While we had
relatively low expectations when we first started on this idea, it ended up that 74 countries,
11 regions, and more than 1,000 companies signed onto this agreement saying that we
should set a price on carbon. We were very excited to host here in Washington, D.C., the
first meeting of that group that signed on to the statement. Companies were represented,
sovereign wealth funds, the countries that had signed on, including China, which has made
very strong commitments to finding a price on carbon for the world. We take very strongly
our responsibility in the area of global public goods like fighting climate change, and we’ll
continue to do this work.

On Ebola, the meeting that we had, the early morning meeting, we had on Thursday was
extremely productive. The heads of state made very concrete statements. They told us
exactly what they needed, and we were very encouraged to see that many organizations
stepped up. I especially want to thank Christine Lagarde. Not only did she make $130
million quickly available, in the bank accounts of these countries, but she stated that taking
on debt at this point was fine for these countries, creating fiscal space, that they were
frankly jubilant to receive. And in addition to the efforts of the African Development Bank
and the U.N. system, we’re beginning to make some progress. But I want to stress, again,
one of the things that Tom Frieden, the head of the United States Centers for Disease
Control, stated was that we’re still behind. It’s worse now than it was 10 days ago and that
this is the worst epidemic he’s seen since HIV. As an HIV physician and someone who
fought that epidemic, I have to say that in many ways it could be worse.

And so, the point that we kept stressing is that the humanitarian response, the public health
response, and the response that can blunt the economic impact are all the same. We have
to get very high quality treatment and prevention services in those three countries
immediately. We've already seen the impact. In Mr. Duncan's case here, in the United
States, he died unfortunately and people were exposed. In Spain, we've already seen the
very first Ebola infections ever outside of Africa. The economic impact is already being felt
in Spain, with the hits on the stock value of some travel companies. Now we hope that this
will be under control quickly, but it gives you some sense of how complicated it is, to mount
an effective and adequate response. So we once again call on all of the countries who are
watching, if you have any sense that you want to help with this epidemic, do it today. Do it
now. Every day that we wait, the ultimate response is going to get more expensive. And
we have no choice. We have to get this under control. This is not something that we can
look away from, because right now, without effective services in place, on the ground, in
these three countries, the rational, logical thing to do if you think you might have been in
contact with someone with Ebola, is to get out of your country. And so what we need to do
is to change the incentive so that such good services are being offered in those three
countries, that people want to stay. We will continue to work on this. We also suggest that
what we need now is a tool going into the future. We need some source of funding that will
disperse immediately on the occasion of the next epidemic and the global community needs
to come together to decide what the response will be. We know we can do it. We know we
can build that instrument. And working together with the IMF and the other multi-lateral
development banks and the U.N., we think that we can learn from this experience and not
let it happen again. Thank you.

MS. LAGARDE: Thank you very much Chairman. Good afternoon to all of you. It's not tit
for tat, but if I may, I would like to commend Jim Kim for the terrific leadership that on behalf
of the World Bank he has expanded and demonstrated tirelessly on Ebola. I will second
everything that he has said. I will just slightly qualify a point that he has made. It is true that
much to their surprise, I said that for once, the IMF is saying that it is okay to increase the
deficit, because I think it's okay to increase the deficit, but hopefully, hopefully, it's not
necessarily going to induce an increase in debt, because what those countries are going to
need is grants and financial support from the international community. So we are both on
the same page with the same sense of urgency. And we will certainly continue to try to help
as much as we can these three countries. Equally, if I may say, it's not for me to tell you
what your job is about. But I think we should be very careful not to terrify the planet in
respect of the whole of Africa. Those three countries are severely hit. We are going to try
to give as much support as we can. The big urgency is to stop it. Contain it. But it's not the
whole of Africa. And business has to continue. The economies of all the other countries
have to keep on working and creating jobs and so on and so forth. So we have to be
attentive to it. We are attentive to it. But I think if you can communicate that as well, it
would be terrific.


Now just two other points that I would like to mention briefly. One is, just to show you this,
which is a publication that is released today that brings together all the work that we've
done on low income countries, to really assess the current situation. It's a bright spot on the
world stage. The average growth of the low income and developing countries is more than
six percent, compared with other areas, it's a lot. And clearly there is much work that can
be done to help them sustain that growth and continue to develop. And we've tried to
capture that, studying 60 different countries.

Third point, as you may know, since the financial crisis, we have been lending at zero
interest rate, out of the poverty and reduction and growth trust fund that we have, and we
have been called by the IMFC earlier today, to actually extend that zero interest rate for
another two years. And I hope that the board of the IMF will be considering that
favorably. I'm certainly going to schedule that board meeting very expeditiously. Thank
you.

MODERATOR: Thank you. We will now take your questions. Please identify yourself and
your affiliation. In front.


QUESTION: Madame Lagarde, with regard to containment, is there any plan to put more
funds on the table, particularly for countries that are not directly affected but may be
affected? I have in mind Senegal and Nigeria. Dr. Kim, with the pandemic response unit, is
that strictly a funding operation, or will it have other functions that might conflict with what
the World Health Organization does? Thank you.


MS. LAGARDE: Now very briefly on the issue of containment, we provide financial support
in the form of loans to quite a few African countries, actually 18 of them at the moment. And
if ever there was spreading or very specific needs related to the spreading of the disease of
course we would be open to additional support.


DR. KIM: Well, it's still very much in the early stages. This is really just in concept
form. But the thinking is that this would actually require all the multilateral systems working
together. What we found in Ebola is that it's not just the World Health Organization, the
World Health Organization is playing a critical role, but also the World Food Program
because there's also food security issues. UNICEF has been working on procurement and
community based responses. You know, of course, our role has been partly in the funding,
but just in managing logistics for example, many of the different organizations have been
involved. The peacekeeping apparatus of the UN system, you know, people who have led
that system are now working on logistics. I think that ultimately what you'll see is that the
funding streams organized by the international financial institutions and it will be
coordinated very closely with lots of different institutions. For example, you know, probably
among the best organizations in managing epidemic outbreaks is the United States Center
for Disease Control. They will surely be involved. The Pasteur Institute in France will surely
be involved.


What we've recognized is that this is now something we have to take with deadly
seriousness. You know, we need a rapidly dispersing financial instrument, we need almost
with military precision we need to do exercises to make sure that the next time this happens
we'll be ready. The point I'd like to make is that this is a slow-moving virus. If this were a
Coronavirus, the virus that causes SARS, if this were a pandemic flu, it would be moving
very quickly and what we know it would do is every weak link in the chain, every country
that does not have these systems in place to stop these outbreaks would accelerate the
epidemic even more. So I think we've got a very tough dose of the reality of what these
outbreaks can look like. You know, a very wise man who was one of the leaders, Larry
Brilliant, of the smallpox response said outbreaks are inevitable but pandemics, meaning
epidemics that cover the entire world, are entirely in our control. This is not yet a pandemic,
but we have to get moving to ensure that it won't become one.

MODERATOR: Right here in the front.


QUESTION: Good afternoon. My first question goes to the World Bank boss. You talked
about the adverse human reaction to the Ebola virus, but don't you also think that some of
the governments in those countries haven't done much to give some confidence to
businesses outside? Kenya Airway for instance was one of the last airlines to withdraw
from the region of these countries because people think that they are not seeing this
government doing that much. Apart from extending support to these countries what are you
doing to ensure that these funds go to the right areas to contain the spread of these
diseases? And my second quick question is about Ghana which was seen as a rising star
in the sub region, now the economy is going through a lot of problems. What help are you
willing to extend to Ghana to let it regain its status and also to ensure that authorities do the
right thing so you don't come in again to help them? Thank you.


DR. KIM: Thank you. And, you know, I think Madam Lagarde and I will share the answer
on Ghana because Ghana is doing some very positive thing and reaching out in I think
important ways. So let me first start with the funds. The funds are being watched very, very
carefully. And so for example for funds that need to go directly into the hands of health
workers that are paid by the government that money goes directly into the government's
bank account. For those funds that are going to UNICEF or WHO or other organizations
that are working, we actually make direct payments to those organizations. So we are
following it as closely as we can and we are doing everything we can to ensure that every
dollar of this money is spent, you know, in an actually tackling the epidemic. Now we're
moving very quickly. So for example from the day the Board approved $105 million, within
9 days it was in the bank accounts of the countries and the organizations that we're working
with. That's been unheard of speed for us. It usually takes many months in order to move
money but we did it that quickly. Now anytime you do that, you know, it is even more
important that you're extremely, extremely diligent in following the funds and we're doing
that right now.


In terms of Ghana, you know, I met with President Mahama very, very recently and he's
very much aware of the kinds of structural reforms that he needs to undertake in order to
get Ghana back on a much more vigorous growth path. And I think my own sense is that
the President has really now understood the full nature of the challenge in front of him and
he is very committed to undertaking the reforms that we know and that he knows that he's
got to undertake. Now in addition to being very committed to the reform process, President
Mahama also has been absolutely critical to the fight against Ebola because he's allowed
Accra to be the staging center, meaning anyone who's going into these three countries is
stopping in Accra. Now I think he is a fantastic example of how, you know, science and
awareness trumped fear, and solidarity trumped any kind of temptation to just turn his
back. So we're extremely grateful to President Mahama for his role in fighting this
epidemic. And we're also very encouraged that he understands the path toward reform and
he's committed to it.

Do you want to anything, Christine? No?

MS. LAGARDE: No. Because you've asked me the question about Ghana this morning
and I gave you the answers.


MODERATOR: Right here.


QUESTION: Thank you, John. My question is for Dr. Kim and Madam Lagarde. As both
the IMF and the World Bank have identified that China has overtaken the United States as
the largest economy in the world based on the purchasing power parity, do you see a kind
of shifting of powers between the world’s major economies and do you see the increasing
demand to reform the quota system in both the World Bank and the IMF? And the second
question is about infrastructure as both organizations have emphasized the importance of
infrastructure development. For China, too much dependence on investment. We are in the
process of restructuring. Do you see it’s still necessary for China to push the infrastructure
projects? Thank you.


MS. LAGARDE: On the measurement of the size of an economy, purchasing power parity
is one way of measuring. And on that basis, China is certainly topping the economies. But
if you look at other measurements, other economies are topping the list. And if you look at
per capita GDP, clearly other countries are ahead. So to really get a sense of where the
economies are situated relative to each other, you have to look at different
measurements. You can’t just use one. GDP is the most frequently used one. It’s the
market GDP. PPP is another one. Per capita GDP is another one, et cetera, et cetera. So
that’s point number one.


Is there shifting powers between advanced economies and emerging market and
developing countries? Of course, we’re seeing it in the numbers. If you look at the average
growth of the advanced economies relative to the average growth in the emerging market
and developing countries, yes. Is the quota reform critically important? Yes, absolutely,
and we all know that. We need the U.S. to ratify the 2010 reform of the governance and
doubling of the quota and we very much hope that this will happen before the end of the
year.
DR. KIM: So, you know, China has made it clear that they want to shift from a growth
strategy based on investment and exports to one based on consumption and
services. And, you know, China had such high rates of investment to GDP, 46 percent, I
think was the top rate. It’s not possible to just quickly reverse all of that. That would have
very serious implications for the economy. So I know that China wants to step back, but it
has to do it probably in a much more gradual way. You know, even with relatively lower
growth rates, in the seven, seven and a half percent range, what we see so far is the
continuing of the Chinese commitment to the reform process. We’ve been very engaged
with them and our role has been one in which my predecessor wrote along with the Chinese
NDRC a brilliant report called China 2030 that really laid out the steps in the reform
process. And what we are seeing is that China’s actually following those steps.
When I took over, the leadership was so happy with that process led by Bob Zoellick that
they asked us to do the next study, which is on urbanization. And already China is
beginning to do those things which they know they need to do as 300 million more people
come into the cities and China becomes the first country in the world to have more than 1
billion city dwellers, which will happen soon enough.

And now we’re working with them on healthcare. Because once again, the idea is that their
investment in people has to be of higher quality. And that they’re really thinking about how
to upgrade their healthcare services so that the improved health outcomes also spurs
growth.

So, you know, it’s a very complicated thing to move the largest country in the world down a
different development path. So far the commitment of the Chinese government to that
reform path has been very encouraging. And we look forward to continuing to work with
them very closely and we’re also very encouraged that China has indicated that they’re
interested in increasing their borrowing from us. You know, not that they need the money,
but that we can work together for example on pilot projects utilizing new ideas from other
countries about how to make the healthcare system more effective and efficient. We look
forward to doing just those things with the Chinese government.

MODERATOR: Just have time for one or two. Right, here.


QUESTION: Thank you. Dr. Kim, you just talked about the Asian infrastructure investment
bank. The other day you say the World Bank working closely with if it’s funded. Yet, New
York Times today they report that the U.S. is actually opposing the idea and by saying that
it’s an deliberate effort to undercut the World Bank. Since the infrastructure investment is
so important to the world development, so if I may, may I ask you what your reaction to the
report and do you support the idea of forming the AIIB? Thank you.


DR. KIM: Well, so last year we spent about $24 billion on infrastructure. And the
infrastructure was about 40 percent of our overall portfolio. And so but if you look at low
and middle income countries, the estimation is that the infrastructure funding deficit is
anywhere from one trillion to $1.5 trillion, so our $24 billion barely touches it. And if you put
all the multi-level development banks together, it’s in the $40 to 50 billion range, again, not
even close to meeting the need. Moreover, private sector investments and infrastructure
developing countries actually went down from 2012 to 2013. So there’s no question that
there’s a huge need for investment in infrastructure. And so I’ve been in very deep
conversations with the Chinese authorities and they have assured me again and again they
have no intention of making this bank a rival to the World Bank or if indeed, I just spoke with
Vice Minister Shi today about how we can work even more closely together.


You know, we’ve been around for 70 years. We are full of experts who know how to do
project preparation, implementation, who know how to do project supervision who, you
know, the Bank invented the project cycle decades ago. So I think that our position is very
clear. The enemy is poverty. And in order to fight poverty, you need to build infrastructure,
especially in the low and middle income countries. And so any group that is focused on
fighting poverty by investing in infrastructure is our friend. You know, my own sense is that
the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank will be one of the partners in the global
infrastructure facility. It just makes sense.

Again, you know, we have to look at this from the actual problem of infrastructure deficit,
and not from the problem of politics. We are non-political organization.

MODERATOR: I'm sorry. We'll now have to conclude the press conference.
