                                                                          101962


Speech by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim: “The
Importance Of Safety Nets:
Mexico’s Leadership?
November 19, 2014

World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Mexico City, Mexico

As Prepared for Delivery


Buenos días a todos.
Señor Presidente de la República , Enrique Peña Nieto
Señor Secretario de Hacienda y Crédito Público, Luis Videgaray Caso
Señora Secretaria de Desarrollo Social, Rosario Robles
Distinguidos Secretarios
Delegados estatales de Prospera
Amigas y amigos todos
Es un gran placer para mí estar aquí hoy con ustedes, y atender a la amable invitación del
señor Presidente Peña Nieto.

Hace unos años, en otra visita de un alto funcionario del Banco Mundial a México, tuvimos
la oportunidad de conocer a Antonio Montes, un joven de 17 años del estado de Morelos,
que aspiraba con llegar a ser un chef profesional. Aunque no sabemos con certeza si lo
logró, el entusiasmo con que compartió en ese momento su sueño de un futuro mejor a
pesar de ser ya “papá y mamá?de sus dos hermanos menores, nos hace pensar que sí lo
hizo. Lo que sabemos con certeza– porque así lo comunicó Antonio en esa ocasión -- es
que sin la transferencia de efectivo que recibían entonces, él y sus hermanos, no habrían
podido siquiera alimentarse bien y mucho menos acudir a la escuela y soñar con llegar a
ser alguien en la vida.
Friends, Antonio’s story is like the tale of millions of children in Mexico and around the
world. Despite hardship, they fiercely desire to pursue their dreams and improve their lives
and those of their loved ones. However, to pursue opportunity – to stay healthy, to learn
skills, to find a job and to generate income – they often need help to overcome many
obstacles.

We are here to talk about the importance of safety nets and social protection that countries
provide to their citizens. But it would be wrong for me to be in Mexico today and not reflect
for a moment on the tragedy regarding the disappearance of the 43 young people. I want to
add my voice in support of the families of the disappeared students. They deserve truth and
they deserve justice. I am sure the government today is doing its utmost to uncover the full
story of what happened and then prosecuting those responsible for this injustice. Terrible
tragedies like this one underscore the need to continue investing in the future of the most
vulnerable, improving their wellbeing and providing them with better opportunities and good
jobs.

Over the past generation and more, Mexico has been a world leader in providing this
assistance through Oportunidades. It was one of the world’s first national conditional cash
transfer programs that provided incentives to families to invest in health and education,
linking income support to their investment in their children’s futures. This innovative
structure was also combined with a cutting edge focus on what we at the World Bank Group
call the Science of Delivery – an approach that aims to capture and curate what works best
in development and then spread that knowledge to countries around the
world. Oportunidades had high standards for good governance and transparency and,
crucially, it collected real-time program management information and used it to make
evidence-based reforms. This relentless focus on execution was critical to its success –
and helped make it one of the world’s largest social safety net programs. Mexico also
should be proud that Oportunidades has been the model for safety net programs in 52 other
countries. The World Bank Group is one of its biggest supporters, providing the program
with $2.75 billion dollars in low-interest loans since 2009.


Mexico’s track record as a global leader in social safety net design and implementation is
one of the reasons we are excited about today’s announcement of the PROSPERA
program. As I will explain, by linking Oportunidades to the country’s wider social protection
system, it represents the next generation in social safety net development. It creates new
possibilities for Oportunidades beneficiaries across a range of sectors, and shows the
flexibility to accommodate their increasingly mobile and urban way of life. All of these
reasons helped persuade us to partner with Mexico in supporting the program. We’re very
pleased to announce today that we’ll be providing $350 million dollars in the form of a low-
interest loan for the development of PROSPERA.


PROSPERA and social safety nets more generally will be critical for achieving our goal of
ending extreme poverty by 2030. Over the last few decades, income growth has been
responsible for about 70 percent of countries’ success in helping people lift themselves out
of extreme poverty. However, our latest forecast is that the average rate of economic
growth for Latin America is expected to drop to 1.2 percent this year. This projection is far
below the 4 percent rate that has helped reduce poverty across the region in recent
years. For the benefit of the poor, governments must adopt appropriate structural reforms
to bolster economic growth. Given the trend toward increasing inequality in recent years,
however, governments must also take steps to ensure that the gains from growth are
shared equally, especially with people who have little or no income. This type of progress
comes from investments in people, such as improved health care services and education.

Social safety nets like PROSPERA provide a financial cushion to poor people, allowing
them to achieve a higher level of health and security and giving them the chance to learn
skills and find good jobs. Ultimately, they become more productive workers, raise their
income levels, and promote economic growth.


Today, about 345 million people living in extreme poverty around the world are helped by a
safety net program. The expansion of social safety nets, especially cash transfers, has
been substantial in Africa. In 2010, 21 countries had some form of cash transfer in place;
today, social safety nets operate in 37 African nations. These programs have helped break
the vicious cycle of being born poor, without opportunity, and remaining so from one
generation to the next. Take the example of Morocco: It launched a conditional cash
transfer program in 2008 that recommended recipients to ensure that their children attend
primary school. In just two years, the student dropout rate fell by 70 percent and the country
has expanded this program to more than 800,000 students.

But we must expand these safety nets to an even greater scale. Today, 870 million people
living in extreme poverty still do not have access to any kind of social assistance
program. Research shows that, where this support is absent, many families tend not to
send their children to school. They also lack the financial means to provide their children
basic nutrition, which has long-term negative consequences. It’s clear that if we are to
achieve our goal to end extreme poverty, we must expand and improve social safety nets.
The World Bank has supported the development of these programs in 122 countries and
regions, committing $16 billion dollars for this purpose over the past seven years.

We are proud to support Mexico’s second-generation safety net program, PROSPERA,
which builds on the core responsibilities of both the government and the recipients and aims
to reach and support the most marginalized populations in the country. PROSPERA will
connect families in multiple ways to the country’s social protection system. For instance,
PROSPERA will support vocational training and technical education; it will link people to 29
federal programs and give them preferential access to services; it will help teach financial
literacy and show people how they can access low interest rate loans; and it will help young
people living in cities enter the National Employment Service.

As countries have scaled up their social protection programs, we have learned some
important lessons.

First, we have learned that safety nets DO NOT lead to dependency or laziness. To the
contrary, evaluations show that the only groups systematically working less due to safety
nets are children and the elderly – and that is a very good thing. In South Africa, for
instance, cash transfers increased labor force participation and employment, as
beneficiaries were able to afford bus fares to commute to more vibrant labor markets.

Second, we now know that safety nets are, in fact, cost-effective and efficient ways to
quickly provide security and stability for the poor. Governments in developing and emerging
market countries spend on average 1.6 percent of GDP on social safety net
programs. Less effective alternatives, such as fuel subsidies, can often cost three to four
times as much – and do not effectively target the poor. Safety nets can also provide
assistance to millions in short amounts of time and with minimal effort. For example, when
a drought hit the Horn of Africa in 2011, Ethiopia was able to expand the number of people
covered by its safety net by more than 40 percent. As a result, Ethiopia made sure that an
additional 3.1 million more people had an adequate food supply.

And third, we have learned that cash transfers are one part of a suite of services required
for helping people pull themselves out of poverty. PROSPERA is a good example. By
connecting beneficiaries of Oportunidades’ conditional cash transfers to other government
sponsored initiatives, PROSPERA will promote access to financial services such as credit,
savings, and insurance. PROSPERA will also offer the poor a way to finance investments in
education and skill development that are essential to increasing productivity and raising
incomes.


Because we believe so strongly in the role that safety nets can play in ending poverty, we’re
committed to promoting further programmatic innovation. For example, we’re working with
the Secretariat of Social Development – or SEDESOL – in the design and development of
their new and powerful social policy. This will help Mexico pull together efforts in different
areas of the government toward providing more opportunities for the poorest.

We’re also helping to ensure that governments around the world are aware of best
practices. Earlier this year, working with Brazil, we helped host a global conference on
social protection systems, as part of our on-going involvement with South-South Learning
Forums. We also helped organize a smaller regional workshop on inclusive growth last
week in Lima. Mexico played a crucial role in the success of both events, sharing lessons
learned from its leadership in the sector and responding to presentations on the
experiences of other countries that have faced similar challenges.

Mexico is a world leader in social protection, especially now through PROSPERA’s
approach to making many more government services available to the poor. Countries
around the world look to you for ideas on how to help their poorest citizens. We are eager to
continue to support you as you grow in your knowledge of the best ways to build effective
social protection systems. We also want to disseminate knowledge of your best practices
throughout Latin America, Africa, Asia and, even, the United States. Your success has
helped millions of Mexicans – and it has helped many more millions of poor people around
the world. Your work has brought hope, opportunity and prosperity to many who dreamed it
would never be possible.

We are all very grateful and we at the World Bank are humbled to have played a small role
in your great success. Muchisimas gracias.
