                                                                               101922


Transcript: Press Conference with
World Bank Group President Jim
Yong Kim following Development
Forum in Yangon, Myanmar
January 27, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Press Conference, Development Forum
Yangon, Myanmar

Transcript

MR JOHN DONNELLY: Good afternoon. My name is John Donnelly, I'm the
Communications Advisor for President Jim Kim at the World Bank Group. President Kim is
sitting to my left. To his left is Axel van Trotsenburg the Vice President of the East Asia
region for the World Bank. To Axel's left is Karin Finkelston who is a Vice President of the
International Finance Corporation, which is the bank's private sector arm.


So the way this will start up, is that President Kim will start with a statement and after that
we'll take questions. Thank you.

DR KIM: Thank you very much. I'm very pleased to be here in Myanmar and thank you for
the very warm hospitality that I've received on this visit. I've just come from the
Development Cooperation Forum and I'm very encouraged by the way the government of
Myanmar has taken the lead to drive development forward, bringing the international
community together to promote the effectiveness of the [dollars] that are used here.
Myanmar's reforms have been dramatic. Moving the country forward towards peace,
democracy and an open market based economy that's integrating with the region and
beyond, providing jobs and opportunities for Myanmar's poorest. They're delivering results.
The gross domestic product growth rose to about 7 percent in 2013, up from 5.9 percent in
2012 and foreign investment has tripled. Reallocations in the government budget have
increased investment in public health and education and social programs.

The World Bank Group, and that includes our private sector arm, IFC and MIGA, the
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, is committed to supporting these reforms to
improve the lives of all the people of Myanmar. As part of this effort I have announced plans
for a $2 billion multi-year investment program to support the government's plans to help
everyone in the country gain access to electricity by 2030 and to deliver universal
healthcare as well as other development priorities.

Currently, 70 percent of Myanmar's people do not have access to reliable electricity. We
know electricity has broad benefits for poverty reduction, enabling students to study at night,
clinics to run equipment and refrigerate medicine and for businesses to operate and
expand. This is why of the total that we've announced $1 billion will be used to expand
electricity generation, transmission and distribution. $1 billion will also support the
development of the National Electrification Plan; it will enhance institutional capacity and
promote regulatory reforms. It will also support private sector investments in power
generation and distribution, as well as a scale-up of renewable energy for rural and off grid
electrification.

With less than two years to go until the Millennium Development Goals' deadline, health is
an urgent priority. An estimated 75 percent of Myanmar's people who live mostly in rural
areas lack access to quality healthcare and high costs place most essential services out of
reach for many families. Everyone should have access to affordable, quality health services
and no one should be forced into poverty trying to pay for the healthcare they need.

The government's ambitious plan for universal coverage by 2030 will help ensure that every
Myanmar citizen has the opportunity to live a healthy, productive life. We want to make sure
this happens so we're committing $200 million from the investment program to scale up
access to quality essential health services for women and children through results based
financing and remove out of pocket payments as a barrier to healthcare for the poorest
people.

I know that we share a common goal, to end poverty and build shared prosperity, paying
close attention to improving the lives of the poorest 40 percent here in Myanmar. As
daunting as the challenge may appear I'm hopeful, especially after seeing the earnest
resolve of the people of Myanmar to transform their country for the better.
Now I'd be happy to take your questions.

QUESTION: All right, great. Hi, May Wong from Channel NewsAsia, a TV station from
Singapore. My first question to you, President Kim, is what kind of conditions are you
tagging onto that $2 billion of funds that you've committed? My reference is what is your
take on the Rohingya issue given the fact that the violence is still ongoing today and does it
show that - are you condoning that kind of an action when you disperse such funds at this
particular period of time?


My second question is what kind of measurement will you be using to monitor the success
of how the funds are dispersed? Thank you.

DR KIM: So let me be very clear, we do not condone violence and we are hopeful that the
government will take all measures to investigate and also to respond in the appropriate way.
In terms of conditions we don't use that word in the sense that we determine what the
outcomes have to be and unless the government complies we stop doing it. We just simply
don't operate in that way. The way that we work is that we come to an agreement with the
government, we come to an agreement with the private sector companies that we support
and we come to an agreement about the results that we all agree we should get. Then we
have a very rigorous system of following up.

You may know that the World Bank group pioneered safeguards in terms of following things
like environmental impact, the impact on local citizens, the impact in terms of moving people
from one place to another. We also have very, very strict rules around corruption and we
audit every single project. So we've done many things in the past to ensure that we're
battling corruption effectively. On my very first day on the job in July of 2012 I had to cancel
a project because we had reliable evidence that there was corruption - and this was a
project in Bangladesh. I would not hesitate to do that again if we were to find that there was
any evidence of corruption in any of the projects.

We feel confident that we can monitor our projects, we feel confident that we can achieve
the goals that we want to achieve, but most importantly we feel confident that we share the
goals of each of the loans with the government in some cases and private sector companies
in others.

MR JOHN DONNELLY: Another question? Okay, yes.
QUESTION: Hello, this is [Jotu] from Bloomberg. Can you please a little bit elaborate about
the $1 billion investment in power sector, is it any hydropower or [unclear] or other kinds of
energy?


MR AXEL VAN TROTSENBURG: Of the energy - first of all we are in a dialogue on the
National Electrification Plan and we are working with the government to identify the different
projects. We have already - as of today we have already approved one project for $140
million that is replacing gas turbines, existing gas turbines for more efficient ones. In that
project we're also providing technical assistance that will help the government also to lay
out the program.


What is of concern to us is thirdly the access to electricity. As you know, unfortunately only
30 percent of the population has access, so therefore a special challenge is in our support
project, whether that is coming from the public sector arm, the World Bank or from our
colleagues of the IFC we are going to look at access. It is not only in the urban area but
most importantly also to the rural areas. So it will be on this elaboration of the government.
We have already, as I said, made the down payment on an existing project but we are
looking forward to develop this first. As you know, the government certainly would like to
make sure that the entire population has access in the next 15 or 17 years and with more
ambitious goals for the medium term and we would like to be part of this.

Of the $1 billion this is not only coming from the public sector arm, namely the IDA credit,
but also from our private sector colleagues, the IFC and MIGA. So there will be a
combination but as we have said, this is an overall commitment on which we then will work
out with the government the appropriate project.

MS FINKELSTON: Maybe I can just add from the private sector perspective. Our projects
are driven by the market and at this point I think one of the key areas that we're focusing on
the generation side is really on coming up with standard agreements in terms of what a
power purchase agreement should look like, that will allow the government to transparently
bid out the concessions for power generation.


So we've been mandated in the [Mingun] project to help them come up with the criteria,
help the government come up with the criteria by which they will determine which of the, I
think, about 19 or 20 bidders would be the best to take that project forward. We hope that
this would also allow the government to get a market price for power so that - and we've
seen in most international bidding situations that the price for power would be lower than
from a negotiated bid. So this should be better for the overall system.

The other area we're focused on the power side is on the distribution side, because as most
of you know there are losses in the distribution side that are quite high here in Myanmar, so
in order to - as Axel said, gain efficiency from the existing system we want to work with the
distribution arms of cities such as Yangon to look at how can we get a distribution entity that
is able to stop the losses and actually begin to raise financing more commercially.

MR DONNELLY: Okay, another question?


QUESTION: Hello, thank you I am [Nam Dim Tu] from Myanmar Times. My question is the
government trying to start - every time is trying to start the hydropower project or the locals,
the residents, they were forced to move or many of them they were forced to lose their land
or their homes and many of them they had a problem with their compensation. Currently we
have a problem with [unclear], so with your new announcement for the electricity power, so
how do you make sure or did you discuss any program with the government? Thank you.


DR KIM: Thank you. So let me just give you a few overarching principles and points and I'll
ask Axel to address the issue directly.


So there's no immediate plans for a hydropower project with the government but we believe
that in context of climate change and also given the fact that there is such an abundant
potential for hydroelectric power here in Myanmar, that hydroelectric power has to be a
viable and potentially important option for Myanmar going forward.

Now, the World Bank Group has a lot of experience with hydroelectric power and over the
years we have developed a very sophisticated, and we think very strong, safeguard system
to ensure that hydroelectric power plants have the minimal environmental impact and that
also the people who are displaced are cared for and compensated in a fair and equitable
way.

So generally speaking we believe that hydroelectric power will have to be part of the future.
We also believe that there's just no chance for us to get and keep global warming at two
degrees Celsius or lower without really looking seriously at hydroelectric power.

In terms of the details here in Myanmar I'll ask Axel to make some comments.
MR VAN TROTSENBURG: Well, we haven't had a new project in hydro or elsewhere but
when we do an electricity project, but also for that matter a transport [or others], we are
looking as President Kim said also at what are not only the direct effects but what are the
social and environmental implications. So they are governed by fairly clear safeguard rules.
In addition, if there are resettlement issues involved as you were alluding to, that people
would need to move or so, there is a very strict resettlement policy on this. These kinds of
policies are not implemented just that the World Bank works with the government on this.
No, it will require extensive consultations so that actually the issue is being addressed also
to the satisfaction by the people affected. A concrete example of that type of thing when we
did, for example, a hydroelectric project in Lao, Nam Theun 2, that involved an extensive
work with the communities.

Yes, these projects sometimes take a lot longer to prepare because you want to do it right
and it needs also to make sure that the people who are affected ultimately are satisfied that
a fair and reasonable solution was found. We are not at this stage but I just want to assure
you that the policies that govern this type of project are strict and are also transparent. So
these projects will not be implemented behind closed doors. There are - those are involving
also with clear publications involvement and, as I said, consultations.

So as I mentioned, our commitment is to work in the power sector with the government. But
whatever policy - but this is not specifically for Myanmar, this is worldwide - those policies
are being respected and adhered to.

MR DONNELLY: Thank you very much for coming today.
