                                                                                101990


Third Inclusive and Sustainable
Industrial Development Forum
July 14, 2015


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

As Prepared for Delivery


Your Excellencies:

I’m honored to participate today in UNIDO’s forum on the critical role of inclusive and
sustainable industrialization in the future global development agenda, including to end
extreme poverty by 2030.

Industrial development is often perceived to be disruptive to the environment – disruptive
through construction, natural-resource demands, and its effect on air quality. But it doesn’t
have to be this way. Industrialization — when done sustainably and inclusively — can be a
driver of job creation, technology transfer, and sustainable economic growth.

In the spirit of the international community’s ongoing efforts to establish strong partnerships
for development, this event is most timely and welcome.

Investing in resilient infrastructure, inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and
innovation has been identified as a prerequisite for achieving a wide range of sustainable-
development priorities. This requires a strong private sector and good public policies that
provide an enabling environment for private investment and business development. The
World Bank Group has been actively financing industrial infrastructure — particularly
industrial parks and trade logistics — as well as related “soft? infrastructure across different
regions of the world.

Promoting inclusive and sustainable industrial development calls for a broader range of
resources than any single development institution can provide on its own. This type of
development requires investments not only in industry, but also in associated infrastructure,
such as transport facilities and utilities. It also calls for policies, strategies, and regulatory
frameworks designed to facilitate market access, create decent jobs, attract foreign direct
investment, upgrade technology and ensure environmental sustainability.

In recognition of the complexity of these challenges, we applaud UNIDO for launching its
Program for Country Partnership in Ethiopia and Senegal.

In Ethiopia, UNIDO and World Bank Group teams are working together to support the
government’s industrial parks program. My organization has provided $250 million dollars to
finance key infrastructure for two industrial parks, provide technical and capacity-building
support for the institutional and regulatory framework, and develop links to small businesses
in the country.— UNIDO’s complementary strengths in the project includes developing
value chains for leather and textile sectors, skills training programs, quality and standards,
and technology know-how. UNIDO’s role is a critical one – the institution’s coordination as a
neutral broker has helped to create synergies and facilitate technology transfer.

Together, we’re working with the government of Ethiopia to ensure that new industrial parks
make use of recycled water and renewable resources; develop green areas; and reflect
upgraded environment standards and environmental inspection systems. Many countries in
Africa have an abundance of renewable sources of power generation that aren’t fully
realized. Ethiopia is not one of them. This country is effectively leveraging its renewable-
energy sources – hydro, geothermal, and wind – to industrialize in a way that’s consistent
with its ambitious carbon-neutral agenda.

In Senegal, UNIDO is providing technical advice regarding the development of industrial
zones, covering social and environmental impact studies; the management of such zones;
and the incentives package for investors. The first of these zones -- near the new
international business center and airport -- will be built in two phases. Work on the first
phase is underway, with government financing, and it is due to open in early 2016. We at
the World Bank Group are actively looking for opportunities to work closely with UNIDO
during the second phase of this industrial project, including possibly through both our fund
for the poorest, IDA, and our private sector arm, the IFC.

These two examples are just a beginning. I’m confident that we will build on these existing
initiatives to broaden our partnership. I’d like to particularly thank UNIDO’s strong leadership
and my friend, Director-General Li Yong. Our partnership is helping to scale up inclusive
and sustainable industrial development, which will be a critical driver toward reaching many
of the post-2015 development goals.

Thank you very much.
