                                                                                 101960


                                                                       st
"Human Capital in the 21
Century"
November 4, 2014



Jim Yong Kim
Symposium
Seoul, Korea, Republic of

As Prepared for Delivery



President Park, Honorable Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Thank you for the warm welcome and kind introduction. It’s wonderful to be back in Korea.
I’ve just come from a four-day trip to the Horn of Africa, where I saw some inspiring efforts
to promote peace, stability and development. Understandably, much of the news from the
continent is focused on the Ebola epidemic, its terrible human toll, and efforts to extinguish
it. On my way back from East Africa, I visited Ghana, where the United Nations has
established the first-ever UN mission focused on stopping the spread of an infectious
disease. While we are making progress on fighting Ebola in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra
Leone, we were much too slow in responding, and we still face an uphill struggle to bring
the epidemic under control. Ebola continues to represent a serious threat, not only in terms
of human lives, especially in the three most affected countries, but to the regional and
global economies as well. We were not prepared for this outbreak and, while all of our focus
must remain on fighting it, we must also prepare ourselves for the next epidemic that will
surely come and may be even more deadly.

As serious as the Ebola crisis may be, we must not forget that the virus is presently
confined largely to the three countries in sub-Saharan Africa. There are, in fact, about 900
million people in the region who live in countries free of the virus on a continent that is still
very much open for business, growing fast, and a great opportunity for investment. Indeed,
according to the World Bank Group’s projections, sub-Saharan Africa’s economy is on
target now to grow more than 5 percent next year. The Korean government and Korean
companies have a presence in Africa, but they are lagging behind their neighbors in
exploring the tremendous opportunities on this vast and rapidly evolving continent. While
our focus today is on the role of education in growing the Korean economy, I would urge
both the government and the private sector to commit to deepening its relationship with
Africa, in both humanitarian and economic terms. The benefits to both Africa and Korea will
be enormous.

The World Bank Group estimates that Korea will grow at about 4 percent in 2015, which is
quite strong compared with other OECD countries. I’m pleased that, despite this positive
outlook, there is a lively debate here about ways to continue this success, including through
educational reform. Indeed, I was grateful last December when, during my last trip to Korea,
President Park invited the World Bank Group to join this discussion. Since that time, we’ve
worked closely with the Korean Educational Development Institute and other think tanks to
do what we were asked – evaluate ways to promote creativity in Korea through educational
innovation. We’re circulating the initial results of the World Bank’s contribution today in a
background conference paper entitled Intelligence, personality and creativity: Unleashing
the power of intelligence and personality traits to build a creative and innovative economy .
I’ve read the paper, and its findings inform my views about human capital in the 21 st century,
and Korea’s opportunity to improve its already impressive success in developing human
resources.


The title of this speech – Human Capital in the 21st Century – deliberately echoes the title of
French economist Thomas Piketty’s recent best-seller, Capital in the Twenty-First
Century. Piketty argues in his book that global capitalism tends toward inequality,
especially in periods like the present where growth, on average, is slow. He also suggests
that two things have primarily fostered greater convergence, both within and between
countries, in the evolution of global market capitalism – the diffusion of knowledge, and
investment in training and skills of people. At the World Bank Group, boosting economic
growth in all our client countries is a top priority because we know that income growth was
responsible for about 70 percent of our success in lifting people out of extreme poverty over
the last few decades. Growth has also enabled many countries to provide better access to
health care, education and employment, but only when countries themselves have focused
on growth strategies that were inclusive. To promote inclusive growth, the World Bank
Group works to facilitate the diffusion of knowledge and support countries in investing in the
productivity and skills of their people. This is in line with the two overarching goals that we
have set for ourselves – to end extreme poverty by 2030 and to boost shared prosperity.
So what I’ll be talking about today is not merely how Korea can continue its impressive
record of economic growth in the rapidly changing landscape of global capitalism; I’ll also be
speaking about ways it can do this so that all of its citizens – young and old, women and
men – share in the gains from that growth. The development of human capital with broader
and deeper skills, and the liberation of that capital so that it can be applied more
productively, are goals that most countries share. As I will discuss, education plays a central
role in this process, and given the role that this country has played in my own development,
I’m grateful for the chance you’ve given me to speak about these issues here today.

I was born in Korea and spent the first five years of my life here, before moving to the
United States, where I grew up. I first returned many years later, when I was 24 years old, in
1984, as a graduate student and researcher. I lived in Seoul for a good part of the next four
years, studying the Korean development experience, and relearning the language. Upon my
return to the United States, I wrote my Ph.D. dissertation on the Korean health care system.
I also spent many days, and especially nights, learning about this country and its many
charms. So coming to Seoul always brings back good memories. Indeed, as I will explain,
that period was one of the most important of my life, as it set in motion an appreciation of
both the fundamental commonality of human experience, and the importance of social,
cultural and economic differences between social groups, nation states, and even entire
regions.

When I arrived three decades ago, Korea seemed new to me, despite my birth and
parentage. I struggled with the language and the culture. Some of the cultural norms and
patterns were familiar from growing up with Korean parents, but there were also many
things that were vexing to me, even as my language skills improved.

Those struggles forced me to grow personally in so many ways. For example, I reconnected
with my family and cultural history – an important experience for an immigrant who, in the
United States, at times felt like an outsider. This helped me come to terms with my dual
identity, and develop a much deeper understanding about my place in the world. I learned
to be open to new experiences, embrace uncertainty, and adapt to social situations where
the rules on the proper way to act were both complex and unfamiliar. Most importantly, I
learned the craft of ethnography, the practice of listening deeply, and suspending one’s own
social and cultural assumptions to learn how the “other? construct s his or her world. In every
job I have had, and in every situation in which I find myself, I try to apply the classic
ethnographic method of “participant-observation? to really understand what’s going on. At
the end of the day, it’s not such a complicated method – Koreans call it using your “nunchi?
– and my professor, the great Sally Falk Moore, told us once that it’s just a matter of walking
into a room and asking yourself, “Who the hell are these people and what do they
want??

Without question, the time I spent in Korea pushed me to develop socially and emotionally.
The codes of conduct in Korean social life were so much more demanding and precise than
anything I had experienced in the United States. There was level upon level of complexity in
language, and even mannerisms that required much more attention than the typical college
student in the United States would give to a standard social setting. The kind of experience I
had in Korea helps young people to develop competencies that education experts call “non-
cognitive? skills, like empathy, confidence, communication, motivation, perseverance and
resilience. Researchers have argued that these skills are every bit as important as the so-
called “cognitive? skills, like language and mathematical reasoning, which are often the
focus of students’ classroom attention.

Taking on new challenges, solving problems creatively, and working across different
backgrounds and cultures, will be important tasks for the vast majority of human beings in
the 21st century. The increasingly global, technological and services-based nature of the
economic interactions of high- and middle-income countries makes these attributes
essential to the success of creative and innovative economies. Based on what I have seen
and experienced over my career, people can do this best when equipped with both
cognitive and non-cognitive skills. The World Bank Group’s background paper supports the
notion that a combination of these skills is essential to promoting creativity. Together, these
qualities empower people to identify problems of value, resolve them based on new ways of
thinking, and work persistently and collaboratively to overcome difficult challenges.
As we state in the draft report, Korea is well positioned to flourish in this environment, due
largely to its citizens’ high-level of educational achievement, and the non-cognitive skills this
success requires. However, to maximize inclusive economic growth, more can be done. For
example, the process of developing cognitive skills could be made less painful by reducing
the social and monetary costs presently associated with Korean students’ education. The
system could also build in opportunities for students to develop a broader range of non-
cognitive skills through interest-based, rather than test-focused, learning. Korean mothers
and fathers can be assured that balance – good study habits AND time for children to
pursue their passions, rather than only late nights studying for tests – is the preferred
route to success and happiness.
Korea can also promote a creative and innovative economy through changes beyond the
education system, so that the country uses its substantial supply of human capital more
effectively. Of special importance are more open and inclusive work places that reward
ideas based on quality not hierarchy, and increase women’s labor force participation,
earnings and career advancement. New approaches in these areas should enable Korean
workers to drive growth in GDP, productivity and living standards for years to come.

Cognitive ability, as measured by IQ, is one of the principal determinants of a student’s
academic success. How a student scores on a test that measures verbal and mathematical
abilities tends to correlate strongly to the student’s ultimat e level of academic achievement
and a country’s economic growth. Because of these expectations, educational systems
place great emphasis on developing IQ-related skills in students. For the same reasons,
when we compare the quality of national educational systems, we do so based on their
ability to produce students who generate the best outcomes on standardized tests of these
skills. And countries invest billions of dollars into educational systems with the aim of
improving these scores.

But research also shows that personality traits have a positive impact on academic
performance and work place outcomes, because they affect the efficiency of people’s
development and use of their intelligence. For example, the personality trait of
“conscientiousness,? which academic literature associates with being organized and
dependable, and exercising self-control, has been shown consistently to predict
achievement in school and professional life. This seems intuitive given that developing
cognitive skills, high-levels of academic success, and solving difficult problems in
professional settings, often require hundreds, if not thousands, of hours of personal
attention, focus and dedication.

Conscientiousness is closely related to a non-cognitive skill some scholars have called
“grit,? which is defined as “the tendency to pursue long-term goals with sustained zeal and
hard work.? According to Katherine Von Culin, Eli Tsukayama, and Angela Duckworth, the
motivation behind someone who exhibits grit is the pursuit of engagement and meaning,
rather than pleasure. Grit also appears essential to characteristics commonly associated
with creativity. For example, researchers suggest that creative people show an interest in
their field at an early age, have built expertise in a specific field over several thousands of
hours, and typically demonstrate patterns of hard work and breakthroughs as a result of
their determination. I think the notion of grit is especially important to consider here in
Korea. So many young people are told to pursue certain socially acceptable or admired
fields, whether or not they have a passion for them. I think this is a real weakness in the
system, and more attention should be paid to awakening the passion in young people for
vocations and fields of their own choosing.

Studies also show that non-cognitive skills have positive impacts on an individual’s
employability, productivity and earnings. My own experience running Partners In Health
showed that smart employees weren’t enough for success. We wanted people who would
dedicate themselves to tasks, work well with others, and enthusiastically take on new
challenges. Non-cognitive skills like emotional stability, dependability, openness, and
confidence, create these qualities in workers. These and similar non-cognitive attributes,
like believing in self and one’s ability to control events, are among the best predictors of job
performance, job satisfaction, and higher income.

Our understanding of non-cognitive skills continues to develop – in fact, it’s relatively new
that we even try to measure them – so we need more research to understand more fully the
role they play in fostering creativity and creating a productive work force. However, research
suggests that, like cognitive skills, they play an integral part in producing innovation. Based
on this knowledge, we at the World Back Group think that an education system can
encourage creativity by helping students acquire a healthy mix of cognitive and non-
cognitive skills. The way forward is to provide diverse approaches to learning, allowing for
greater alignment between students’ own interests and educational offerings.

Based on our review, the Korean education system shows some of the attributes that we
believe foster creativity in students. For instance, it is highly effective at producing
graduates with enduring cognitive skills. Korea is consistently among the highest-performing
countries in international assessments of numeracy and literacy, and evidence suggests
that these competencies persist into adulthood. International test results also indicate that
Korean students show exceptional levels of creativity in certain areas: In 2012, for example,
this country’s 15-year-old students’ average scores were the highest among the
participating countries in PISA’s inaugural creative-problem solving assessment.
Succeeding in Korea’s highly competitive and criticized university entrance examination
process does require a lot of grit, creating a powerful incentive for students to develop a
non-cognitive skill that makes for productive and potentially creative workers.

The difficulty seems to be that, within Korea’s education system, this skill development
process is painful, may direct students’ attention away from more productive pursuits, and
might even have a negative impact on social cohesion. For example, students endure
substantial psychological costs from competition and long hours of work. In 2012, the same
international tests that showed Korean students scoring in the top five internationally in
numeracy and literacy, indicated that they were also the least happy with their school
experience. These students’ intense focus on, and Korean society’s value preference for,
cognitive skills may also result in young people missing opportunities to develop non-
cognitive or technical ones. Depending students’ interests and abilities, this may result in
them forgoing fulfilling careers and lead to inefficient educational expenditures for the
national economy.

Korean families also bear heavy financial and personal costs as the country’s demanding
university admissions’ process has spawned widespread private tutoring and increasing
demands for parental involvement in educational activities. This, in turn, may undermine the
country’s national spirit by entrenching inequality: The country’s lowest income earners are
far less likely to be able to afford expensive tutoring or have time to dedicate to directing
their children’s education.

There also appear to be barriers preventing Korea from fully leveraging the significant skills
its education system produces. For example, anecdotes suggest that, in professional
settings, opportunities to correct mistakes, produce better outcomes, or bring forth new
ideas – the building blocks for creativity – are missed, because of rigid hierarchies based on
age or rank. Perhaps the most famous story in recent memory is the tale of Korea’s men’s
national soccer team. According to one report, “[f]or years, the Korean soccer -development
program rewarded family ties, prestigious academic backgrounds, and seniority over talent.?
However, at the 2002 World Cup, after FIFA had ranked the men’s team 42 nd in the world,
the team finished fourth – the highest finish to date in the tournament of any team from
Asia. Many attribute this success to the team’s coach, a non-Korean who incorporated
widely practiced coaching strategies that were nonetheless new for Korea. For example, his
decisions on player selection and playing time were guided by players’ skill rather than their
age, family background or experience – an idea that seems so commonsensical but which
was disruptive here.


In my view, getting past rigid hierarchies in all aspects of Korean social and professional
life, whether in the public or private sector, in education or even in sports, will be a major
challenge. However, it is also the surest way to know whether this country is willing to make
the kinds of changes that will be required to compete in the 21st century. Can corporate
CEOs listen to their employees from all ranks to make the business grow? Can university
professors encourage their students to openly challenge them in class? Can mothers-in-law
listen to their daughters-in-law to build harmony in the family? Some of these things are
happening; however, at the World Bank Group, we are convinced that Koreans can and
should be leaders in the world in breaking down hierarchies, just as they are in so many
other areas.


Data also show that Korea is not properly leveraging the huge pool of productivity and
creativity among its female citizens. In 2012, more Korean women than men graduated from
university. Yet in 2013, only 55.6 percent of Korean women between the ages of 15 and 64
participated in the labor force, compared to 77.6 percent of men. Although the percentage
of Korean women in the labor force has risen significantly over time, in 2013, it was still
below 62.6 percent, the average rate for women in OECD countries. For Korean women
between the ages of 35 and 39, the difference between their labor force participation rate
and their counterparts in OECD countries, reached 16 percent, and this difference
continued to be nearly 10 percent for women between the ages of 40 and 44

There are studies that suggest that a more efficient use of this human capital would have
substantial economic benefits for Korea. For example, a recent report found that greater
female labor supply would add to economic growth. In Korea specifically, a full convergence
in the labor participation rate between men and women over 20 years could boost GDP per
capita growth rates by more than 0.5 percent annually. It would also avoid the looming
decline in the size of the country’s labor force overall. In 2008, Goldman Sachs concluded
that narrowing Korea’s gap in labor force participation rates could significantly increase
personal income as well. It estimated that efforts to reduce the gap had the potential to push
per capital income 5 percent higher than the firm’s base line projections by 2020.
Korean companies also appear to be undervaluing this outstanding female talent pool. For
example, in 2012, the average median wage for Korean women was 37.4 percent less than
for Korean men, the biggest gender gap among OECD countries. Also, in 2010, Korean
women comprised only 2 percent of corporate directors, compared to 10 percent in the
Philippines, and 7 percent in China and Thailand.

As described in the draft report and companion reports from Korean think tanks, there are a
variety of things Korea can do to remedy these shortcomings, and develop and apply the
human capital it needs for a creative and innovative economy. Indeed, I’m happy to see that
President Park’s government and the private sector are already moving forward with some
of these ideas.
For example, the World Bank Group supports the government’s effort to broaden be yond
test scores the metrics relevant to Korea’s university admissions’ process. Our view is that,
given the cultural and commercial importance attributed to university credentials, this
process sets the context for much of the behavior of administrators, teachers, parents and
students toward children’s education. As a result, it is a powerful way to channel their
choices in directions that increase student happiness, reduce costs to parents, and open up
avenues for social mobility. We expect a broader approach to qualifications for admission to
provide important incentives for students to explore and prove themselves across a wider
range of activities and interests. This, in turn, should lead to the development of a greater
diversity of non-cognitive skills, and provide room for greater creativity. I saw this work first-
hand when I was President of Dartmouth College, and I think it can work here, too.

In the private sector, companies like Daum Communications are reportedly focusing on
steps to make younger employees feel freer to express ideas and improve communication
and teamwork. At Daum, employees are encouraged to refer to each other by English
names, instead of by their positions or seniority. Naver Corporation has likewise sought to
discontinue employees’ use of titles to increase the informal nature of the work place and
make it feel more open. These are similar to steps taken several years ago to prompt risk
taking and creativity at SK Telecom, which reduced the number of employee titles, relaxed
its dress code, and began to assign employees tasks based on ability rather than seniority.

I am also encouraged that, earlier this year, the Korean government established the Task
Force on Gender Parity and Empowerment of Women, in collaboration with the private
sector and other actors, to improve women’s labor force participation and reduce the
compensation gap. The task force’s inclusion of 54 of the country’s major corporations gives
me confidence that it can make real and widespread change happen. Combined, these
companies’ revenues account for more than 50 percent of Korea’s 2013 GDP. Participating
corporations reportedly have plans to, among other things, double the number of women in
managerial positions in the near future, and establish a “returnship? program – as CJ Group
has done – to train and recruit women seeking to re-enter the labor force. To succeed,
though, commitments to women’s inclusion must be enduring, and top corporate leaders
must take personal responsibility for their success – chief executives, in particular,
must make sure their organizations follow through on these initiatives.

It occurs to me, then, that human capital in the 21st century may be conceptualized as a
balance of factors – an individual’s non-cognitive and cognitive skills, and the creativity of
young and old, women and men. Korea’s drive for a creative and innovative economy is
therefore a challenge that followers of Confucius would appreciate. Like yin and yang, what
lies ahead is a process of harmonization to ensure the balance of these things. Cognitive
and non-cognitive skills complement each other: A young person who develops both types
of skills is bound for success and happiness. Women and men, young and old, are also
different, yet bring peace and equity to societies that encourage their active participation in
the work place.


Korea is a country of great accomplishment. Its continued success depends on tackling
difficult issues like the rigid hierarchies that limit the full participation of all members of
society in social and commercial life. It must nurture young people to develop emotional
stability, dependability, openness, and confidence; it must include women and youth as
equals in its corporate culture. If Korea finds this balance, I predict the rate of its
achievements will even accelerate. Korea’s current national dialogue on how to promote
continued rates of economic growth and increases in living standards is part of this
progression. I am grateful that you have included the World Bank Group and me, a son of
Korea, in this critically important conversation. Thank you very much.
