                                                                              101963


Statement by Jim Yong Kim,
President, World Bank Group
Following the United Nations’ Chief
Executives Board Meeting on Ebola
November 21, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Washington, D.C., United States

As Prepared for Delivery


Good afternoon. I’m pleased that we had the opportunity today to bring the leaders of the
United Nations system together, to assess the status of the global response to the Ebola
epidemic, and to work toward a unified approach on the ground in West Africa.

This is a pivotal moment in the world’s worst ever Ebola epidemic. There’s clear evidence of
areas of progress, particularly in Liberia, where new cases have declined
significantly. International support is making a difference. But there’s also evidence that is
very worrisome, such as the increase in infections in Sierra Leone and the spreading of the
outbreak to Mali.

And our goal will be extraordinarily difficult: We must get to zero cases. Ebola is not a
disease where you can leave a few cases and say you’ve done enough; look what
happened in the early days of this epidemic, when it fell in Guinea and then exploded into
Liberia and Sierra Leone.

A key element in getting to zero cases will be to invest much more in effective health
systems. These countries need community-based care facilities with well-trained health
workers and strong triage, diagnostic, treatment and referral capabilities. They must be
able to do the kind of extensive contact tracing of infected patients that enabled Nigeria and
Senegal to get to zero cases. Doing so will require even more resources, more discipline,
and more coordination among the affected governments and international agencies.
Even as we focus intensely on the immediate health response, we also must begin planning
to help the affected countries back on the road to economic recovery and development. As
soon as possible, we need to get children back in school, farmers back in their fields,
businesses back up and running, and investors back into these countries.

Today, we must stand more united and committed than ever as an international
community. We must accelerate and adapt the response to changing conditions on the
ground as we also prepare for the recovery. We know this deadly virus has a history of
resurgence, so we all must remain vigilant even where things look promising. This
epidemic is not close to being over. Our end game is not near. The Ebola-affected countries
face a very difficult road ahead, and they can count on our continuing support as
development partners.
