                                                                             101973


Speech by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim: Ending
Extreme Poverty by 2030: The
Final Push
April 7, 2015


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C., United States

As Prepared for Delivery


Good morning. Thank you, John, for that kind introduction. Thank all of you for coming, or
watching on the Webcast. And thank you to CSIS for hosting us at your beautiful building.
Before I begin, I want to pause to remember the 147 students at Garissa University College
in Kenya who were senselessly murdered just a few days ago. Schools are sacred grounds,
and all who study there should be safe. Let us reflect for a moment.

Just 15 years into the new millennium, economic development in poor countries and
emerging markets is at a critical crossroads. Much of the attention has been on the near
horizon – concerns about the slow-moving global economy, uncertainties over the price of
oil, and conflicts from the Ukraine to the Middle East to parts of Africa. But when we look at
the longer term picture, we see that the decisions made this year will have an enormous
impact on the lives of billions of people across the world for generations to come.

2015 is the most important year for global development in recent memory. In July, world
leaders will gather in Addis Ababa to discuss how we’ll finance our development priorities in
the years ahead. In September, world leaders will come together at the United Nations to
establish the Sustainable Development Goals – a group of targets and goals set for 2030.
And in December, world leaders again will gather in Paris to work out an agreement based
on government commitments to lessen the severe short- and long-term risks of climate
change.
At the same time, we have witnessed the emergence of a major new player in development
– the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank led by China, with more than 50 countries and
regions signing on as members. With the right environment, labor and procurement
standards, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the New Development Bank,
established by the BRICS countries, can become great new forces in the economic
development of poor countries and emerging markets. The World Bank Group sees these
development banks as potentially strong allies in tackling the enormous challenge of
bringing much needed infrastructure to Asia.

Our mission at the World Bank Group is defined by two goals – to end extreme poverty by
2030 and to boost prosperity among the poorest 40 percent in low- and middle-income
countries. These goals are ambitious and there’s more than enough work to go around. By
2030, we will most likely need 40 percent more energy and face a 40 percent shortfall of
fresh water – pressures that may well be further accelerated by climate change. We
estimate that the developing world will need an additional $1 to 1.5 trillion dollars every year
to be invested in infrastructure – roads, bridges, railways, airports, energy plants and
desalination facilities.

If the world’s multilateral banks, including the new ones, can form alliances, work together,
and support development that addresses these challenges, we all benefit – especially the
poor and most vulnerable. It is our hope – indeed, our expectation – that these new
institutions will join the world’s multilateral development banks and our private sector
partners on a shared mission to promote economic growth that helps the poorest. I will do
everything in my power to find innovative ways to work with these banks. Next week, during
the Spring Meetings of the World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund here in
Washington, I plan to continue my discussions with Chinese and other officials about these
potential collaborations.

Our ambitions for economic development couldn’t be higher. We’re no longer talking about
billions of dollars for economic development. We’re talking about trillions of dollars – which
means that we must be creative and use all of our resources to leverage much-needed
private sector investment to build infrastructure and create jobs.

The decisions we make this year, and the alliances we form in the years ahead, will help
determine whether we have a chance to reach our goal of ending extreme poverty in just 15
years.
The good news is that the world has made substantial progress already. In 1990, when the
world population was 5.2 billion, 36 percent of people lived in extreme poverty. Today – with
7.3 billion people – an estimated 12 percent live in extreme poverty. Over 25 years, we’ve
gone from nearly 2 billion people living in extreme poverty to fewer than 1 billion.

But we still have nearly 1 billion people living on less than US$1.25 a day. Few of us can
even imagine what this is like. Let’s remember what poverty is. Poverty is 2.5 billion people
not having access to financial services like bank accounts. Poverty is 1.4 billion people
without access to electricity. Poverty is having to put your children to bed without food. And
poverty is not going to school because, in order to survive, everyone in the family needs to
earn a few cents each day.

Some say it’s impossible to end extreme poverty – especially in just 15 years. But we know
it’s possible. We know in part because of our past success, and because we have learned
from years of experience about what has worked in particular contexts and what has not.

Later in the year, I’ll talk in depth about our strategies to boost prosperity for the bottom 40
percent, especially in middle income countries. But today, I want to talk about our broad
strategy to lift nearly a billion people out of extreme poverty and into the modern world.

Inside the World Bank, for the past 50 years, we’ve continuously distilled and analyzed our
global experience in fighting poverty. As a result, our advice to governments has evolved
over time. We now known that our strategic advice must evolve even more. Our strategy to
end extreme poverty, based on the best global knowledge now available, can be summed
up in just three words:

Grow. Invest. And insure.

Let me talk about each one.

First, grow.

The world economy needs to grow faster, and grow more sustainably. It needs to grow in a
way that ensures that the poor receive a greater share of the benefits of that growth. We
can reach the end of extreme poverty only if we mark a path toward a more robust and
inclusive growth that is unparalleled in modern times.

Decades of experience have taught us that economic growth is the primary driver of
increased personal income and poverty reduction. Sustained growth requires
macroeconomic stability in the form of low inflation, manageable debt levels and reliable
exchange rates. Government policies also must prioritize growth in sectors that increase the
incomes of the poor.

The World Bank Group will continue to support governments and make investments in a
broad variety of areas in the fight against extreme poverty. For instance, in countries with
great amounts of mineral wealth, governments can encourage pro-poor growth with
improved education systems and the development of more diversified economies. In most
of the developing world, though, efforts to end extreme poverty will require us to focus on
boosting agricultural productivity.

Despite the massive global migration to urban areas, 70 percent of the world’s extreme poor
still live in rural villages. They are mostly farmers or work in informal jobs – providing
services to rural populations. Our experience in China shows that, in poorer economies,
growth in agriculture is four times more powerful in lifting people out of poverty than growth
in manufacturing and services.

But how can countries follow China’s example? It depends on the local circumstances.
Sometimes it is just a matter of giving farmers more control over how and what they
produce. This is what Vietnam did during the Doi Moi economic “renovation? in the late
1980s. Over the next three decades, Vietnam became a top exporter of rice, coffee and tea,
and its poverty rate fell from 57 percent to 5 percent.

Helping farmers improve yields requires increasing access to better seeds, water, electricity
and markets. According to one study in Bangladesh, six years after constructing 3,000
kilometers of roads to connect communities to markets, household incomes increased by an
average of 74 percent.

Promoting growth in agriculture also depends in part on the integrity of the global food
system. At next week’s Spring Meetings, we’ll be releasing a new discussion paper to
develop a strong food system – one that raises the incomes of the poorest, provides
adequate nutrition, and combats climate change.

That’s the growth part of the strategy. The second part of the strategy is to invest – and by
that, I mean investing in people, especially through education and health.

The opportunity to get children off to the right start happens just once. Investments made in
children early in life bring far greater returns than those made later on. Poor nutrition and
disease can have life-long implications for mental and physical health, educational
achievement, and adult earnings. Clean water and sanitation facilities, both at home and in
school, also have a substantial impact on future professional opportunities. They help
children avoid infections that cause developmental disabilities and ensure girls’ consistent
school attendance, even after the beginning of menstruation.

Investments in girls and women are particularly important because they have a multiplier
effect on the well-being of the extreme poor. When empowered through education, mothers
have healthier children; and, when they have financial resources, they’re more likely to
invest in the next generation.

We must also set clear learning standards in schools. The level of learning among young
people today in many countries is alarming. Over 50 percent of young people in Kenya who
have completed six years of schooling cannot read a simple sentence. Over 70 percent of
children completing primary school in Mozambique do not have basic numeracy skills.
These low achievement levels have devastating implications for when people look for jobs.

We know that using new technology can help transform educational outcomes. For
example, Bridge International Academies uses software and tablets in schools that teach
over 100,000 students in Kenya and Uganda. After about two years, students’ average
scores for reading and math have risen high above their public school peers. The cost per
student at Bridge Academies is just $6 dollars a month.

One of the most effective ways to encourage investment in the extreme poor and improve
health and educational service delivery is accountability. One study in Tanzania found that
doctors in public clinics spend an average of only 29 minutes in any day seeing patients.
According to other research, in India, primary teachers in public schools are absent 25
percent of the time, and primary care doctors 40 percent of the time. Governments can help
poor people monitor and discipline service providers for these failures, and also create
incentives for public employees to do better. Those that do will reap far greater returns on
their human capital investments.

The final part of the strategy is to insure. This means that governments must provide social
safety nets as well as build systems to protect against disasters and the rapid spread of
disease.

National social assistance and insurance schemes protect against setbacks like illness and
unemployment and can promote growth and human capital development. For instance,
cash transfer programs can be substantial and cost-effective: Brazil’s Bolsa Familia has cut
extreme poverty by 28 percent in a decade, for a cost of just 0.5 percent of GDP. Despite
successes like this, 870 million people living in poverty still do not have access to any kind
of social assistance.

Another critical element of insurance is protecting people against catastrophic risks.
Examples include universal healthcare schemes, better quality healthcare services, disaster
risk management, and financing tools like catastrophic bonds or draw-down facilities. This
may sound technical, but the so-called cat bonds are very effective. They make funding
immediately available to countries responding to natural disasters.

Similar approaches should be used to protect against pandemics. Ebola revealed the
shortcomings of international and national systems to prevent, detect, and respond to
infectious disease outbreaks. Ebola also taught us that the poor are likely to suffer the most
from pandemics.

The World Bank Group has been working with partners on a new concept that would
provide much needed rapid response financing in the face of an outbreak. The idea behind
a pandemic emergency facility is to mobilize and leverage public and private sector
resources through public funding, and through market and private insurance mechanisms.
In the event of an outbreak, countries would receive rapid disbursements of funding, which
would, in turn, help contain outbreaks, save lives, and protect economies.

There is no single blueprint for countries in their efforts to end extreme poverty. But our
strategy suggests priorities for the future. First, agricultural productivity must increase.
Second, we must build infrastructure that provides access to energy, irrigation, and
markets. Third, we must promote freer trade that provides greater access to markets for the
poor and enables entrepreneurs in low- and middle-income countries to grow their
businesses and create new jobs. Fourth, we must invest in health and education, especially
for women and children. And finally, we must implement social safety nets and provide
social insurance, including initiatives that protect against the impact of natural disasters and
pandemics.

Nine months ago, the World Bank Group started one of the most ambitious re-organizations
in its history. We knew we needed to restructure in order to meet the evolving needs of low-
and middle-income countries. In a world where capital is more easily available, we needed
to emphasize our greatest strengths – the marriage of our vast knowledge to innovative
financing to deliver programs that have the greatest impact on the poorest. Our new global
practices, cross-cutting solutions areas, and regional units are working closely with
governments to develop customized poverty reduction programs. These are based on
analyses of a wide range of local factors, including the demography and location of people
living in extreme poverty. Our aim is to help countries translate global experience into
practical know-how to solve their most difficult problems.

We know that ending extreme poverty will be extraordinarily difficult – in fact, the closer we
get to our goal, the more difficult it will be. The most persistent poverty will be in fragile
environments. In five years, we expect that more than half the world’s extreme poor will live
in conflict affected countries. Conflict, as we know, can have devastating effects on our fight
against poverty.

Poverty itself can also create a fertile landscape for conflict. For example, where people feel
excluded from progress due to joblessness, discrimination or corruption, they may take up
arms. These factors, for example, have made it easier for extremists in the Middle East and
Africa to recruit for their cause. More violence destroys buildings, bridges, schools, clinics –
and most importantly, lives. This destruction, of course, causes even more poverty.

We can help break this vicious cycle and promote security if we implement development
policies and programs that promote growth – invest in human capital – and insure people
against risks that can plunge them into poverty. Initiatives to strengthen institutions are also
important. Governments must be more accountable to citizens, and work to reduce arbitrary
treatment at the hands of security forces and the demand for bribes from poor people. This
will help to minimize the likelihood of violent conflict and eliminate a driver of poverty.

When conflict persists, the hard truth is that poverty reduction is extremely difficult.

When the fighting stops, though, progress is possible.

Over the last two years, I’ve made three trips with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon to
Africa – to the Great Lakes region, the Sahel, and the Horn of Africa. Our purpose was to
take advantage of these opportunities when fighting stops. In these three regions, we’ve
worked with partners to collectively move billions of dollars to promote regional
development. We’ve taken steps to increase cross-border political and economic
cooperation, which we hope will make conflict less likely. We’ve also increased investments
that will benefit the poor and most vulnerable, reducing the drivers of fragility. Our partners
have included the European Union, the African Development Bank, the African Union, and
the Islamic Development Bank. This kind of collaboration will give us a fighting chance to
end extreme poverty.

Still, it won’t be easy. Development has never been easy. We find encouragement, though,
in the record of the past 25 years. We’ve reduced extreme poverty by two-thirds and shown
that great gains can be made through the strategy of grow, invest, and insure. In the fight to
end extreme poverty, many countries have succeeded in taking something that seemed
impossible and making it possible. The end of extreme poverty is no longer just a dream.
The opportunity is before us.

Governments of the world must seize this moment. Our private sector partners must step
up. The World Bank Group, our multilateral development bank partners, and our new
partners on the horizon, must all seize this moment. We must now collaborate with real
conviction and distinguish our generation as the one that ended poverty.

We are the first generation in human history that can end extreme poverty. This is our great
challenge, and our great opportunity. We will be guided by a half-century of evidence and
practice. It is doable … it is in our sights … and it will be, I believe, humankind’s most
significant and memorable achievement. We can end extreme poverty. The final push must
begin right now.

Thank you very much.
