                                              101951




15
years of
           Indonesia’s National Community-Driven
           Development Programs
           The Kecamatan Development Program (KDP)
           The National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM)




                                                                   i
© [2015] The World Bank – PNPM Support Facility, Jakarta, Indonesia

www.pnpm-support.org

Lead Writer: Ian Pollock, Anita Kendrick
Editor: Peter K. Milne
Editorial Support: Lily Hoo, Vinny Flaviana Hyunanda
Graphic Design: Bobby Haryanto

PSF Office
Bursa Efek Jakarta
Jl Jenderal Sudirman Kav 52-53
Jakarta Selatan 12190
Tel: (6221) 52993000
Fax:(6221) 52993111
        15 Years of Indonesia’s
      National Community-Driven
        Development Programs
       The Kecamatan Development Program (KDP)
The National Program for Community Empowerment (PNPM)
DAFTAR ISI



     1       Introduction
     7       Annotated Bibliography
    68       Index
    72       Glossary
AN ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
For more than fifteen years, Indonesia has been pioneering and implementing
various community-driven development (CDD) projects and programs. Beginning
in 1997, when the Kecamatan Development Project (KDP) was piloted in 25 villages,
Indonesia has pioneered the design, management, and expansion of projects that
give communities more control over the plans and resources that shape their towns
and villages. In 2007, the Government decided to scale up the KDP nationwide and
renamed it the National Program for Community Empowerment (Program Nasional
Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Mandiri or PNPM Mandiri), ultimately reaching more
than 70,000 villages and urban wards across the archipelago.

With the passage of the Law No. 6 of 2014 on Village (Village Law), Indonesia’s
CDD efforts are set to move into a new phase, and it seems an appropriate time
to take stock of the lessons drawn from the experience of starting the Indonesian
CDD program and taking it to national scale.

This annotated bibliography draws together articles, evaluations, studies, and
other materials that reflect the lessons learned from fifteen years of research,
covering a broad array of topics connected to KDP and PNPM Mandiri, including
program design and management, participation and empowerment, transparency
and accountabilit y, microcredit, relations with government and civil societ y
organizations, and the effectiveness of CDD approaches in urban areas and post-
conflict situations. Most of the materials included here were published by the
PNPM Support Facility (PSF), a multi-donor trust fund facility managed by the
World Bank on behalf of the Government of Indonesia. All materials included are
freely available to the public.

Because the emphasis is on lessons learned, certain kinds of publications, such
as baseline studies and strategy papers, have been left out. Anyone interested in
going beyond the scope of this bibliography can find more information at http://
www.pnpm-support.org, http://www.psflibrary.org, or the World Bank’s Open
Knowledge Repository at http://openknowledge.worldbank.org.




                                                                                    1
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
    1                           2015

                                EVALUATION OF THE VILLAGE FINANCIAL
                                ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (BANTUAN
                                KEUANGAN PEUMAKMU GAMPONG, OR BKPG)
                                IN ACEH PROVINCE
                                Edited by PNPM Support Facility – World Bank
                                Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                                The Government of Aceh implemented its own version of PNPM, called Bantuan
                                Keuangan Peumakmu Gampong, or BKPG, in 2009. By 2012, BKPG had disbursed
                                over IDR 1.5 trillion (around USD120 million) to support investments in village
                                infrastructure, savings and loan groups for women, education, health, and village
                                governance, among other activities. Unlike the national PNPM, BKPG provided
                                an equal amount of block grants to all villages in Aceh. This evaluation examines
                                the overall performance of BKPG, general public awareness of the program, and
                                public perceptions about its effectiveness. Key findings include:
    Study Location(s):            •	 63 percent of sur vey respondents had heard of BKPG, results in line with
    Aceh                             findings on awareness of PNPM outside Aceh. Almost half of these (49 percent)
                                     reported hearing about the program through more than one source, and 25
    Methodology:
                                     percent through three or more sources. The commonest way that respondents
    Quantitative
                                     heard about the program was through social networks, including friends,
    Language(s):                     family and neighbors (68 percent of respondents).
    English, Bahasa Indonesia     •	 There were significant gender differences in awareness of the program: 51
                                     percent of female respondents had heard of BKPG, versus 76 percent of male
    Keywords:                        respondents.
    Gender, socialization,        •	 Among those who reported having attended BKPG meetings, a large majority
    participation,                   (71 percent) attended only one or two meetings.
    female-headed households,     •	 45 percent of male respondents had attended at least one meeting of BKPG,
    plebiscites                      versus only 18 percent of female respondents.
                                  •	 65 percent of women who attended BKPG meetings reported “only listening”
                                     compared with 47 percent of men.

                                These findings suggest that that many villagers face opportunity costs, societal
                                norms, or other factors that limit their engagement with participatory projects. The
                                report’s authors suggest that the plebiscite model of project selection proposed
                                by Olken (2010) may be an appropriate way to increase broad-based participation.
                                Community leaders, shown here to be a key source of information about community
                                programs, should be targeted for training in budgeting and responsive governance.
                                Further research may be needed to illuminate the ways community leaders decide
                                how to allocate funding and respond to village needs. Similar to PNPM in other
                                contexts, BKPG is perceived as serving general needs, and not the needs of poor
                                or marginalized groups. Implementation of the new village law (Law No. 6/2014 on
                                Villages) may benefit from programs (similar to PEKKA, an empowerment program




4
for female-headed households) that specifically target those communities, while
being sensitive to the social dynamics and opportunity costs that prevent poor
and female-headed households from participating in community programs.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7076

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Evaluasi Program Bantuan Keuangan Desa (Bantuan Keuangan Peumakmu Gampong,
BKPG) di Provinsi Aceh

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7075




                                                                                  5
    2                           2015

                                INTEGRATING COMMUNITY-DRIVEN
                                DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPLES INTO POLICY:
                                FROM PNPM MANDIRI TO THE VILLAGE LAW
                                Edited by Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan
                                Kemiskinan (TNP2K)
                                Published by: Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan
                                Kemiskinan (TNP2K), Jakarta
                                With the Village Law (Undang-Undang Republik Indonesia Nomor 6 Tahun 2014 tentang
                                Desa, or UU Desa) signed in early 2014, Indonesia has taken the CDD principles of
                                PNPM Mandiri from programs into policy. This report reviews the strengths and
                                limitations of PNPM, and offers an outline of how to support, and limit the risks
                                to, the process of building the real frameworks of the Village Law.

    Project(s):                 While the Village Law is aligned with CDD principles generally and PNPM processes
    PNPM Rural                  specifically, the details of its implementation are laid out in government regulations
                                (Peraturan Pemerintah, or PP), some of which move in opposing directions.
    Language(s):                  •	 The Village Law clearly intends for the participatory development of both
    English, Bahasa Indonesia        annual and medium-term village plans. But the PP Desa emphasizes the village
    Keywords:                        head’s leadership.
    Participatory planning,       •	 Poor households are not specifically mentioned in the implementation guidelines.
    Village Law of 2014,          •	 The village government has discretion to define “legitimate” organizations to
    accountability,                  partner with, a power that could undermine village organizations that do not
    transparency,                    have explicit state sanction.
    representation,               •	 The Village Law stipulates that the community can obtain information from village
    accountability, financial        governments on a wide range of activities. The PP Desa points only to the village
    management                       head’s responsibility to inform villagers about governance implementation in
                                     writing and through easily accessible media. There is no overall requirement
                                     for a report to villagers from the village government regarding implementation
                                     of the Rencana Kerja Pemerintah ( RKP) and the budget.
                                  •	 The Village Law specifies that Badan Permusyawaratan Desa (BPD) members should
                                     be representatives of village residents based on territorial representation, chosen
                                     democratically. Meanwhile, the PP Desa states that the specific mechanisms
                                     for choosing BPD members are left up to districts, and makes no mention of
                                     territorial representation.
                                  •	 The PP Desa provides weaker accountability than PNPM did for funds transfers,
                                     allowing funds to flow with signatures from only the village head and treasurer.

                                The report recommends a focus on the poverty impact of improved governance.
                                Additional resources should be dedicated to ensuring that governance mechanisms
                                work well in the poorest villages and regions. Understanding and adjusting to variations
                                in the implementation of the Village Law in different political, economic, and social
                                contexts will be instrumental to achieving its objectives, and its implementation
                                should include multiple processes for continuous learning and adjustment. There
                                should be a central unit at the national level to lead and coordinate the management
                                of the transition and implementation of the new Village Law.




6
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7093

http://www.tnp2k.go.id/en/download/integrating-communitydriven-development-
principles-into-policy-from-pnpm-mandiri-to-the-village-law/

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Mengintegrasikan Prinsip Pembangunan Berbasis Masyarakat ke Dalam Kebijakan:
Dari PNPM Mandiri menjadi UU Desa

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7094

http://www.tnp2k.go.id/id/download/mengintegrasikan-prinsip-pembangunan-
berbasis-masyarakat-ke-dalam-kebijakan-dari-pnpm-mandiri-menjadi-uu-desa/




                                                                               7
    3                          2014

                               EXPANDING AND DIVERSIFYING
                               INDONESIA’S PROGRAM FOR COMMUNITY
                               EMPOWERMENT, 2007-2012
                               Jonathan Friedman
                               Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                               This case study charts the expansion of Indonesia’s Kecamatan Development
                               Program (KDP) into the National Community Empowerment Program (PNPM).
                               The case offers some key lessons on scaling up community-driven development
                               (CDD) programs.
                                •	 Built-in learning was a key component of PNPM’s success: rigorous baseline
                                   studies and impact evaluations to determine the effectiveness of the program,
                                   conducted by the PNPM Support Facility (PSF).
                                •	 When these studies revealed shortcomings in PNPM, PSF had the freedom
                                   and funding to design and implement innovative pilot programs to address
    Project(s):                    such gaps.
    PNPM Rural, PNPM Peduli,    •	 Studies created opportunities for government agencies, development partners,
    KDP, PNPM Generasi, PNPM       universities, and civil society organizations (CSOs) to discuss broader policy
    RESPEK                         issues. In this way, PSF served as a platform for government and non-government
                                   actors to share ideas.
    Methodology:                •	 Major obstacles to the scaling-up of PNPM included regional variation, especially
    Qualitative                    in Papua, and management issues at the national level, where PNPM was
                                   handled by a very small number of civil servants.
    Language(s):
                                •	 PNPM was expected to spur communities to demand improved transparency
    English
                                   and service delivery from their local governments, but this “spillover” failed
    Keywords:                      to occur.
    Spillover, CSOs,
                               The paper concludes with a discussion of the integration of PNPM values into new
    management, scaling up
                               legislation, especially the 2014 Village Law.

                               http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7054

                               ht tp://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/01/23040388/expanding-
                               diversifying-indonesias-program-community-empowerment-2007-2012

                               http://successfulsocieties.princeton.edu/publications/expanding-and-diversifying-
                               indonesia%E2%80%99s-program-community-empowerment-2007-2012




8
                                                                             2014                              4
GENDER INCLUSION STRATEGIES IN PNPM
Sippi Azarbaijani-Moghaddam
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
As a nationwide program, PNPM has enormous potential to address barriers to
gender equality; but its size also prevents PNPM from engaging with the nuances of
the differences within communities, or tending to the needs of particular groups.
This report explores a tactical approach to bringing gender awareness into the
mainstream, so that PNPM can serve women better.

The areas in need of urgent attention are:
 •	 Gender dynamics in the decision-making process. Gender awareness among
    the staff is low, with less than one quarter receiving gender-awareness training,
    which is not part of the national-level training. PNPM’s affirmative action
    policies are being followed, but mechanistically. As yet, PNPM has not had a
    strong affect on gender issues, or built solidarity among women.
 •	 The gendered division of labor, where women’s labor is invisible. Women             Project:
    often provided snack and food during program’s meetings and infrastructure          PNPM Rural
    building and did other menial jobs. However, these often went un-noticed and
                                                                                        Study Location(s):
    were not formerly acknowledged as providing labors. Women are invited to
                                                                                        East Nusa Tenggara, South
    PNPM meetings not to participate in planning but to receive orders, especially
                                                                                        Sulawesi, West Sumatra
    to undertake work that men find demeaning or tedious. Women are often
    expected to give their labor for free.                                              Methodology:
 •	 Improving possibilities for women to build, control and own assets (even if         Qualitative
    the beginnings are modest).
                                                                                        Language(s):
The report recommends that PNPM put together a national gender strategy,                English
train facilitators in gender issues, and include gender indicators in the national
management information system (MIS). These indicators should include impacts,           Keywords:
as well as process—not just a headcount of women who attend PNPM meetings,              Women, participation,
but whether participation in PNPM leads to any benefits for these women. A PNPM         mainstreaming, solidarity,
child care program would allow women to significantly improve their productivity        affirmative action
and participation. The report also recommends that staff engage more actively
with local social conditions, including customary law (adat ).

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7062




                                                                                                                     9
 5                            2014

                              INFRASTRUCTURE CENSUS: REPORT ON
                              INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPLY READINESS
                              IN INDONESIA – ACHIEVEMENTS AND
                              REMAINING GAPS
                              PNPM Support Facility
                              Published by: PNPM Support Facility in cooperation with Tim
                              Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan Kemiskinan (TNP2K), Jakarta
                              A census of basic village infrastructure, including health and education, conducted
                              using the 2011 round of the national village census, known as Potensi Desa or PODES.
                              The census provides detailed information on 166,506 health facilities and 164,561
                              schools all across the country, using seven indicators along three dimensions: (i)
                              availability and accessibility; (ii) presence and qualification of personnel; and (iii)
                              the physical characteristics of the facilities. The data go deeper than the provincial
                              level, allowing analysis of districts and sub-districts.
 Project(s):                    •	 The largest gaps in availability were in Papua, West Papua, Maluku, North
 PNPM Rural                        Maluku, East Nusa Tenggara, and remote parts of Kalimantan and Sulawesi.
                                •	 There are large variations within provinces. The urban-rural divide is substantial;
 Study Location(s):
                                   cities have both more infrastructure and better services than rural areas.
 Nationwide sample
                                •	 More than 6 million Indonesians have no or poor access to primary health
 Methodology:                      care, and 36 million lack access to inpatient hospital care.
 Quantitative                   •	 More than 9 million have no access to a junior secondary school (SMP), and
                                   16.6 million lack early childhood education facilities (PAUD or TK).
 Language(s):
 English, Bahasa Indonesia    The study recommends sharing this information as widely as possible, so that local
                              governments and line ministries can plan against it, development planners can
 Keywords:                    improve their targeting, and communities can better hold their leaders accountable.
 Infrastructure, education,   Future infrastructure censuses should also include private schools and clinics.
 health, access, frontline
 services                     http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6943

                              Bahasa Indonesia version:

                              Sensus Infrastruktur: Laporan tentang Kesiapan Suplai Infrastruktur di Indonesia – Capaian
                              dan Kesenjangan yang Masih Terjadi

                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7058




10
                                                                              2014                               6
THE LOCAL LEVEL INSTITUTIONS STUDY 3:
OVERVIEW REPORT
Anna Wetterberg, Jon R. Jellema, Leni Dharmawan
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
The first Local Level Institutions (LLI) study, carried out in 1996, provided key
evidence and inspiration for KDP. Follow-ups in 2000/2001 (LLI2) and 2012 (LLI3)
returned to the same study areas in Jambi, Central Java, and East Nusa Tenggara,
seeking to track changes in local capacity (defined as the ability to solve common
problems collectively), identify the conditions that contribute to rises or declines
in capacity, and trace the effects of decentralization, democratization, and the
expansion of participatory programs since 2001. The new study combines updated
versions of the qualitative and quantitative research instruments used in LLI2.
Some key findings include:
  •	 About half of the studied villages held the same capacity; about one third
     declined, and about one quarter improved.                                           Study Location(s):
  •	 The decline was linked to a loss of environmental resources, reduced reciprocity,   Jambi, Central Java, East
     and unresponsive leadership.                                                        Nusa Tenggara
  •	 Strong capacity was self-reinforcing, and weak capacity could (but did not
     always) lead into a downward spiral.                                                Methodology:
  •	 Reformist officials and external forces such as NGOs were often important           Mixed
     to improving capacity, but just boosting the powers of “good” village heads
                                                                                         Language(s):
     was not enough.
                                                                                         English, Bahasa Indonesia
The report suggests that policymakers should create new mechanisms to make
                                                                                         Keywords:
government more responsive to citizens through improved information flows and
                                                                                         Collective action,
greater accountability, including monitoring both from below and above. Simply
                                                                                         local capacity, village
increasing funding could exacerbate conflict in low-capacity villages, and any
                                                                                         institutions, governance,
additional funds must be carefully monitored. Development programs should
                                                                                         NGOs, CSOs, village heads
encourage the empowerment of a diverse group of leaders at the community
level, ensuring that a variety of voices are heard, and power does not concentrate
in the hands of an elite.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6942

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Studi Kelembagaan Tingkat Lokal Ke-3: Laporan Akhir

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7053




                                                                                                                     11
 7                            2014

                              QUALITATIVE STUDY OF THE PROLIFERATION
                              AND INTEGRATION OF COMMUNITY
                              EMPOWERMENT PROGRAMS
                              Muhammad Syukri, Hastuti, Akhmadi, Kartawijaya,
                              Asep Kurniawan
                              Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                              In 2010, the then president ordered all community-driven development programs
                              to be folded into PNPM, the National Community Empowerment Program, and
                              instructed PNPM to integrate with an existing mechanism for medium- to long-term
                              planning, the village development planning meeting ( musyawarah perencanaan
                              pembangunan desa, or Musrenbangdes). This study asks how well these projects
                              and procedures are integrating. The findings suggest:
                                •	 Smooth integration relies on support at all levels: from dedicated village heads,
                                   CSOs, and community leaders at the grassroots level, to local and national
 Project:                          governments. Where there is proper support, projects and programs can be
 PNPM Rural                        integrated more or less easily, but that support is largely lacking in practice.
                                •	 Weak information flows between villages and government make government-
 Study Location(s):
                                   run frontline services very difficult to integrate into village planning.
 Central Java, West Nusa
                                •	 Integration alone is not making PNPM or the Musrenbangdes more inclusive. Full
 Tenggara, South Sulawesi
                                   inclusion still depends on the efforts of facilitators, NGOs, and community leaders.
 Methodology:
                              The study recommends explicitly tying all development programs to the Musrenbangdes,
 Qualitative
                              creating a single system for budgeting, reporting, and accountability that spans
 Language(s):                 all projects, and using CSOs to ensure that local governments design their work
 English, Bahasa Indonesia    plans in response to community needs.

 Keywords:                    http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6994
 NGOs, frontline services,
                              Bahasa Indonesia version:
 reporting, CSOs, planning,
 facilitators                 Studi Kualitatif Proliferasi dan Integrasi Program Pemberdayaan Masyarakat

                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6995




12
                                                                                 2014                              8
INDONESIAN VILLAGE HEALTH
INSTITUTIONS: A DIAGNOSTIC
Karrie McLaughlin
Published by: PNPM Support Facility - World Bank, Jakarta
This study looks at how village-level health actors and institutions interact (or fail
to do so) with community members and with the various levels of government, and
considers how much power they command and how much trust they enjoy. It also
examines the approaches to improving citizen engagement taken by the Australian
Community Development and Civil Society Strengthening Scheme (ACCESS) and the
Australian-Indonesian Partnership on Maternal and Neo-natal Health (AIPMNH).
Finally, it discusses the use of data. The findings include:
 •	 The health sector appears reluctant to value the opinion of anyone without
    a health background, and does not fully explore obstacles to access such
    as poor transportation, information, and communications, and significant                 Project(s):
    up-front costs.                                                                          PNPM Generasi, ACCESS,
 •	 Health information is managed in a bureaucratic way. If a district nutritionist          AIPMNH
    post is empty, for example, no one else at that level feels empowered or
                                                                                             Study Location(s):
    required to provide nutrition information.
                                                                                             West Java, Gorontalo, East
 •	 The midwife is the critical first point for villagers to engage with the health
                                                                                             Nusa Tenggara, West Nusa
    system. Traditional midwives are most women’s primar y source of health
                                                                                             Tenggara
    information—both right and wrong—and in many places there are no other
    health facilities to go to.                                                              Methodology:
 •	 The current policy of excluding traditional midwives from the health system              Qualitative
    precludes engaging with them constructively, and erodes village-level support
    networks without providing an alternative.                                               Language(s):
 •	 In every village visited, the village health post (Posyandu) and its cadres were         English
    women’s main point of contact with the formal health system.
                                                                                             Keywords:
 •	 Linkages between communit y health centers ( Puskesmas) , midwives, and
                                                                                             Data, information,
    Posyandu workers are often weak, and linkages with “non-health” actors are
                                                                                             Posyandu, Puskesmas,
    virtually non-existent.
                                                                                             midwives, NGOs, advocacy
 •	 Nearly every health program collects its own data, out of a distrust of other sources.
 •	 Sanctions for poor results may push some individuals to falsify data.

The study recommends engaging with traditional midwives and healers, offering
them training and support, and listening to them instead of excluding them from
the health system. Links should be strengthened between actors at the village
level—midwives, Posyandu, Puskesmas , and village government—and village heads
should be trained and encouraged to engage with health issues. NGO advocacy
should be explored further. Several problematic policy areas should be discussed:
punitive approaches to service delivery; the real costs of a facilities-based approach;
and emergency services, among others. PNPM Generasi’s position with the health
department should be improved, perhaps by hiring a specialist ‘health facilitator’
to liaise between them and help PNPM Generasi use data for advocacy on health
issues. PNPM Generasi could also be coordinated through the Badan Perencanaan
Pembangunan Daerah (Bappeda) instead of the community empowerment division,
putting it in a stronger cross-sectoral position.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7045


                                                                                                                          13
 9                           2013

                             STUDI KELOMPOK MASYARAKAT PNPM
                             Leni Dharmawan, Indriana Nugraheni, Ratih Dewayanti
                             Published by: Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan Kemiskinan
                             (TNP2K), Jakarta
                             This study examines the community institutions set up by PNPM: the Inter-village
                             Cooperation Boards (Badan Kerjasama Antar Desa, or BKAD), Financial Management
                             Unit (Unit Pengelolaan Keuangan, or UPK), the UPK Monitoring Body (Badan Pengawas-
                             Unit Pengelolaan Keuangan, or BP-UPK), and the Project Management Team ( Tim
                             Pengelola Kegiatan, or TKP) in PNPM Rural, and Communit y Self-Help Groups
                             (Badan Keswadayaan Masyarakat, or BKM, and Lembaga Keswadayaan Masyarakat,
                             or LKM) in PNPM Urban. The study asks what these institutions do, what their
                             legal status is, and what kinds of support they require to function. The study also
                             looks for instances where the PNPM principles of transparency, accountability,
                             and participation have expanded beyond the borders of the program and into
                             other villages processes, including village government.
 Project(s):
                               •	 The community PNPM experience, positive as it has been, has not inspired
 PNPM Rural
                                  people to demand more from government.
 Study Location(s):            •	 The PNPM process has been dominated in some places by the kepala desa and
 South Kalimantan, Central        village elites, without interference from the institutions set up to prevent this
 Java, Central Sulawesi,          from happening, such as the Village Consultative Body (Badan Permusyawaratan
 West Nusa Tenggara,              Desa, or BPD).
 Bangka-Belitung               •	 This weakness is due in part to the overwhelming amounts of administrative
                                  work and reporting that facilitators are required to do.
 Methodology:
 Qualitative                 The report recommends using binding regulations to extend PNPM’s principles
                             of transparency to the management of village budgets. The implementation of
 Language(s):                these principles should be measured against a few key indicators, with sanctions
 Bahasa Indonesia            for violators and incentives for high performers. Village-level checks and balances
                             should be put in place; these mechanisms should be permanent, not project-
 Keywords:
                             based. Social facilitation will be needed to ensure that village budgets are not
 Facilitators, village
                             captured by elites.
 institutions, governance,
 BPD, spillover              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7050

                             http://www.tnp2k.go.id/id/download/studi-kelompok-masyarakat-pnpm/




14
                                                                            2013                          10
INDONESIA: EVALUATION OF THE URBAN
COMMUNITY DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
PNPM Support Facility
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank in cooperation
with Coordinating Ministry for People’s Welfare and Ministry of
Public Works, Jakarta
PNPM Urban, a CDD program that delivers block grants to the urban poor for small-
scale infrastructure, and social and economic development, currently serves all
urban areas in Indonesia. The program aims to foster community participation,
improve local governance, and deliver basic needs at the community level. This
policy note draws on two qualitative field studies assessing how specific aspects
of the program are working, particularly for the infrastructure component, and
documenting good practices and lessons learned.                                        Project(s):
 •	 PNPM Urban projects are viewed as well-chosen and targeted, and independent        PNPM Urban
    assessments show that the infrastructure built through the program is of           Study Location(s):
    high quality.                                                                      Nationwide Sample
 •	 Community organizations are perceived to be working relatively well, independent
    of government programs and structures.                                             Methodology:
 •	 The most frequently cited barrier for participation was the time-cost of the       Qualitative
    process, which can be substantial.
                                                                                       Language(s):
 •	 Community members and key informants name social and economic services
                                                                                       English, Bahasa Indonesia
    as their first priorities, not infrastructure.
 •	 Larger, more complex projects require strong financial management and skilled      Keywords:
    labor, making it more difficult to involve (untrained) community members           Urban poverty, targeting,
    in implementation.                                                                 facilitators, representation
The report recommends increasing funding for social and economic activities,
in part as a way to increase the participation of women. Facilitators should be
given better training and a lighter administrative burden, so they can focus on
empowerment, inclusion, and better data collection. PNPM Urban should also
develop manuals, with instructions on planning for maintenance, coordinating
with local governments, and improving communication between PNPM groups
in neighboring areas.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6527

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/17870

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Indonesia: Evaluasi Program Pembangunan Berbasis Masyarakat Perkotaan

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6528




                                                                                                                      15
 11                              2013

                                 INDONESIA: URBAN POVERTY AND
                                 PROGRAM REVIEW
                                 PNPM Support Facility - World Bank
                                 Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank in cooperation
                                 with Coordinating Ministry for People’s Welfare and Ministry of
                                 Public Works, Jakarta
                                 This study combines information from the National Socio-economic Survey (Susenas)
                                 2002-10 and the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS) with qualitative studies of
                                 the urban poor in 16 locations, building a holistic picture of urban poverty with
                                 a focus on participation in social assistance programs and the accessibility and
                                 use of basic services. Key findings include:
                                  •	 Key challenges named by poor urban communities: low incomes, scarce jobs,
                                     and high school expenses. Poor infrastructure and lack of capital were also
 Project(s):                         mentioned, but at a lower level of priority.
 PNPM Urban, BLT, Raskin,         •	 Social protection programs such as Rice for the Poor (Beras Miskin, or Raskin),
 Jamkesmas                           community health insurance ( Jaminan Kesehatan Masyarakat, or Jamkesmas), and
                                     unconditional cash transfers (Bantuan Langsung Tunai, or BLT) do reach many
 Study Location(s):
                                     of the urban poor and near-poor. Leakages in these programs are significant,
 West Java, East Java, Central
                                     but the rate of leakage in urban areas is well below the rate in rural areas.
 Java, Yogyakarta, North
 Sumatra, South Sulawesi         The study recommends a focus on two main policy areas:
                                  •	 Economic policies that improve economic returns from urbanization, including
 Methodology:
                                     investments in infrastructure, ensuring that infrastructure development is
 Mixed
                                     inclusive of the poor and anticipates the needs of poor communities, and
 Language(s):                        expanding access to credit.
 English, Bahasa Indonesia        •	 Social policies that extend access to education and health for the urban poor,
                                     insure households against a sudden loss of income, and improve the design
 Keywords:                           and targeting of existing programs.
 Urban poverty, targeting,
 social protection, urban        http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6529
 planning
                                 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16301

                                 Bahasa Indonesia version:

                                 Indonesia: Kemiskinan Perkotaan dan Ulasan Program

                                 http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6530




16
                                                                            2013                           12
OPPORTUNITIES AND APPROACHES FOR
BETTER NUTRITION OUTCOMES THROUGH
PNPM GENERASI
Jesse Hession Grayman, Nelti Anggraini, Siti Ruhanawati
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
PNPM Healthy and Smart Generation (Generasi sehat dan cerdas , known as Generasi )
uses incentivized block grants to help communities improve maternal and child
health, ensure universal access to primary education, and reduce poverty. An
impact evaluation showed that PNPM Generasi effectively reduced malnutrition,
but could not explain the mechanisms behind this success. This report asks how
chronic malnutrition indicators rise and fall, how much PNPM Generasi affects
that process, and to what extent PNPM Generasi has changed the behavior of
health service users and providers. The main findings include:
 •	 PNPM Generasi reaches remote areas by leveraging existing village health           Project(s):
    posts ( Posyandu ) in new ways. Midwives, through Posyandu , help connect          PNPM Generasi
    communities with government health services.
 •	 Providers reach out to people they believe are “deserving” of health service,      Study Location(s):
    and not to those they feel are “undeserving.”                                      West Java, East Java, East
 •	 Most PNPM Generasi funding is spent on supplementary feeding, which draws          Nusa Tenggara
    parents and children to their local Posyandu. But this feeding does not actually
                                                                                       Methodology:
    impact chronic malnutrition.
                                                                                       Qualitative
 •	 Neither providers nor users of health ser vices fully understand the way
    incentivized grants work.                                                          Language(s):
 •	 In PNPM Generasi, both knowledge and resources are vulnerable to capture           English, with executive
    and rent-seeking.                                                                  summary in Bahasa
                                                                                       Indonesia
The report suggests placing limits on the amount that can be spent on supplementary
food, while improving the quality of the food that is bought through the program.      Keywords:
PNPM Generasi should do more to build the skills of Posyandu volunteers, and           Midwives, traditional
offer higher incentives to more skilled workers. PNPM Generasi should also extend      birthing assistants, health
training opportunities to traditional birthing assistants, and welcome them into       services, frontline services,
the official health system instead of pushing them away.                               Posyandu, elite capture,
                                                                                       malnutrition
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6922




                                                                                                                    17
 13                           2013

                              RESULTS EVALUATION: SUSTAINABLE
                              NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
                              THROUGH PNPM GREEN INVESTMENTS – A
                              RURAL LIVELIHOOD ANALYSIS
                              Vivianti Rambe, Steffen Johnsen
                              Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                              PNPM Green was designed to improve the ability of poor communities to manage
                              their environments and benefit from their natural resources. PNPM Green worked in
                              eight provinces, supporting only four kinds of project: natural resource management,
                              income generating activities, renewable energy, and capacity building, all of which
                              should contribute to positive environmental impacts. PNPM Green funded extra
                              facilitators to mainstream the concept of sustainability.

 Project(s):                  This report evaluates the economic, social, and environmental benefits of PNPM
 PNPM Green                   Green, drawing on three separate studies: the Economic and Livelihood Study (by
                              LPM Equator), Micro-Hydropower – Return on Investment (MHP – ROI) Study (by
 Study Location(s):
                              Castlerock), and the Spillover Effects Study (by CARDS-IPB). Some key findings
 South East Sulawesi, North
                              from the evaluation include:
 Sulawesi, South Sulawesi,
                                •	 PNPM Green should help preserve or improve natural assets, but those benefits
 Bengkulu, North Sumatra
                                   will only merge fully in the long term, for example, as mangrove forests mature.
 Methodology:                   •	 Micro-hydro projects are not viable in generating economic returns, but have
 Mixed                             considerable social benefits.
                                •	 PNPM Green livelihoods projects often succeeded in creating viable, sustainable
 Language(s):                      income-generating or cost-saving activities.
 English, Bahasa Indonesia
                              Participation in PNPM Green is likely to rise if the project: (a) follows the participants’
 Keywords:                    livelihood priorities; (b) provides immediate benefits; (c) directly increases household
 Sustainability, natural      incomes; (d) is supported by local values, local regulations, or local knowledge;
 resource management,         and (e) is co-facilitated by community leaders and local government officials.
 livelihoods, facilitators
                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6815

                              https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21128

                              Bahasa Indonesian version:

                              Evaluasi Hasil: Pengelolaan Sumber Daya Alam yang Berkelanjutan melalui Investasi
                              PNPM-LMP

                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6816




18
                                                                               2012                           14
SHOULD AID REWARD PERFORMANCE?:
EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT ON
HEALTH AND EDUCATION IN INDONESIA
(NBER WORKING PAPER NO. 17892)
Benjamin A. Olken, Junko Onishi, Susan Wong
Published by: National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge
This paper asks whether the performance incentives in PNPM Generasi actually
improved performance on a raft of health and education measures. In a randomized
controlled trial, 3,000 villages receiving block grants for maternal and child health
and education were divided into three groups: a group with incentives, a group
without incentives, and a pure control group. Surveys were conducted at baseline,
and then 18 and 30 months after the program started. With over 1.8 million target
beneficiaries, this was one of the largest randomized social experiments ever
                                                                                           Project(s):
conducted. Findings included:
                                                                                           PNPM Rural, PNPM
 •	 PNPM Generasi, with or without incentives, had a statistically significant positive
                                                                                           Generasi
    impact on 12 health and education indicators, such as regular weight checks
    for children, pre- and postnatal care, and school participation rates.                 Study Location(s):
 •	 Villages with incentives reached their health goals faster. The boost was especially   Nationwide sample
    pronounced in underdeveloped villages.
 •	 After 30 months the differences between the incentivized and non-incentivized          Methodology:
    areas were no longer statistically significant. This is not because the incentivized   Quantitative
    groups stopped performing, but because the non-incentivized groups caught up.
                                                                                           Language(s):
 •	 Other than the decline in malnutrition at 18 months, ultimate health outcomes
                                                                                           English
    were no better with incentives.
 •	 Incentives had no special impact on education.                                         Keywords:
                                                                                           Incentives, health,
The paper suggests two ways the incentives may have worked:
                                                                                           education, budgeting,
 •	 Incentives led to an increase in the supply of midwives, the major providers
                                                                                           randomized controlled
    of the preventative care services (e.g., prenatal care, regular weight checks
                                                                                           experiment (RCT)
    for children). But incentives did not lead to a greater number of teachers.
    One possible explanation is that midwives are paid on a fee-for-service basis,
    whereas teachers are not.
 •	 Incentives may have led to a more efficient use of funds. Areas with incentives
    shifted funds towards health costs and away from education supplies; yet there
    was no drop in the number of households that received education supplies,
    and students were actually more likely to receive scholarships.

This reallocation of budgets was very important, suggesting that incentives may
work better when put in place at a level of government high enough to have some
budget flexibility.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7063

http://www.nber.org/papers/w17892




                                                                                                                   19
 15                          2012

                             CONSOLIDATED ASSESSMENT OF UPK
                             REVOLVING LOAN FUNDS IN INDONESIA
                             Micro-Credit Ratings International Ltd (M-CRIL)
                             Published by: M-CRIL
                             This report aimed to assess the financial performance of Revolving Loan Funds (RLF)
                             attached to PNPM Rural and PNPM Urban, and the capacity of local financial units
                             (UPK) to run them. It asks whether UPK can continue to operate without government
                             assistance, and what would have to change for UPK to become sustainable.

                              •	 Only 28 percent of rural RLFs and 9 percent of urban RLFs are sustainable.
                              •	 Most loans are in the USD100-150 range.
                              •	 RLFs have reached substantial numbers of customers, with about 1.6 million
                                 borrowers in the four provinces surveyed.
                              •	 RLFs in rural areas serve more customers than urban ones, probably because
 Project(s):
                                 there are more alternative providers of credit in urban areas.
 PNPM Rural, Revolving
                              •	 The most important problem facing RLFs is that in most locations both the
 Loan Funds
                                 borrowers and the community leaders on financial review committees are
 Study Location(s):              under the impression that the RLF supplies grants, not loans.
 Central Java, Yogyakarta,    •	 Most locations suffer from a skill and motivation problem: few staff know how
 West Sumatra, East Nusa         to conduct audits, and low remuneration, especially for urban UPK, gives the
 Tenggara                        job a “volunteer” feeling resulting in low motivation.
                              •	 The quality of reported data depends on the training and commitment of the
 Methodology:                    UPK staff, with variations from office to office.
 Quantitative                 •	 The key areas of capacity building that must be addressed are delinquency
                                 management and the broad area of group management and supervision.
 Language(s):
                              •	 Audits showed that the UPK do not always report the data they have accurately.
 English
                              •	 UPK data show that profitability is good; but UPK reports omit all kinds of
 Keywords:                       costs, including voluntary costs, facilitation, financial expenses, and accurate
 Revolving loan fund,            loan loss provisioning, and especially the costs of losses to corruption.
 sustainability, UPK,         •	 The PNPM Rural technical manual includes a list of performance indicators,
 corruption, financial           none of which appears to be used to inform decision-making.
 management
                             The report recommends severing the RLF from PNPM, and converting it to one of
                             several alternative legal footings: as a cooperative, a government-owned company,
                             or some other form of organization under Indonesian law. The very best UPK should
                             be launched immediately as independent financial institutions, while the next tier
                             should be given 6-12 months of assistance to become independent—after being
                             registered under a new legal framework. The lowest tier of performers should
                             be shut down immediately and their resources reassigned. All participants in the
                             RLF need both training and “hand-holding,” consistent on-the-job supervision and
                             correction. Current training methods, such as lectures, must be reassessed. UPK
                             should be brought into line with international microcredit best practices, starting
                             with the reinforcement of accounting rules. The indicators used to measure UPK
                             performance should be simplified, and the staff trained to track them accurately.

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7075




20
                                                                               2012                          16
GOVERNANCE REVIEW OF PNPM RURAL:
COMMUNITY LEVEL ANALYSIS
Andrea Woodhouse
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
In 2006, the Government announced that it would expand PNPM to cover the entire
country. By 2009, PNPM had nearly quadrupled in size. As might be expected from
any rapid scale-up, many elements of the program—including management and
oversight mechanisms and staffing—struggled to keep pace.

Since 2009, supervision missions for PNPM have identified a rise in serious fraud and
corruption cases, and problems with the quality of facilitation, participation, and
other key elements at the community level. This Governance Review addresses the
extent and causes of such problems, and offers recommendations for improvement.
                                                                                          Project(s):
The report finds governance problems in a number of categories: participation,
                                                                                          PNPM Rural
transparency, information flows, corruption, marginalization, elite capture, and
accountability. Often, problems on the ground are caused by issues higher up              Study Location(s):
the chain:                                                                                West Java, Central Java,
  •	 Political interference. PNPM institutions are vulnerable to capture by political     East Java, South Sulawesi
     actors, such as DPR members or sub-district heads who seize the process or
     direct its benefits for their own ends.                                              Methodology:
  •	 Weak central oversight. When there is little chance of detection, facilitators       Qualitative
     face pressure to collude.
                                                                                          Language(s):
  •	 The proliferation of PNPM offshoots and pilot programs has given facilitators
                                                                                          English
     an increasingly heavy administrative workload, preventing them from allocating
     more time to facilitation.                                                           Keywords:
                                                                                          Governance, corruption,
Some issues were caused by the rapid scale-up:
                                                                                          oversight, accountability,
 •	 The program is under intense pressure to disburse its funds, with oversight
                                                                                          information flows
    and accountability rendered secondary goals.
 •	 Facilitators face unrealistic workloads: increased reporting burdens, and
    geographic areas that are too large or have too many villages to cover effectively.
 •	 At this scale, effective oversight has been impossible.

The review recommends focusing on the core of the program: skilled facilitators
who are free to do their jobs, with reliable accountability mechanisms. Community
and Village Empowerment Directorate (Pemberdayaan Masyarakat dan Desa, or PMD)
needs to clarify its vision, and rebuild the program’s design, implementation, and
information management around that vision. To reduce corruption, PNPM should
reduce the number of cash transactions, do more cross-audits, and involve CSOs
in monitoring at the district level. PNPM should also offer legal assistance, both
for the prosecution of corruption, and for the defense of embattled facilitators.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=5973




                                                                                                                       21
 17                       2012

                          IMPROVING MANAGEMENT OF PNPM
                          Independent Research & Advisory Indonesia (IRAI) and PNPM
                          Support Facility
                          Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                          At its inception in 1998, KDP assigned responsibility for policy, financing, monitoring,
                          and audits to civil servants, while outsourcing technical and social facilitation to
                          the private sector. Through massive changes—including decentralization and the
                          maturation of Indonesia’s democratic institutions—the managerial arrangements
                          for KDP, and later PNPM, remained basically unchanged. The purpose of this study
                          was to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the current system, and suggest
                          reforms that might support a transition to a better PNPM in 2014.

                          Strengths:
                           •	 Even with a small, under-resourced, and under-trained staff at PMD, KDP and
                              PNPM have functioned well.
 Project(s):               •	 Communities involve themselves in problem solving.
 PNPM Rural                •	 The system does disclose complaints and corruption cases.

 Study Location(s):       Weaknesses:
 West Java, Banten         •	 No online budget system, leading to delays, mountains of paperwork, and
                              inefficient monitoring. The number of staff at PMD is too small to handle
 Methodology:
                              PNPM and all of its pilots without delays.
 Qualitative
                           •	 Several large agencies besides PMD, including state agencies and the World
 Keywords:                    Bank, are involved in program super vision, contributing to planning and
 PMD, MOHA, online            implementation delays that can seriously affect outcomes.
 budgeting, corruption,    •	 Information management is poor.
 delays, facilitators,     •	 The volume of complaints is higher than the system can bear, and guidelines
 humanresources               for complaints resolution are not always clear.

                          The report suggests auditing the current MIS, and designing a new, integrated
                          information system. Human resources management should be improved at the
                          national level, where tasks and the skill-sets of the people in charge of those tasks
                          are often mismatched. PNPM should develop a system capable of handling the
                          volume of complaints the program receives. Facilitators, the backbone of PNPM,
                          should be better recruited, better trained, subjected to regular assessments, and
                          offered incentives to work in remote areas.

                          http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7065




22
                                                                               2012                           18
INDONESIA URBAN POVERTY ANALYSIS AND
PROGRAM REVIEW
Nicholas Burger, Peter Glick, Francisco Perez-Arce,
Lila Rabinovich, Yashodhara Rana, Sinduja Srinivasan,
Joanne Yoong
Published by: RAND Labor and Population, commissioned by
PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
For eight years, from 2002 to 2010, both urban and rural poverty declined sharply
across Indonesia; but as of 2010, 33 percent of urban dwellers (and 48 percent of
the nation at large) were still living on less than USD2.00 PPP per day. Meanwhile,
37 percent of Indonesia’s poor live in its cities, a number projected to rise as the
country continues to urbanize.

This report uses the National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas) and the Indonesian            Project(s):
Family Life Survey (IFLS) to analyze urban poverty, and to track the effectiveness         PNPM Urban, BLT, Raskin,
and the targeting of programs aimed at the urban poor. It was one of two studies           Jamkesmas
commissioned by the World Bank contributing to the larger review of PNPM Urban,
Indonesia: Urban Poverty and Program Review report. The report finds that:                 Study Location(s):
  •	 Urban poverty has declined nationwide since 2002, and all sorts of indicators,        West Java, East Java, Central
     from school enrolments to vaccinations, are on positive trends.                       Java, Yogyakarta, North
  •	 In a rural sample, equal numbers of people crossed the poverty line in both           Sumatra, South Sulawesi
     directions. In the urban sample, more individuals became poor than rose
                                                                                           Methodology:
     from poverty, but the proportion of poor people who became non-poor was
                                                                                           Mixed
     higher than in the nation at large.
  •	 The urban poor prioritize employment and livelihoods over improving infrastructure.   Language(s):
  •	 The percentage of households with female heads is actually slightly lower             English
     among the poor than the non-poor.
  •	 Overall, targeting of poverty programs is better in cities than in rural areas,       Keywords:
     and better in Java than elsewhere. But even in cities, 30 percent of the poorest      Urban poverty, targeting
     quintile received no subsidized rice from the Rice for the Poor (Raskin) program,
     and 62 percent do not have a community health insurance ( Jamkesmas) card.
  •	 No single characteristic, such as education level, employment type, or having a
     female household head, correlates strongly enough with poverty to guide targeting.

The report recommends standardizing and improving targeting practices across
programs. More attention should be paid to social protection, to insure that
households affected by a sudden shock—an illness, a disaster, a loss of income—
do not fall below the poverty line.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6526




                                                                                                                       23
 19                           2012

                              PNPM MANDIRI RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE
                              TECHNICAL EVALUATION REPORT
                              2012 – FINAL REPORT: FINDINGS AND
                              RECOMMENDATIONS
                              Neil Neate
                              Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                              The vast majority of PNPM funds are spent to build small-scale infrastructure in
                              rural areas. This report asks basic questions about the quality and usefulness of that
                              infrastructure, and about the planning and management behind it. A team of seven
                              engineers and an architect, accompanied by social sector, financial management,
                              and safeguard specialists, evaluated PNPM infrastructure in 12 provinces, each
                              carefully selected to ensure a wide geographic coverage across Indonesia and to
 Project(s):
                              include both ‘poor’ and ‘less poor’ provinces. The evaluation found that:
 PNPM Rural, PNPM Green,
                                •	 82 percent of projects reviewed were of high quality, and 14 percent acceptable
 PNPM Generasi, BKPG,
                                   quality, while 4 percent of projects were deemed to have failed.
 SPADA
                                •	 PNPM projects are 15 to 25 percent cheaper on average than similar projects
 Study Location(s):                funded and managed by government line ministries.
 Aceh, West Sumatera,           •	 All indicators were either roughly equal to, or better than, where they were
 Lampung, West Java,               at the last evaluation in 2007.
 Central Java, West             •	 There are not nearly enough technical facilitators, and without their help
 Kalimantan, West Sulawesi,        certain projects, especially dams, can end up posing dangers.
 North Sulawesi, Maluku,
                              The report stresses that villages are unlikely to plan for maintenance without
 North Maluku, East Nusa
                              guidance from project facilitators. Facilitators also need to ensure that land issues
 Tenggara, Papua.
                              are resolved and documented before any construction begins.
 Methodology:
                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6774
 Quantitative
                              Bahasa Indonesia version:
 Language(s):
 English, Bahasa Indonesia    Infrastruktur PNPM Mandiri Perdesaan Laporan Evaluasi Teknis 2012 : Laporan Akhir
                              Temuan dan Rekomendasi
 Keywords:
 Maintenance, rural           http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6775
 infrastructure, technical
 facilitators, land issues




24
                                                                               2012                        20
PNPM GENDER STUDY 2012: INCREASING
THE QUALITY OF WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION
Megan McGlynn Scanlon, Tasnim Yusuf, Ancilla Y. S. Irwan,
Nelti Anggraini
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
Microeconomic research shows that when women participate in the institutions
and processes around them, outcomes improve. This report investigates the roles
of women in PNPM: their engagement in all levels of the process, the status of the
women who do participate, the fate of proposals advanced by women, and whether
those projects actually meet women’s expressed needs. The report finds that:
 •	 Quality of participation is mixed, and still not optimal. Women are far more
    active in the early stages—socialization and needs assessment—than in the
    later stages, such as planning and management.                                        Project(s):
 •	 Facilitators are not being trained effectively on gender issues, and hiring           PNPM Rural
    guidelines are not bringing on enough female facilitators.
                                                                                          Study Location(s):
 •	 When asked about their priorities, women tend to ask for training. But in
                                                                                          East Nusa Tenggara,
    PNPM, the projects proposed by women that actually receive funding tend
                                                                                          Central Java, South
    to be infrastructure, such as water systems.
                                                                                          Kalimantan
 •	 Local strategies for gender inclusion exist, but have not made it into practice.
                                                                                          Methodology:
The report recommends hiring gender specialists at the national level, with a
                                                                                          Qualitative
budget, the authority to collect data on women’s participation and supervise
gender-related activities, and the means to share knowledge. A network of gender-         Language(s):
focused facilitators should be placed in districts across the country. PNPM’s technical   English
guidelines should be revised to include gender in social mapping, integrate good
practices identified in a 2003 assessment of KDP, and establish women-only meetings,      Keywords:
with no men present. Facilitator training should include basic gender awareness.          Women, gender, inclusion,
                                                                                          participation
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7078

http://bit.ly/1FzOale




                                                                                                                      25
 21                           2012

                              PNPM PEDULI – ONE YEAR ON:
                              INDEPENDENT REVIEW OF LESSONS
                              LEARNED
                              Donna Leigh Holden, Edwar Fitri, Meuthia Ganie-Rochman,
                              Rima Irmayani, Early Dewi Nuriana
                              Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                              PNPM Peduli was launched by the Government based on the perception that many
                              people or community groups do not have as equal access to opportunity and
                              services as others. These marginalized groups are usually the recipients of various
                              stigma and negative stereotyping because of differences in social circumstances,
                              identity, occupation or sexual orientation. For example, these include among
                              others: lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered (LGBT) groups, sex workers,
                              people living with HIV/AIDS and leprosy, customary communities, street children,
 Project(s):                  child labors, etc.
 PNPM Peduli
                              Various international studies show that CSOs have comparative advantages in
 Study Location(s):           reaching out to these groups and working together with them to improve their
 West Java, West              socio-economic conditions. PNPM Peduli works with 72 CSOs at the national and
 Kalimantan, West Nusa        regional levels by channeling grants to implement various sub-projects with the
 Tenggara, DKI Jakarta,       marginalized groups that support local economic development, access to legal
 Yogyakarta, South Sulawesi   documentation, access to health and education services, advocacy for rights and
                              social justice, social inclusion, and reconciliation. In addition to grants, PNPM
 Methodology:
                              Peduli also provides capacity building in advocacy, and basic education and health
 Qualitative
                              services, as well as innovative poverty reduction activities. This review lays out
 Language(s):                 lessons learned from the first year of the project.
 English, Bahasa Indonesia      •	 PNPM Peduli has built networks and systems to support ongoing development,
                                   as well as provide an effective approach to understand and reach out and
 Keywords:                         empower marginalized groups in Indonesia
 CSOs, livelihoods,             •	 Although the program’s logic appears solid and its objectives seem relevant,
 marginalized groups               the program’s achievements can be strengthened by improving targeting or
                                   focusing on specific issues/geographic coverage/target groups.
                                •	 Throughout implementation, there has been good progress in terms of social
                                   inclusion. In several cases, beneficiaries appreciated the positive changes in
                                   improved awareness, self-confidence, social networks and bargaining power.

                              The review finds that PNPM Peduli’s concept is sound, but suggests that a new,
                              clearer vision statement would help to clarify the roles of each partner and ensure
                              that everyone is working towards the same goals. A programmatic approach is
                              needed to avoid current issues with fragmented program’s components and sub-
                              projects. In addition, partnerships in PNPM Peduli should be based on existing
                              experience and organizational capacity using proven approaches.

                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6629

                              Bahasa Indonesia version:

                              PNPM Peduli Satu Tahun Berjalan: Evaluasi Independen Atas Hasil Pembelajaran (Oktober 2012)

                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7061


26
                                                                              2012                         22
PNPM RURAL IMPACT EVALUATION
John Voss
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
This paper gauges the impacts of PNPM Rural on household welfare, poverty,
access to services, employment, social dynamics, and governance. Survey questions
covered household consumption, housing conditions, health care, pre-natal care,
education, employment, income, social dynamics, and governance. The report
also draws on the national census (Susenas) on topics such as land size, water
supply, and available infrastructure. Key findings include:
 •	 PNPM was linked to higher real per capita consumption and a higher likelihood
    of escaping poverty, as well as better access to outpatient health services and
    better chances of employment.
 •	 Households from disadvantaged or marginalized groups (where the head of the
    household is female or has a low level of education) received fewer benefits         Project(s):
    than others.                                                                         PNPM Rural
 •	 PNPM scored well on measures of social capital and governance within the
    program itself, but these benefits did not spill over into other village decision-   Study Location(s):
    making processes.                                                                    Nationwide Sample
 •	 Impacts are strongest for the poorest households, as well as households in
                                                                                         Methodology:
    poorer sub-districts and places with significant infrastructure gaps, where
                                                                                         Quantitative
    the interests of the poor and non-poor are aligned.
                                                                                         Language(s):
The report recommends that block grants be targeted towards areas with low levels
                                                                                         English, Bahasa Indonesia
of infrastructure. Facilitators should emphasize maintenance and sustainability,
and continue to try innovative approaches to include marginalized groups in the          Keywords:
PNPM process. More research is needed to understand why PNPM’s governance                Poverty, rural
mechanisms have not spurred community demand for greater participation and               infrastructure, governance,
transparency from government generally.                                                  marginalized groups

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6299

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Evaluasi Dampak PNPM Perdesaan

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6876




                                                                                                                     27
 23                       2012

                          RAPID APPRAISAL OF PNPM
                          NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (AND
                          POVERTY ALLEVIATION PARTNERSHIP
                          GRANT MECHANISM)
                          Nina Schuler, Risye Dwiyani
                          Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                          The PNPM Urban Neighborhood Development (ND) pilot significantly increases
                          the size of the PNPM Urban grant, and introduces some new components: spatial
                          planning and area prioritization. This rapid appraisal was designed to offer a
                          snapshot of a particular moment in the process. The findings suggest:
                           •	 The project does best in locations with a Community Self-Help Group (Badan
                              Keswadayaan Masyarakat, or BKM, also referred to as a Community Trust), an
                              engaged local government, and generally simple infrastructure needs.
 Project(s):
                           •	 Strategic spatial plans are too complex: they fail to help the community to
 PNPM Urban
                              understand its neighborhood, or how to advocate with local government.
 Study Location(s):        •	 Spatial plans quickly become obsolete.
 Central Java, South       •	 Many proposed ND plans are abandoned before they can be put into practice,
 Kalimantan, South            due to time and facilitation constraints.
 Sulawesi, Southeast       •	 Governments often do not have the budget flexibility to respond to infrastructure
 Sulawesi                     requests from urban districts (kelurahan).
                           •	 Community leaders and PNPM facilitators and consultants often believe that
 Methodology:                 the poor are entrenched in “slum-like” behavior.
 Qualitative               •	 Facilitators want more guidance on the meaning of “slum upgrading,” and
                              perhaps a closed menu of program options (i.e., paving, sanitation, waste
 Language(s):
                              management, water, housing improvement, market improvement) to focus
 English
                              community proposals.
 Keywords:
                          The report recommends simplifying the design tools, and either limiting the menu
 Urban poverty, spatial
                          of projects that ND will fund, or running proposals through a more stringent
 planning, urban
                          selection process. The program needs a better method for identif ying target
 infrastructure
                          communities, perhaps by focusing on districts with a high density of urban poor,
                          or that are particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. The program needs better
                          monitoring in order to ensure that it is not duplicating or displacing government
                          spending, as well as better reporting, so that lessons learned can be used to
                          improve the program.

                          http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7069




28
                                                                            2012                         24
THE IMPACT OF PNPM RURAL: EAST JAVA –
WEST SUMATRA – SOUTHEAST SULAWESI
Muhammad Syukri, Sulton Mawardi, Akhmadi
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
This report compares qualitative data from 2012 to a baseline study conducted in
2007. Main research topic included the PNPM Rural process, including participation,
transparency, and relations with local government; the dynamics of poverty in
rural areas; and access to public services, and the quality of those services. Key
findings included:
  •	 Participation, accountability, and transparency were strong within PNPM, but
     this did not lead the community to demand these things from the village
     administration.
  •	 The “open menu” is almost always used for infrastructure, which seldom
     matches well with the needs of the poorest people.                                Project(s):
  •	 Participation is high, but “instrumental” and often of low quality. Female        PNPM Rural
     participation is high, but does not reduce male domination of the process.
                                                                                       Study Location(s):
  •	 Representation systems did not always bring aspirations up, or information
                                                                                       East Java, West Sumatra,
     down.
                                                                                       Southeast Sulawesi
  •	 In some areas pover t y increased: where produc tivit y was damaged by
     environmental pollution, and where industrial mechanization had reduced           Methodology:
     the size of the workforce.                                                        Qualitative
  •	 Targeted programs such as unconditional cash transfers (BLT), Rice for the
     Poor (Raskin), and community health insurance ( Jamkesmas) contributed a great    Language(s):
     deal in preventing the poor from becoming poorer. Targeting was handled by        English, Bahasa Indonesia
     elites, without participation or transparency.
                                                                                       Keywords:
  •	 Rather than award funds to the proposals that succeed in a competitive process,
                                                                                       Impact, poverty,
     villages prefer to split funds evenly between all competing groups.
                                                                                       participation, transparency,
The report concludes by emphasizing the importance of facilitators: to socialize       accountability
the program and its open menu, to adapt program processes to local conditions,
and to make PNPM more inclusive and ensure that the priorities of the poor are
met. To reach this goal, more facilitators should be hired, and the administrative
workload placed on them should be reduced. Facilitators should be overseen by a
body with the authority to see that PNPM procedures are followed properly. PNPM
should consider targeting agriculture, perhaps through changes in program design.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6552

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Laporan Penelitian Studi Kualitatif Dampak PNPM Perdesaan: Jawa Timur, Sumatera
Barat, Sulawesi Tenggara

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6877




                                                                                                                   29
 25                              2011

                                 EVALUATION OF PNPM RESPEK: VILLAGE
                                 INFRASTRUCTURE AND INSTITUTIONAL
                                 CAPACITY
                                 Yulia Indrawati Sari, Harmein Rahman, Dewi Ratna
                                 Sjari Manaf
                                 Published by: AKATIGA for PNPM Support Facility
                                 This study evaluates the implementation of PNPM RESPEK, a program supported
                                 jointly by PNPM and the special autonomy funds of Papua and West Papua. PNPM
                                 RESPEK began in 2008, and during the evaluation period reached 87 percent of
                                 the villages in Papua and West Papua. About 70 percent of PNPM RESPEK funding
                                 was spent on infrastructure. This study looks at the quality of those projects,
                                 whether they worked, how the infrastructure were being utilized, and their impact
                                 on villages.
                                   •	 Infrastructure built through PNPM RESPEK was 60 percent cheaper than
 Project(s):                          infrastructure built by comparable government projects.
 PNPM RESPEK                       •	 General participation is very weak and most ordinary people are still poorly
                                      informed. The very poor are not invited to, or made aware of, meetings and
 Study Location(s):
                                      their participation is generally pro-forma or non-existent. The main contribution
 Papua, West Papua
                                      of the poor is labor.
 Methodology:                      •	 Most infrastructure is used by only an elite segment within the community,
 Mixed                                and not by the community at large. This is often caused by elite domination
                                      in planning processes that is exacerbated by weak facilitation. Only about
 Language(s):                         one third of RESPEK infrastructure reviewed was both of good quality and
 English, Bahasa Indonesia            effectively used.
                                   •	 Facilitators are often required to cover vast territories and visit nearly inaccessible
 Keywords:
                                      villages. Hence this adversely influenced the quality of facilitation.
 Village infrastructure,
                                   •	 Community monitoring is most common when a village contains more than
 participation, elite capture,
                                      one powerful clan.
 facilitators, utilization,
 community monitoring            The report recommends a serious, long-term effort to recruit and train local
                                 facilitators, perhaps along the lines of the World Bank’s “barefoot engineers”
                                 program. RESPEK should design incentives for facilitators to improve their capacity to
                                 empower marginalized groups, prevent elite capture, and communicate effectively.
                                 In villages where facilitators are unable to visit often, these remote communities
                                 should be allowed to combine two years’ budget into a single, two-year project
                                 cycle. Facilitators should focus on particular groups, such as mothers or children,
                                 to create space for non-elite projects.

                                 http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6298

                                 Bahasa Indonesia version:

                                 Laporan Final Evaluasi PNPM RESPEK: Infrastruktur Pedesaan dan Kapasitas Kelembagaan

                                 http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6297




30
                                                                              2011                        26
LESSONS LEARNED FROM SPADA PLANNING
AND SERVICE DELIVERY
The PATTIRO Institute
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas (SPADA) is a complement to PNPM
in disadvantaged and conflict areas, with a special focus on governance at the
community and district levels. SPADA is designed to combine participatory and
technocratic planning, align local plans with district ones, and give some training to
government officials. This report draws some lessons from SPADA’s implementation:
  •	 SPADA has improved basic services, primarily through paying for items that were
     not covered by the district budget: unfunded government projects, unfunded
     community projects, and projects proposed by neither the government nor
     communities but suggested by research or brainstorming.
  •	 District-level planning is subject to government “interventions”, enabled by a      Project(s):
     lack of community oversight.                                                        SPADA (P2DTK)
  •	 District assemblies (DPRD) are a vulnerable link: legislators want more control
                                                                                         Study Location(s):
     to integrate all state budgeting under their own supervision, but have not been
                                                                                         Aceh, Central Sulawesi,
     involved in line ministry activities in the past, and are generally uninformed
                                                                                         West Kalimantan, North
     about the budgets and projects of line ministries in their districts.
                                                                                         Maluku, East Nusa
The report recommends positioning the district development planning (Bappeda)            Tenggara
as the leading coordinator of all poverty projects, and engaging with the DPRD to
                                                                                         Methodology:
synchronize and monitor development programs.
                                                                                         Qualitative
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7060
                                                                                         Language(s):
                                                                                         English

                                                                                         Keywords:
                                                                                         Planning, DPRD, APBN,
                                                                                         services, corruption




                                                                                                                   31
 27                           2011

                              STUDI PEMBELAJARAN DAN PEMANFAATAN
                              PRO-POOR PLANNING, BUDGETTING DAN
                              MONITORING (P3BM) KAJIAN SINGKAT DI
                              SEMBILAN KABUPATEN
                              Donny Setiawan, Suhirman
                              Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                              The Pro-Poor Planning, Budgeting and Monitoring program (P3BM), put in place by
                              the Ministry of National Development Planning (Bappenas), comprises four parts:
                              (i) an MDG scorecard, (ii) poverty mapping, (iii) checking district budgets (APBD) to
                              see whether they are pro-poor, and (iv) an instrument to help local governments
                              choose the most needed sub-district projects. P3BM signed districts up, trained
                              the trainers to go to visit the districts, and gave some technical assistance on
                              pro-poor planning and budgeting. This rapid assessment was commissioned by
                              PSF to examine the benefits of the program, weaknesses in its implementation,
 Project(s):                  and the lessons it might offer PNPM and other poverty programs.
 P3BM                           •	 With committed leadership at the district level, P3BM can help target the poor
 Study Location(s):                and set the budget properly.
 Southeast Sulawesi, East       •	 P3BM requires considerable work to implement, but staff are frequently rotated
 Nusa Tenggara, West Nusa          out and there is no incentive to adopt the program properly.
 Tenggara, Central Java         •	 Some districts face ongoing technical issues with their databases and need
                                   constant assistance.
 Methodology:                   •	 CSOs have been helpful in developing and using these tools.
 Qualitative
                              The report recommends establishing regulatory support for the program, starting
 Language(s):                 with a Joint Circular Letter from Bappenas, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry
 Bahasa Indonesia, with       of Home Affairs, to mobilize the resources needed to make P3BM work properly.
 Executive Summary in         A special secretariat should be set up in each province to move the districts
 English                      towards MGD goals. At the local level, positions should be established to supply
                              P3BM information to line ministries ( Satuan Kerja Perangkat Daerah, or SKPD),
 Keywords:
                              representative assemblies (DPRD), and village planning meetings (Musrenbang ).
 Millennium Development
                              The program should offer intensive technical assistance to the districts for two
 Goals (MDG), minimum
                              years, and should extend training to universities, CSOs, and PNPM stakeholders.
 service standards, poverty
 mapping, planning,           http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7077
 budgeting, pro-poor,
 databases, targeting         English version:

                              Executive Summary Lessons Learned from the Pro-Poor Planning, Budgeting and
                              Monitoring Program (P3BM): A Rapid Assessment in Nine Districts http://psflibrary.
                              org/collection/detail.php?id=7070




32
                                                                               2011                          28
P2SPP/PNPM INTEGRATION LESSONS
LEARNED STUDY IN SIX DISTRICTS
Suhirman, Rianingsih Djohani
Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
P2SPP ( Program Pembangunan Sistem Perencanaan Partisipatif or the Participatory System
Development Program, renamed PNPM Integrasi in 2006) was designed to help
integrate community planning into the larger scheme of technocratic government
planning. The program gave grants at the district level to fund projects at the sub-
district level that had been proposed in PNPM meetings at the village level, tying
the three levels together. This study examines the interactions between PNPM’s
participatory planning process, and the plans of government line ministries.
  •	 Community proposals are reaching district planners, but there is not much
     evidence that government planning is actually becoming any more responsive
     to community needs.
  •	 Planning is fragmented horizontally (between villages, which do not know             Project(s):
     what each other are doing) and vertically (because villages do not know what         PNPM Integration
     the districts are doing).
  •	 Local government technical agencies ( Satuan Kerja Perangkat Daerah, or SKPD)        Study Location(s):
     still resist village proposals for a couple of reasons:                              East Nusa Tenggara,
     o	 Village proposals are not standardized.                                           Yogyakarta, West Java,
     o	 They are inconsistent with the district plan.                                     Central Java, South
     o	 They are too small for district agencies.                                         Kalimantan, Jambi
     o	 Mandatory programs from above use up most of the money, leaving little
                                                                                          Methodology:
        for proposals from below.
                                                                                          Qualitative
  •	 Setrawan (public servants charged with promoting community empowerment)
     have a weak position in government, in part because they are temporary. They         Language(s):
     have not always been successful in bridging community priorities and SKPD.           English
  •	 P2SPP created social networks among stakeholders beyond the village level,
     with the potential to promote community priorities at the district level.            Keywords:
  •	 Policy advocacy through ‘multi-stakeholder dialogues’ garnered the commitment        Planning, SKPD, DPRD,
     of local governments to make and implement innovations.                              facilitators, setrawan

The report recommends clarifying the legal relationship between community and
government planning processes. Dedicated task forces in each sub-district should
share information freely and promptly, including sending sub-district budgets
and plans to villages before community planning meetings. All village funding
sources should be consolidated into a single budget. Setrawan should be made
permanent, and embedded in the offices of the district PMD and SKPD section
heads. The Inter-village Cooperation Board (BK AD) should bridge communities,
SKPD, and district assemblies (DPRD).

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7059




                                                                                                                   33
 29                             2011

                                PROCESS EVALUATION OF THE PROGRAM
                                NASIONAL PEMBERDAYAAN MASYARAKAT
                                (PNPM)-URBAN
                                RAND Labor and Population
                                Published by: RAND Labor and Population
                                This process evaluation looks at the current phase of PNPM Urban and the pilot
                                Neighborhood Development (ND) scheme, asks whether project objectives are
                                being reached, and extracts some best practices and lessons learned for the future:
                                 •	 Communities are happy with PNPM Urban infrastructure, which is generally
                                    of high-quality.
                                 •	 Female participation in the implementation of infrastructure projects consists
                                    mostly of providing workers with snacks and drinks.
                                 •	 The urban poor tend to be geographically spread out, making it hard to classify
 Project(s):                        any given area as “high poverty.”
 PNPM Urban                      •	 There appears to be little duplication of activities or priorities, in large part
 Study Location(s):                 because most areas incorporate PNPM Urban into the development planning
 Yogyakarta, West Java,             meeting (Musrenbang ).
 East Java, North Sumatra,       •	 Involved facilitators consistently improve the quality of projects. But facilitators
 Jakarta, Central Java, South       are overworked and overextended; and the practice of rotating facilitators
 Sulawesi                           disrupts their ability to meet community needs.
                                 •	 The most cited attributes of successful facilitators are their personal characteristics,
 Methodology:                       experience and training. Effective facilitators tirelessly promote the program
 Mixed                              and build community capacity, rather than solely enforcing rules.
                                 •	 Auditing is key to limiting or preventing the misuse of funds.
 Language(s):
 English                        The evaluation recommends improving the management information system
                                (MIS), which is relied upon for auditing, but often contains poor data. ND funding
 Keywords:
                                dedicated to marketing was proving to be ineffective and should be reduced.
 Urban poverty, targeting,
 auditing                       http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=6525




34
                                                                            2011                            30
INDONESIA’S PNPM GENERASI PROGRAM:
FINAL IMPACT EVALUATION REPORT
Benjamin A. Olken, Junko Onishi, Susan Wong
Published by: The World Bank
This report describes the findings from three waves of evaluation: a baseline
survey, a midpoint survey after 15-18 months of project implementation, and a
final evaluation after 27-30 months. The third and final round gathered responses
from 45,000 household members, village heads, and school and health facility
staff. The evaluation also includes findings from a qualitative study in 12 villages
in West Java and East Nusa Tenggara. Main findings include:
  •	 PNPM Generasi had a statistically significant positive impact on average across
     the 12 indicators it was designed to address, with its greatest impact in areas
     with low baseline health and education indicators.
  •	 PNPM Generasi demonstrated that a national CDD architecture can be adapted        Project(s):
     to other uses.                                                                    PNPM Generasi
  •	 The main long-term impac t was a decrease in malnutrition. Childhood
                                                                                       Study Location(s):
     malnutrition was reduced by 2.2 percent, about a 10 percent reduction from
                                                                                       Nationwide sample, West
     the control level. Reductions in malnutrition were strongest in areas with
                                                                                       Java, East Nusa Tenggara
     higher initial malnutrition rates, most notably in East Nusa Tenggara province,
     where underweight rates were reduced by 8.8 percent, a 20 percent decline         Methodology:
     compared with control areas.                                                      Mixed
  •	 Surprisingly, in Java, there was a negative impact on stunting and severe
     stunting, which needs to be explored further.                                     Language(s):
  •	 Education indicators improved in the final evaluation, following the zero or      English
     negative impacts found at the interim evaluation.
                                                                                       Keywords:
  •	 In terms of the longer-term education learning outcomes, the program did
                                                                                       Health, education,
     not improve childhood test scores as yet.
                                                                                       incentives
  •	 Performance incentives improved program effectiveness in health but not in
     education; a host of contingent reasons may explain why that was the case,
     and further research and testing will be needed to see if incentives can impact
     education indicators.
  •	 Incentive rules were sometimes difficult for communities to understand.

The report suggests that future expansion of PNPM Generasi should prioritize
areas where its 12 key indicators are lagging, and not necessarily areas identified
as poor. The Government may wish to see how incentives can work in other lagging
areas, e.g., poverty programs or access to water and sanitation; these interventions
and incentives must be properly monitored and evaluated. PNPM Generasi should
regularly review its 12 target indicators and consider whether they should be
complemented or replaced. A follow-up evaluation may be needed in the future
to examine the longer-term sustainability of interventions and impacts.	 	

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=5887




                                                                                                                  35
 31                          2010

                             MARGINALIZED GROUPS IN PNPM RURAL
                             AKATIGA
                             Published by: AKATIGA for PNPM Support Facility – World Bank,
                             Jakarta
                             This study grew out of concern that certain segments of society were being left out
                             of the development planning process in PNPM Rural. Previous studies indicated
                             that decision-making within the project favored the majority and those who were
                             better-off as opposed to poorer villagers and those living in outlying areas. This
                             study was undertaken to better understand the socio-economic and political
                             dynamics of participation and marginalization. The report finds that:

                             In relation to PNPM Rural participation (or non-participation), generally there are
                             four major groups:
                               •	 The elite are the wealthy, village government leaders, religious and customary leaders.
 Project(s):                   •	 Activists are villagers who posses knowledge of government projects and use
 PNPM Rural                       this knowledge to become involved. These activists, such as those in farmers’
                                  groups and Pembinaan Kesejahteraan Keluarga (PKK) (government-led women’s
 Study Location(s):
                                  group), have a close relationship with government leaders. Together, elites and
 Papua, West Kalimantan,
                                  activists dominate decision-making, including in women’s meetings.
 South Sulawesi, West
                               •	 The majority are people with few assets or small income levels, such as small
 Sumatra, West Java, West
                                  landowners, motorcycle taxi drivers, small industry workers and mobile vendors.
 Nusa Tenggara
                               •	 Marginalized groups have no (valuable) assets, live in outlying areas with limited basic
 Methodology:                     infrastructure, have limited income with a large number of dependents, and originate
 Qualitative                      from an ethnic/religious minority. Poverty alone does not mean marginalization.

 Language(s):                PNPM’s rapid scale-up in 2009 led to a series of problems that contributed to
 English, Bahasa Indonesia   marginalization:
                              •	 Facilitators lack the skills to advance the empowerment agenda.
 Keywords:                    •	 A program-wide focus on administration over empowerment.
 Poverty, marginalized        •	 Monitoring and evaluation has become mechanistic, and qualitative monitoring has
 groups, exclusion, elite        suffered. Data on participation numbers are collected, but data on participation
 capture, empowerment,           quality are not.
 facilitators                 •	 Delays in disbursement severely damage faith in the program.
                              •	 Late funds are often put to uses other than those in the original proposal.

                             The repor t recommends giving PNPM a more specific sectoral focus—rural
                             infrastructure—that can be more easily administered and more ef fectively
                             facilitated. Selecting projects by plebiscite would reduce reliance on facilitators
                             to elicit the voices of the poor in large village discussions. Proposals should be
                             weighted to favor hamlets (dusun) with smaller populations and those farther
                             from the village center. Facilitators should organize marginalized groups, but
                             the program should not offer those groups special benefits, focusing instead on
                             “leveling the playing field.”

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=4442

                             Bahasa Indonesia version:

                             Kelompok Marjinal dalam PNPM Perdesaan

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=4444


36
                                                                           2010                         32
VILLAGE CAPACITY IN MAINTAINING
INFRASTRUCTURE: EVIDENCE FROM RURAL
INDONESIA
Arya Gaduh
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
PNPM gives priority to poorer villages, and then assumes that those villages have
the resources to maintain the assets they build, or assumes that they are willing
to use those resources for maintenance. This study examines these assumptions.
Do villages have the resources? Are villages willing to spend the resources on
maintenance? What are the characteristics of villages that can and will maintain
their infrastructure? The report finds that:
 •	 The labor and money needed to maintain village infrastructure constitute a
    kind of tax. While the sums may be small, they can be difficult to collect, and
    the effect on the poor can be burdensome.                                         Project(s):
 •	 Willingness to contribute, however, is high.                                      KDP, PNPM Rural
 •	 Labor on village infrastructure is undervalued, leading the poor to carry a       Study Location(s):
    proportionately higher burden of the cost of maintenance.                         Lampung, Central Java,
Most villages do not maintain their infrastructure, but villages that do:             East Nusa Tenggara, West
 •	 Had received responses to complaints about quality.                               Kalimantan, South Sulawesi
 •	 Had received more information from PNPM and village leadership on the use         Methodology:
    of project funds.                                                                 Quantitative
 •	 Had received the village allocation fund (ADD) in a timely fashion.
                                                                                      Language(s):
The report recommends that village infrastructure maintenance be assigned             English, Bahasa Indonesia
to specific roles in village and local governments. District governments should
begin transitioning funds away from upgrades and into maintenance, and all new        Keywords:
infrastructure projects should include maintenance plans.                             Village infrastructure,
                                                                                      maintenance, planning
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=4445

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Kapasitas Desa Dalam Memelihara Infrastruktur Bukti dari Pedesaan Indonesia
Nopember 2010

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=4443




                                                                                                                  37
 33                           2009

                              COMMUNITY-BASED REINTEGRATION IN
                              ACEH: ASSESSING THE IMPACTS OF BRA-KDP
                              Patrick Barron, Macartan Humphreys, Laura Paler,
                              Jeremy Weinstein
                              Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                              This paper evaluates the Community-Based Reintegration Assistance for Conflict
                              Victims program (BRA-KDP), an innovative attempt by local and central governments
                              to employ lessons learned from successful past community-development work to
                              post-conflict Aceh. This paper uses data from the Aceh Reintegration Livelihood
                              Surveys (ARLS) to ask how well the program worked, what its impacts were, and
                              why CDD projects unfolded as they did. Key findings include:
                               •	 Overall, the program was only marginally better at reaching conflict victims
                                  than non-victims.
 Project(s):                   •	 BR A-KDP is associated with strong gains in welfare and improvements in
 BRA-KDP                          perceptions of well being.
                               •	 The participation of villages is associated with an 11-point decline in the share
 Study Location(s):
                                  classified as “poor” by village heads.
 Aceh
                               •	 The evidence for improvements in social cohesion or relations between citizens
 Methodology:                     and the state is weak.
 Quantitative                  •	 There is no evidence that BRA-KDP increased villages’ capacity for collective
                                  problem solving.
 Language(s):
 English                      The authors caution that structural differences between BRA-KDP locations and
                              control communities make meaningful comparisons difficult. To overcome these
 Keywords:                    biases, the report relies on an array of statistical methods that may appear overly
 Conflict, social cohesion,   complex. They also point out that BRA-KDP raises two issues inherent in CDD.
 reintegration                First, given full control of project money, communities in Aceh chose to bypass
                              the kinds of processes that build social cohesion. Second, while the empowerment
                              and institutions built up by CDD may create conditions for peace in the long run,
                              in the short term CDD causes interest groups to compete for limited resources,
                              and can contribute to social divisions.

                              http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=2698




38
                                                                                     2009                         34
DELIVERING ASSISTANCE TO
CONFLICT-AFFECTED COMMUNITIES:
THE BRA-KDP PROGRAM IN ACEH
Adrian Morel, Makiko Watanabe, Robert Wrobel
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
This look at the Community-Based Reintegration Assistance for Conflict Victims
program (BR A-KDP), an innovative attempt by local and central governments
to employ lessons learned from successful past community-development work
to post-conflict Aceh, complements “Community-Based Reintegration in Aceh:
Assessing the Impacts of BRA-KDP” (2009) with additional data from BRA-KDP’s
Monitoring Information Supervision (MIS) system, from supervision missions, and
from qualitative fieldwork. Key findings include:
  •	 Community targeting of beneficiaries worked well overall.
  •	 Participation was strong, even among vulnerable groups such as conflict victims             Project(s):
     and women.                                                                                  BRA-KDP
  •	 Ex-combatants affected the program in both positive and negative ways,
                                                                                                 Study Location(s):
     contingent on local histories and conditions.
                                                                                                 Aceh
  •	 BRA-KDP had positive effects on welfare, and demonstrated that with the right
     delivery system, funds intended as compensation can impact development.                     Methodology:
  •	 89 percent of program funds were spent on livelihoods activities, not on public             Mixed
     goods—a stark contrast to KDP in the rest of the country.
                                                                                                 Language(s):
A few modifications could have helped the project work better:                                   English
 •	 Linking BRA-KDP clearly to the obligations defined in the Helsinki Memorandum
    of Understanding.                                                                            Keywords:
 •	 Better training for facilitators.                                                            Targeting, conflict,
 •	 Linking small livelihoods projects to outside sources of capital and technical assistance.   participation,
                                                                                                 ex-combatants, livelihoods
The report recommends that future targeting not rely on conflict-era identities,
but on standard indicators such as welfare and education levels.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=2696




                                                                                                                              39
 35                            2009

                               OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
                               OVERVIEW FOR PROGRAM PENGEMBANGAN
                               KECAMATAN (PPK) AND PROGRAM NASIONAL
                               PEMBERDAYAAN MASYARAKAT (PNPM): TO
                               ASSESS THE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
                               OF PPK AND PNPM IMPLEMENTED
                               MICRO-INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS IN
                               INDONESIA BETWEEN 1999 AND 2007
                               Ted E. Kulongoski
                               Published by: PNPM Support Facility – World Bank, Jakarta
                               This study looks closely at “micro-infrastructure” projects built by KDP (here called
                               by its Indonesian name, Program Pemgembangan Kecamatan, or PPK) between
                               1999 and 2007, to see how they hold up. Are they still working? Are they still being
 Project(s):                   maintained? The study assumes that everything was designed and built to be fully
 KDP, PNPM Rural               functional, which may not always be the case.
                                •	 Of 657 projects examined, 72 percent were of good quality, 21 percent were
 Study Location(s):
                                   partially functional, and 7 percent were not functional. Almost one third of
 Gorontalo, Maluku,
                                   non-functioning projects were due to a broken pump, motor, or generator,
 North Maluku, East Nusa
                                   most of which had been of low quality to begin with.
 Tenggara, Papua, West
                                •	 Functioning projects tend to decline over time, suggesting problems with
 Papua, Riau, West Sulawesi,
                                   design, construction, or maintenance that eventually show themselves.
 South Sulawesi, Central
                                •	 Poor planning and information-sharing lead communities and government
 Sulawesi, Southeast
                                   line ministries to replicate each other’s projects.
 Sulawesi, North Sulawesi
                                •	 Villages do not plan for maintenance.
 Methodology:
                               The report recommends reducing future maintenance issues as much as possible,
 Quantitative
                               by buying better equipment and making sure that local operators know how to
 Language(s):                  repair equipment when it breaks down. Alternative energy sources, such as solar
 English                       and hydro, reduce reliance on fossil fuels, an important cost saving. Communities
                               should be provided with constant guidance and support, and monitored to make
 Keywords:                     sure that the initial designs are as good as possible, community contributions are
 Rural infrastructure,         collected, and maintenance is provided for.
 maintenance
                               http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=2272




40
                                                                                2008                           36
DIRECT DEMOCRACY AND LOCAL PUBLIC
GOODS: EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD
EXPERIMENT IN INDONESIA (NBER
WORKING PAPER NO. 14123)
Benjamin A. Olken
Published by: National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge
Decisions in CDD programs, including KDP and PNPM, are often made in forums
attended by community delegates, and not by the general population, raising
concerns about the possibility of elite capture. To investigate this question, this paper
compares two different methods of project selection in KDP: by representatives,
or by plebiscites. The paper finds that:
 •	 The different methods had little impact on the types of projects selected,
    but a large effect on measures of satisfaction and on the willingness of the
                                                                                            Project(s):
    community to contribute time or money.
                                                                                            KDP
 •	 Women’s projects determined by plebiscite were more likely to be located in
    poor areas.                                                                             Study Location(s):
 •	 The mixed-gender process yielded male preferences.                                      East Java, North Sumatra,
 •	 The difference in the time cost was enormous: voting takes 10 minutes, while            Southeast Sulawesi
    seeking consensus takes three hours.
 •	 There was no evidence of vote-buying.                                                   Methodology:
                                                                                            Quantitative
While cautioning that this was only a short-term study, the paper suggests that
making decisions by plebiscite may not change the projects selected, but has a              Keywords:
large impact on satisfaction, and lends greater legitimacy to the process.                  Plebiscites, representation,
                                                                                            voting, quantitative,
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=7074                                         satisfaction, project
                                                                                            selection
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14123




                                                                                                                        41
 37                      2008

                         IMPACT EVALUATION OF THE SECOND
                         PHASE OF THE KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT
                         PROGRAM IN INDONESIA
                         John Voss
                         Published by: The World Bank
                         This quantitative evaluation asks whether KDP2 increased household welfare,
                         moved households out of poverty, increased access to education, health services,
                         and employment, and benefited poor and disadvantaged groups. The evaluation
                         finds that:
                           •	 Real per capita consumption gains were 11 percent higher for poor households
                              in KDP areas than in control areas.
                           •	 Consumption gains in sub-districts in the poorest quintile were 5 percent
                              higher than in control areas.
 Project(s):
                           •	 The proportion of households moving out of poverty in poor sub-districts was
 KDP
                              9.2 percent higher than in control areas. The proportion of households falling
 Study Location(s):           into poverty was 4.5 percent lower than in control areas.
 Nationwide Sample         •	 The proportion of household heads gaining access to outpatient care was 11.5
                              percent higher than in control areas.
 Methodology:              •	 KDP2 reduced unemployment by 1.5 percent.
 Quantitative              •	 In less-poor sub-districts, the average household saw either no benefits, or
                              negative impacts.
 Language(s):
                           •	 Disadvantaged groups, such as households headed by women or people with
 English
                              low education, are less likely to benefit from the program.
 Keywords:
                         The report emphasizes the poor results in less-poor sub-districts, suggesting
 Consumption,
                         that KDP should change its strategy in these areas. Key to this change should be
 unemployment, poverty
                         a greater focus on ensuring that benefits reach marginalized groups, including
                         women and people with low levels of education. The report recommends that the
                         next round of research focuses on social dynamics and governance, and includes
                         a survey for individuals, and not just for households.

                         http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1447

                         http://bit.ly/1Fzl7i9




42
                                                                                2008                          38
MICRO CREDIT STRATEGY FORMULATION
MISSION FOR THE NATIONAL COMMUNITY
EMPOWERMENT PROGRAM OR PROGRAM
NASIONAL PEMBERDAYAAN MASYARAKAT
(PNPM)
Yayasan MICRA
Published by: Yayasan MICRA for PNPM Support Facility – World
Bank, Jakarta
The microfinance sector in Indonesia is one of the largest in the world, with over
20,000 microfinance institutions (MFI) serving more than 15 million Indonesians.
Despite this, at least 40 million more people in Indonesia still lack access to financial
services, either because they live out of the reach of the formal financial sector,
or because they are considered unbankable. This report assesses the current
micro-credit arrangements attached to KDP and UPP, and outlines a strategy to
                                                                                            Project(s):
improve those arrangements for PNPM. Key findings include:
                                                                                            KDP, UPP
 •	 There is a demand for more micro-credit: KDP/UPP is serving 6.8 million people.
 •	 This success comes despite inadequate policies, procedures, training, and               Study Location(s):
    product pricing.                                                                        Central Java, East Java,
 •	 The KDP/UPP micro-credit system is not legally certified as an MFI. This lack           East Nusa Tenggara, South
    of legal status prevents the program from including a savings component.                Sulawesi
 •	 Current human resources management and evaluation are rudimentar y.
    Neither KDP nor UPP sets clear targets or effectively measures performance.             Methodology:
    Well-trained field staff are critical to the quality, success and sustainability        Mixed
    of both programs, but most staff have limited experience managing micro-
                                                                                            Language(s):
    credit programs.
                                                                                            English
 •	 Fieldwork revealed high staff turnover due to fraud and corruption, related
    mainly to the lack of control and capacity of the Inter-village Discussion Forum        Keywords:
    (Musyawarah Antar Desa, or MAD).                                                        Microcredit, revolving loan
 •	 The data used by UPK—the arrears rate, amount past due—overstate the                    funds
    quality of the portfolio. International best practice recommended a maximum
    of 5 percent portfolio at risk (PAR) as good for micro-credit.
 •	 Community targeting distributes loans based on a sense that the recipient is
    deserving and in need, and not on the quality of the recipient’s plan or ability
    to repay.

The report suggests five options for the future, all of which include separating
micro-credit from other grant-based programming, and adding a savings component,
the cornerstone of effective, sustainable microfinance.
  •	 Executing program credit through banks.
  •	 Linking community groups to banks.
·	 Devolving ownership and management to village level.
  •	 Leading the formation of cooperatives (Badan Usaha Milik Sesa or BUMDES).
  •	 Giving a supervising financial institution ownership or (at least) a profit stake
     in the new microfinance institutions.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1939

http://bit.ly/1K7oE7w


                                                                                                                          43
 39                          2007

                             2006 VILLAGE SURVEY IN ACEH: AN
                             ASSESSMENT OF VILLAGE INFRASTRUCTURE
                             AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS
                             KDP
                             Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                             Three decades of conflict and the earthquake and tsunami of December 26, 2004
                             have had a devastating impact on the physical and social fabric of Aceh. To provide
                             an accurate overview of the current condition of Acehnese villages, KDP undertook
                             an assessment of the infrastructure status and the social situation throughout
                             the province, covering almost every rural village in Aceh. The report found:
                              •	 Poverty is widespread throughout the province.
                              •	 Over 50 percent of infrastructure is damaged, either by conflict (19.5 percent),
                                 natural disaster (38.6 percent), or lack of maintenance (41.9 percent). The total
 Project(s):                     cost of replacing all this infrastructure would come to USD1.3 billion.
 KDP                          •	 Major investment is still required in Aceh; between the tsunami, the conflict,
 Study Location(s):              and years of neglect, total infrastructure repair costs could be as high as
 Aceh                            IDR 20 trillion, or USD2.2 billion.
                              •	 More households are reported displaced by conflict than by the tsunami, and
 Methodology:                    conflict IDPs are returning at a lower rate.
 Quantitative                 •	 Conflict IDPs are perceived to be considerably worse off economically than
                                 tsunami IDPs.
 Language(s):
                              •	 “Social capital” is high: Aceh’s exclusion level is low, and village meetings are
 English, Bahasa Indonesia
                                 regarded as the primary problem-solving mechanism.
 Keywords:                    •	 Community-driven processes are the most effective method for targeting investment.
 Conflict, internally
                             According to the report, while a return to conflict appears remote, a variety of
 displaced people (IDPs),
                             indicators suggest that problems may lie not far beneath the surface. Efforts to
 rural infrastructure
                             support the post-conflict peace-building process should continue, and should
                             include: ongoing socialization of public services and the peace process; equipping
                             local leaders with accurate and up-to-date information on reintegration programs;
                             and improving security. Community-driven processes are most effective in targeting
                             investment, but special attention should be paid to ensuring that all members of
                             the community—particularly women, who are under-represented in the decision-
                             making process in Aceh—have the opportunity to participate in, and contribute
                             to, local development processes.


                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1074

                             http://bit.ly/1ySgGht

                             Bahasa Indonesia version:

                             Survei Desa Aceh 2006 : Evaluasi Keadaan Prasarana dan Sosial Desa

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1084




44
                                                                                2007                          40
GENDER IN COMMUNITY DRIVEN
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS: IMPLICATIONS
FOR PNPM STRATEGY
World Bank Group, Washington DC
Published by: World Bank
As a national program, reaching nearly every corner of the country, PNPM provides
a unique opportunity to engage with issues of gender and inequality. This report
reviews the role of and gender in KDP, the Urban Poverty Program (UPP), and
several other projects.
 •	 Gender training is more likely to have an impact when it appears in government
    guidelines. Flexible approaches are needed to reach women. Separate meetings
    help, but may marginalize women from the mixed-gender process.
 •	 Program procedures entrench elite women in positions of authority.
                                                                                            Project(s):
 •	 Local cultural factors define women’s roles.
                                                                                            PNPM Rural, KDP, PNPM
 •	 Few staff are sufficiently gender-aware, but those who are have a significant impact.
                                                                                            Urban, NUSSP, WSLIC-2,
 •	 Affirmative action is more effective at lower levels
                                                                                            ACCESS
 •	 There is only anecdotal evidence that female facilitators are more effective
    at empowering women.                                                                    Language(s):
 •	 Women’s savings and credit groups rarely include the poorest, unless explicitly         English, with executive
    required by the program.                                                                summary in Bahasa
                                                                                            Indonesia
The report recommends achieving a broad consensus on goals for gender equality,
based around three areas of empowerment: economic, political, and social. Controlled        Keywords:
experiments could help determine which kinds of program design offer women                  Gender, women,
the best chance of achieving positions of responsibility. Male leaders must be              marginalized groups,
offered gender training. Most female facilitators are of childbearing age; HR should        facilitators
accommodate their need for maternal leave, etc., so they do not have to leave
their jobs to have children.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1111

http://bit.ly/1bkF6W5

Bahasa Indonesia version:

Ringkasan Eksekutif Kajian Gender dalam Proyek Pembangunan Berbasis Komunitas:
Implikasi bagi PNPM Mandiri

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1112




                                                                                                                      45
 41                              2007

                                 KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                                 QUALITATIVE IMPACT EVALUATION
                                 Karrie McLaughlin, Adam Satu, Michael Hoppe
                                 Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                                 KDP was designed around principles of transparency and accountability, partly in
                                 the hope that by exposing communities to these ideas the program would spur
                                 a grassroots demand for better services, not just within KDP’s own process, but
                                 from government more generally. This qualitative impact evaluation asks whether
                                 that spillover happened, whether KDP was able to change government practices,
                                 and whether it increased villager capacity to more adequately identify and solve
                                 community development needs, or to assert themselves in the economic, political
                                 and social decisions that affect their lives. The study also examined KDP’s impact
                                 on community institutions, women’s ability to meet their development needs and
 Project(s):                     poverty reduction. Some key findings include:
 KDP                               •	 KDP supports good governance with training and support, but concrete change
                                      is hard to find. KDP encourages community pressure to improve governance,
 Study Location(s):
                                      but this more often leads to conflict than progress.
 South Sumatra, Central
                                   •	 KDP does an excellent job of alleviating poverty at the village level, but does
 Java, South Kalimantan,
                                      so by helping everyone, not by targeting poorer groups.
 North Sulawesi
                                   •	 The strongest factor in the success of KDP is the support of the village head.
 Methodology:                      •	 Systems that send representatives to meetings, instead of opening them to
 Qualitative                          the general public, can obscure elite domination.
                                   •	 The capacity for collective action is strongest at the hamlet (dusun) level.
 Language(s):                         Competition for resources by different dusun within a village can be fierce.
 English                           •	 KDP is better at supporting existing institutions than starting new ones, except
                                      ones founded to receive KDP benefits.
 Keywords:
                                   •	 Women’s involvement follows regional patterns, with little impact from KDP.
 Village institutions, gender,
                                      The existence of women-only programs can end up excluding women from
 women, representation,
                                      mixed-gender programs.
 elite capture, collective
 action, competition,            The report recommends engaging more strongly at the hamlet level, which is the
 governance, spillover           natural unit of solidarity. KDP should offer training to village heads, so that they
                                 understand their place within KDP. The village consultative body (Badan Perwakilan
                                 Desa, or BPD) should be turned back into an elected body, to effectively balance
                                 the village head.

                                 http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1085




46
                                                                        2007                        42
THE EMPLOYMENT AND POVERTY IMPACT
OF PNPM
Gustav F. Papanek
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
One of PNPM’s major benefits is its ability to create employment, primarily for
poor, unskilled workers. This paper estimates the program’s impact on employment
and income for 2007 to 2010, and analyzes the circumstances under which the
effect could be larger or smaller.
 •	 By 2009, PNPM benefited roughly 24 million workers, increasing their incomes
    by 10 to14 percent for 60 days of work.
 •	 Some 6 million families escaped poverty; another 10 million received some
    additional income, but not enough to escape poverty.
 •	 The impact of PNPM is especially important because:
    o	 Provides work and income when few other jobs are available:                 Project(s):
       *	 down-times in agricultural cycles                                        PNPM Rural, PNPM Urban
       *	 following natural disasters
                                                                                   Study Location(s):
       *	 following local economic set-backs
                                                                                   Nationwide Sample
    o	 Can respond to need, adding to the social safety net.
 •	 The number of poor depends as much or more on:                                 Methodology:
    o	 The price of rice and other basic foods.                                    Quantitative
    o	 Jobs created elsewhere in the economy.
    o	 How many are benefited by conditional cash transfers.                       Language(s):
 •	 PNPM’s impact is limited because:                                              English
 •	 It provides supplementar y employment, not full-time regular jobs. Many
                                                                                   Keywords:
    calculations assume that PNPM will provide 21 days of work. Landless and
                                                                                   Employment, poverty,
    land-poor agricultural workers need at least 60 days a year.
                                                                                   impact, microcredit
 •	 PNPM creates few jobs for professional, technical, and other middle-class
    workers.
 •	 PNPM employment cannot help families that have no one in the labor force.
 •	 Reasons for the small impact of the urban program:
    o	 The urban component is expected to employ only one-third as many workers
       as the rural component.
    o	 UPP grants are made for one year, whereas KDP grants last for 3-5 years

The report argues that PNPM should be an essential part of the social safety
net, increasing its investments and creating more employment in areas that are
especially poor or have suffered temporary downturns.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3114




                                                                                                            47
 43                             2006

                                CRISES AND CONTRADICTIONS:
                                UNDERSTANDING THE ORIGINS OF A
                                COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN
                                INDONESIA*
                                Scott Guggenheim
                                Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                                This paper is about the genesis of KDP, with a focus on the opportunities and
                                constraints that challenge social scientists working within large development
                                bureaucracies. The first section of the paper describes the project and the specific
                                historical factors that led to an experiment such as KDP. The second section
                                gives a brief overview of KDP’s ethnographic roots. The final section asks how
                                the vocabulary of development can be expanded to include the critical insights
                                of social scientists. Some main points:
 Project(s):
                                 •	 KDP was produced at a moment when three institutions were in crisis:
 PNPM Rural, KDP
                                    o	 the New Order government, which was collapsing in the wake of the Southeast
 Language(s):                          Asian monetary crisis;
 English                            o	 the World Bank, which was undergoing a crisis of legitimacy after a review
                                       of its involuntary resettlement policy and revelations about the extent of
 Keywords:                             its knowledge of corruption in Indonesia; and
 Historical context,                o	 Indonesian villages, where state-building and the Village Law of 1979 had
 Southeast Asian monetary              undermined traditional sources of authority.
 crisis, New Order, Village      •	 The findings of the World Bank’s Local Level Institution (LLI) studies challenged
 Law of 1979, social capital,       development conventions:
 decentralization                   o	 community-owned projects functioned better than government ones, with better
                                       participation of women and the poor, and higher community contributions;
                                    o	 community organizations were long-lived and served multiple purposes,
                                       and had strategies for challenging leadership and resolving disputes;
                                    o	 community organizations thrived when given access to funds with clear
                                       regulations and left alone; and
                                    o	 village-level problems could be resolved by officials at the sub-district level,
                                       or by reaching out to CSOs.
                                 •	 These findings suggested that an effective project was not something that
                                    delivered a particular product, but a process that helps villagers solve self-
                                    identified problems.
                                 •	 Social researchers needed to translate those findings into a language that
                                    could be grasped by the World Bank and government officials in charge of
                                    development. For that, the field visits and the language of “social capital”
                                    proved to be key.
                                 •	 The idea of historical process had to be introduced to World Bank analyses
                                    of local politics and local economies. Very few people, for example, realized
                                    the extent to which Indonesian villages are the creation of a 1979 law on
                                    village structure.




48
The paper concludes by arguing that KDP is a product of a particular set of histories.
As a result of KDPs rootedness in Indonesia’s historical context, proposals to
“replicate” or “scale-up” the model should be treated with great caution. Second,
a development project such as KDP can contribute towards a re-ordering of local
political relationships. KDP’s underlying premise has been that villagers learn
about democracy by practicing it.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3116

http://bit.ly/1GcKRTc

Also appears in The Search for Empowerment: Social Capital as Idea and Practice at
the World Bank , edited by Michael Woolcock, Scott E. Guggenheim, and Elizabeth
A. Olson, published by Kumarian Press on 2006.

http://bit.ly/1AfHlQi




                                                                                         49
 44                     2006

                        LOCAL CONFLICT AND COMMUNITY
                        DEVELOPMENT IN INDONESIA: ASSESSING
                        THE IMPACT OF THE KECAMATAN
                        DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
                        Patrick Barron, Rachel Diprose, Michael Woolcock
                        Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                        Development projects and conflict inevitably go hand in hand, because development
                        is an inherently political and contested process. This study examines questions
                        relating to development projects and different forms of local conflict by examining
                        how KDP interacts with social tensions and local conflict, and how it affects the
                        nature and extent of local conflict management. What are the strengths and
                        limitations of projects such as KDP in an unstable social and political environment,
                        where identities, rules, and group relations are being reconfigured, where long-
 Project(s):
                        standing grievances have the space to surface, and where access to power is being
 KDP
                        renegotiated? Can outside interventions such as KDP support progressive social
 Study Location(s):     change in this type of dynamic environment and, if so, how?
 East Java, East Nusa     •	 KDP forums, facilitators, and complaints mechanisms deal with conflict related
 Tenggara                    to the program, but KDP has little impact on aggregate conflict or on non-
                             project-related conflict.
 Methodology:             •	 Staying removed from conflict allows KDP to remain a politically neutral space.
 Mixed                    •	 Non-project conflicts addressed through KDP tend to be resolved successfully.
                             This shows a potential for KDP to play a larger mediation role, in particular
 Language(s):
                             for development-related disputes.
 English
                          •	 KDP is helping to improve inter-group and state-society relations, making
 Keywords:                   areas more immune to violent conflict.
 Conflict resolution,     •	 The survey results show perceived improvements in dispute handling, and the
 facilitators                qualitative fieldwork links the program with normative changes: KDP (when it
                             functions well) creates a positive precedent, stimulating demand for changes
                             in local decision-making and conflict resolution.
                          •	 KDP’s impacts vary because political, cultural, institutional, and economic
                             contexts vary.
                          •	 Development programs should prepare to handle the conflict that accompanies them.

                        The report recommends explicitly addressing the conflict inherent in development
                        interventions, and taking potential conflicts into account in both planning and
                        implementation. Projects should be based on a detailed knowledge of the contexts
                        in which they will operate, so that they do not inadvertently lead to conflict.
                        Socialization must be comprehensive and ongoing, monitoring must be tight,
                        and complaints must be addressed. Both state and informal leaders need to be
                        embedded in the process. In conflict situations, actors involved should be included
                        in ways appropriate to local customs (insofar as that is possible).

                        http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=970

                        http://bit.ly/1HnTBES




50
                                                                               2005                         45
ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS OF
KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
Anthony Torrens
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
This independent study commissioned by the World Bank for KDP examines the
economic impacts of 113 KDP rural infrastructure projects, focusing on roads,
bridges, water supplies, and irrigation, the four types of infrastructure most
commonly requested by KDP villages across Indonesia. The study finds that:
 •	 Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of infrastructure across four provinces
    averaged 52.7 percent.
 •	 KDP deliver s projec t s at an average of 55.82 percent of the cos t of
    government contracting.
                                                                                           Project(s):
 •	 106 out of 113 projects were ranked as technically “good” or “very good”.
                                                                                           KDP/World Bank
 •	 Operation and maintenance costs are routinely underestimated, and beyond
    the ability of villages to bear.                                                       Study Location(s):
 •	 Technical facilitators significantly improved the quality and accuracy of proposals,   East Java, East Nusa
    and overcame a wide variety of problems with earlier projects.                         Tenggara, North Sumatra,
                                                                                           South Sulawesi
While the report cautions that some of the numbers appear very high, even the
most conservative interpretations would allow that KDP is creating substantial             Methodology:
returns on investment, at far lower costs than government contractors can provide.         Quantitative

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=22                                          Language(s):
                                                                                           English, Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Indonesia version:
                                                                                           Keywords:
Analisis Dampak Ekonomi Pasca-Konstruksi Program Prasarana Desa PPK: Laporan               Rural infrastructure,
Akhir : Ringkasan Eksekutif Januari 2005                                                   maintenance, technical
                                                                                           facilitators
http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3414




                                                                                                                       51
 46                          2005

                             FINAL REPORT: EVALUATION OF
                             INFRASTRUCTURE QUALITY KDP CYCLE IV
                             National Management Consultants and Kecamatan
                             Development Program Secretariat
                             Published by: KDP Secretariat - World Bank, Jakarta
                             This study evaluates the quality of infrastructure in a sample of villages that
                             had completed building the first year of KDP Phase II, covering technical quality
                             and a range of other indicators, including project management, the role of the
                             community, maintenance, and the opinions of the community about KDP. The
                             report finds that:
                              •	 Women made up 11.99 percent of the KDP infrastructure workforce.
                              •	 Projects require an average of 3.75 months to complete.
                              •	 Project budgets and technical drawings were available in 84 percent of villages
                                 surveyed, but unavailable in 16 percent. Only a small number of these documents
 Project(s):                     were stored in publicly accessible places.
 KDP                          •	 No KDP projects were found to seriously harm the environment. Most were
                                 neutral, 6 percent did light environmental damage, and nearly 10 percent
 Study Location(s):              were beneficial.
 Nationwide Sample            •	 In nearly 5 percent of cases land was improperly acquired, occasionally leading
                                 to serious conflict.
 Methodology:
                              •	 Only 38 percent of villages had properly functioning maintenance groups.
 Quantitative
                              •	 Officials and non-formal leaders significantly over-report the benefits and
 Language(s):                    under-report the problems with KDP.
 English, Bahasa Indonesia    •	 Youths and housewives were less likely to work in KDP, to be satisfied with
                                 KDP wages, participate in planning, or know KDP budgets.
 Keywords:
 Local government,           The report recommends that district facilitators receive mandatory in-service
 maintenance, rural          training, and train sub-district facilitators in turn. This training should cover program
 infrastructure,             requirements for land and asset acquisition, change orders, the definitions of
 transparency                various terms such as “work force” and “person-days of labor,” and the ability to
                             record such data correctly. The National Management Consultants (NMC) should
                             develop additional methods to increase the involvement of women and youth in
                             the program.

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3104

                             Bahasa Indonesia version:

                             Laporan Akhir Evaluasi Kualitas Prasarana PPK Siklus IV

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=2073




52
                                                                                   2005                           47
KDP2 MATCHING GRANT STUDY LOCAL
GOVERNMENT
Paul Adams
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
The second phase of KDP (2003-06) included a Matching Grant scheme, designed
to encourage district governments to supplement KDP with their own funds. Under
the scheme districts that funded the inclusion of extra sub-districts in KDP would
receive additional no-cost technical assistance in the form of training and facilitation
through KDP project consultants. By 2003, 79 out of 190 districts participating
in KDP had pledged to provide Matching Grants, extending KDP to an additional
150 sub-districts.

This study looks at the factors that moved district governments to join or stay out
of the program, and at the issues—both with the project and with government—                   Project(s):
that made the Matching Grant scheme less effective than it might have been. Key                KDP
findings include:
  •	 Districts that participated were motivated by a recognition that community                Study Location(s):
     participation in development reduces costs, and by a desire to curry favor                Nationwide sample
     with the central government.
                                                                                               Methodology:
  •	 Offers of no-cost technical assistance and facilitation did not lure in more districts.
                                                                                               Qualitative
  •	 Ministries competing for a limited budget were unwilling to concede funds
     for matching grants.                                                                      Language(s):
  •	 District contributions were generally small, on average 1.2 percent of the                English
     development budget.
  •	 District governments are unwilling to concede roles or functions to consultants           Keywords:
     or higher levels.                                                                         Local government
  •	 In districts without “champions” for the program, other interests (DPRD, line
     agencies) succeeded in paring back or eliminating matching grants.
  •	 Bureaucratic confusion and inefficiency, and poor information-sharing between
     levels of government were significant obstacles.
  •	 Officials follow regulations to the letter, even when they are clearly not in the
     best interests of the program.
  •	 KDP was not aligned with the government disbursement schedule.

The report recommends taking steps to help second-tier officials and local line
ministries “buy in” to KDP: targeted socialization, training, and clearly defined roles
for everyone whose work touches on CDD. Information flows from “champions”
to local government assemblies need to be improved, and could include regular
bulletins and workshops. KDP should be aligned with the Government’s fiscal year.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3108




                                                                                                                    53
 48                          2004

                             AN ANALYSIS OF EFFORTS TO REPLICATE THE
                             KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
                             Nurlily Basri, Siti Barokah, Carolina Monterio, Kevin Beattie
                             Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                             Local governments in several parts of Indonesia have started KDP replication or
                             “spin-off ” projects funded through their own budgets. This study examines 10
                             such KDP replication schemes in greater depth, assessing their adoption of KDP
                             principles and program features, and looking for insight into how KDP may be
                             influencing local governance, community capacity building, and service delivery.
                               •	 Local-government spin-offs do not target the poor or women’s groups.
                               •	 Village contributions tend to be very high, from 10 percent to nearly 60 percent.
                               •	 Local-government spin-offs generally do not include inter-village competition.
                               •	 Financial management is poor and transparency low.
 Project(s):                   •	 Most spin-offs lack a formal complaints mechanism.
 KDP                           •	 None emphasize maintenance, long-term planning, or sustainability.
                               •	 None have anti-corruption strategies.
 Study Location(s):
 East Java, West Sumatra,    The study recommends studying these spin-offs further and ultimately engaging
 North Sumatra, Lampung,     with them, mainly through training: facilitation techniques, bookkeeping, financial
 South Kalimantan, Aceh,     controls and accountability measures, reviewing good and bad practices, and
 East Nusa Tenggara          promoting “horizontal learning.” KDP should help spin-offs to sync their cycles with
                             grant allocations and local government fiscal years. And studies should compare
 Methodology:
                             local spin-offs with KDP, looking for innovations and efficiencies.
 Qualitative
                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=2027
 Language(s):
 English

 Keywords:
 Gender, women,
 marginalized groups,
 inclusion, participation,
 corruption, maintenance,
 competition




54
                                                                              2004                           49
INDONESIA’S KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM: A LARGE-SCALE USE OF
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TO REDUCE
POVERTY
Scott Guggenheim, Tatag Wiranto, Yogana Prasta, Susan Wong
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
Originally presented at “Scaling Up Poverty Reduction,” a conference held in Shanghai
on May 25-27, 2004, this paper details the explosive growth of KDP, outlines the
successes and challenges of the program, and offers lessons for large-scale CDD
projects in other countries. Main points include:
 •	 Scaling up KDP required overcoming cons traint s in World Bank and
    government procedures.
    o	 Devising a fiduciary system with adequate controls without adding extensive
                                                                                          Project(s):
       delays to the project.
                                                                                          KDP
    o	 KDP’s transfer system allows for very little discretion by government officials.
 •	 Preliminary evidence suggests that KDP’s core design works well in conflict           Language(s):
    and transitional countries.                                                           English
 •	 KDP offers an efficient cost-effective way to provide large amounts of low-
    cost, low-tech village infrastructure, especially farm to market linkages over        Keywords:
    very large areas.                                                                     Scaling up,
 •	 Indonesia’s fiscal transfer system is often very slow, and as much as nine            decentralization, financial
    months of the fiscal year can be lost to delays. KDP’s disbursement system            management, conflict,
    rarely takes as long as a month.                                                      governance
 •	 Preliminary survey evidence suggests that villages that have gone through
    KDP show significantly higher levels of trust in government.
 •	 KDP’s overall management costs run about 15 to 20 percent higher than standard
    World Bank supervision allocations, mostly attributable to KDP’s unusual size.
 •	 Constantly changing rules and responsibilities mean that project rulebooks
    struggle to keep up.
 •	 KPD is not useful for investments that involve recurrent costs, coordinating
    across investments, or technically difficult activities.

The report emphasizes that KDP does not substitute for a broad-based poverty
reduction strategy. Generating local growth requires much more attention to the
incentive environments that favor investment, employment, and local resource
mobilization. KDP can contribute to a poverty strategy of this sort, but it does not
replace the need for a more broad-based action program. Government ownership
must be increased, but at the same time the community’s ability to make decisions
and manage funds should not be lost in the rush for government ownership.
While the first generation of KDP worked primarily to introduce mechanisms for
community development planning and management, future generations can and
must rebuild links to the more formal government planning structure.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3115




                                                                                                                        55
 50                      2004

                         MONITORING CORRUPTION: EVIDENCE
                         FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN INDONESIA
                         (NBER WORKING PAPER NO. 11753)
                         Benjamin A. Olken
                         Published by: National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge
                         This paper uses a randomized field experiment to examine several approaches
                         to reducing corruption. The author measures corruption in over 600 village road
                         projects in Indonesia by having engineers independently estimate the prices and
                         quantities of all inputs used in each road, and then comparing these estimates to
                         villages’ official expenditure reports. Key findings include:
                          •	 Announcing the increased likelihood of a government audit decreased theft
                              of materials by 8 percent.
                          •	 Audits are cost effective, generating enough savings to cover the extra expense.
 Project(s):              •	 Increasing community monitoring reduced wage theft, but those savings were
 KDP                          offset by an increase in materials theft.
 Study Location(s):       •	 Community monitoring may work only for private goods, not public goods.
 Nationwide Sample        •	 Submitting written comments may substitute for attendance at meetings.

 Methodology:            While this paper used measurements of actual corruption, most researchers
 Quantitative            are forced to use data on people’s perceptions of corruption rather than direct
                         measures. Future work can compare perceptions with actual corruption, to explore
 Language(s):            the relationship between perceived corruption and reality.
 English
                         http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=25
 Keywords:
 Corruption, audits,     http://www.nber.org/papers/w11753
 community monitoring,
 social accountability




56
                                                                       2003                         51
INDONESIA KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM: BUILDING A MONITORING AND
EVALUATION SYSTEM FOR A LARGE-SCALE
COMMUNITY-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
Susan Wong
Published by: EASES World Bank
This paper describes the monitoring and evaluation system developed for KDP.
It includes a detailed description of its components, how they were constructed
and operationalized, and the challenges encountered while incorporating these
multi- faceted activities into a large CDD program.

Key components:
                                                                                  Project(s):
 •	 Field monitoring and reporting by government officials and consultants.
                                                                                  KDP
 •	 Community participatory monitoring, by BPD, CSOs, and community groups.
 •	 Case studies.                                                                 Language(s):
 •	 Documentation of lessons learned.                                             English
 •	 NMC financial supervision and training unit.
 •	 Procedures for handling complaints and grievances.                            Keywords:
 •	 NGO province-level monitoring.                                                Monitoring and evaluation,
 •	 Independent monitoring by journalists.                                        CSOs
 •	 Impact evaluation studies.
 •	 Loan evaluations.
 •	 Audits and financial reviews.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=19

http://bit.ly/1zCg9et




                                                                                                               57
 52                            2003

                               ENHANCING WOMEN’S PARTICIPATION:
                               LEARNING FROM FIELD EXPERIENCE
                               KDP
                               Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                               This book was developed as a practical resource for KDP facilitators, following
                               a three-day workshop held in Bogor on March 21-23, 2002. It includes lessons
                               learned from field experience, and a section on monitoring and evaluation. Key
                               points include:
                                 •	 Invitations must explicitly include wives as well as husbands.
                                 •	 Setting targets helps raise attendance.
                                 •	 Scheduling , loc ation, leng th, and regular it y of meeting s all impac t
                                    women’s attendance.
                                 •	 Female facilitators require extra training and support.
 Project(s):                     •	 Women need help in defending their proposals in the open process.
 KDP                             •	 Data on key participation indicators should be collected in meetings, by looking
                                    at proposals, and by monitoring of the planning and execution of KDP projects.
 Methodology:
 Qualitative                   The book closes with a list of “experts’ questions,” derived from experiences
                               bringing women into CDD in other countries.
 Language(s):
 English, Bahasa Indonesia     http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=5367

 Keywords:                     http://bit.ly/1J2F4jV
 Gender, women,
                               Bahasa Indonesia version:
 facilitators, participation
                               Meningkatkan Partisipasi Aktif Perempuan: Belajar dari Pengalaman

                               http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=27




58
                                                                             2002                            53
DO WOMEN MAKE ANY DIFFERENCE? KDP1
GENDER DATA ANALYSIS: INTERIM REPORT
Susan Wong
Published by: World Bank
This paper looks at the impact of gender on KDP Years 1, 2 and 3 (1998 to 2001),
including the types of activities requested by women’s groups, and whether proposals
from women’s groups do better or worse than those from other beneficiary groups.
The paper also explores the effects of KDP’s affirmative action initiatives to improve
women’s representation. Has representation led to greater empowerment and
in turn greater benefits for women? What influence, if any, have women’s groups
and female facilitators had on the program?
  •	 Women’s groups overwhelmingly propose economic activities (74 percent)
     over infrastructure (26 percent). But economic programs, which have smaller
     budgets and impacts than big-ticket items, get trimmed off as villages hone         Project(s):
     their proposals.                                                                    KDP
  •	 Having female facilitators did not make much difference in the number, type,
                                                                                         Methodology:
     or total proportion of women’s proposals.
                                                                                         Mixed
  •	 There was no major difference in selection rates between proposals submitted
     by men or women.                                                                    Language(s):
  •	 The gender of the facilitator had no impact on the likelihood of women’s            English
     proposals being selected.
  •	 KDP recruiters claim there are several reasons why they have difficulties in        Keywords:
     finding women to be sub-district facilitators ( fasilitator kecamatan, or FK):      Gender, women,
     o	 women are reluctant to travel to villages or isolated areas alone;               facilitators, participation,
     o	 women lack confidence and are less likely to apply for jobs; and                 project selection
     o	 women have more responsibilities at home that prevent them from traveling.
  •	 KDP recruiters often assume that these issues make women “less reliable”
     facilitators than men. In practice, however, turnover rates were higher for
     men than women, and there was no evidence that women are “less reliable”
     than men.
  •	 Female facilitators did not necessarily advocate more strongly for women’s
     rights than their male counterparts.

KDP1 demonstrates that even bold affirmative action does not easily or rapidly
empower women. While this cannot be seen in the data, women consistently
report feeling more comfortable expressing themselves in front of a female
facilitator. AS such, the importance of female leaders and role models should
not be underestimated.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=3110




                                                                                                                        59
 54                       2002

                          KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (KDP)
                          IN CONFLICT AREAS
                          Community Development Agency Ministry of Home Affairs
                          and National Management Consultant
                          Published by: Ministry of Home Affairs, Jakarta
                          This paper argues that KDP is a large-scale tool allowing the Government to work
                          effectively in parts of the country racked by social conflict, such as Aceh, Papua,
                          Central Kalimantan, Poso in Central Sulawesi, North Maluku, and Maluku. Some
                          key points include:
                           •	 KDP provides a useful framework for negotiations and consensus building.
                           •	 KDP delivers much-needed technical and f inancial assistance to meet
                              community needs.
                           •	 Once disputes do arise, KDP has found that involving villagers and communities
                              at the outset is the best way to resolve issues.
 Project(s):
                          The report recommends guaranteeing the security and safety of communities and
 KDP
                          KDP consultants, emphasizing the fundamental principles of community participation
 Study Location(s):       and transparency, and maintaining a scrupulously apolitical stance. Mechanisms
 Aceh, Maluku, North      for open discussion and consensus-building must be reinforced so that grievances
 Maluku, Papua, Central   can be discussed and resolved before they erupt into violence. Finally, site visits by
 Kalimantan, Central      ministers and other government officials help to demonstrate the Government’s
 Sulawesi                 support and commitment to development and poverty alleviation in those areas.

 Methodology:             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=1969
 Mixed

 Language(s):
 English

 Keywords:
 Conflict resolution




60
                                                                             2002                           55
VILLAGE CORRUPTION IN INDONESIA:
FIGHTING CORRUPTION IN THE WORLD
BANK’S KECAMATAN DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM
Andrea Woodhouse
Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
This paper examines where, why, and how corruption occurs in KDP: how the
actors perceive their interests, what motivates them, what kinds of constraints
they face, and what kinds of steps they take to resolve their problems. The paper
argues that corruption is primarily a problem of incentives, and can be fought
effectively only by changing the costs and benefits attached to corrupt behavior.
It also claims that the local context and social norms are key to understanding how
these incentives can be changed in order to reduce corruption. Key findings include:
  •	 Corruption in Indonesian villages is encouraged by:                                 Project(s):
     o	 Bureaucracy and red tape, which create opportunities for rent-seeking.           KDP
     o	 A history of impunity for corruptors and oppression of whistleblowers.
                                                                                         Methodology:
     o	 The power of village elites, combined with a weak and corrupt judicial system,
                                                                                         Qualitative
         impeding poor people’s access to justice and control over decision-making.
     o	 The New Order government’s conscious strategy of depoliticizing villages.        Language(s):
     o	 The use of development funds for patronage and control.                          English
  •	 Complexit y: all par ties may have dir t y hands, including those that are
     relatively powerless.                                                               Keywords:
  •	 KDP’s anti-corruption strategy begins by putting information in the hands           Corruption, facilitators,
     of participants.                                                                    access to justice,
  •	 Transparency, community participation, and the provision of independent             information flows
     channels for resolving complaints help curtail corruption in KDP.
  •	 Facilitators provide information independent of local governments, and have
     more protection from threats and intimidation than ordinary villagers.
  •	 It is important to identify clean leaders and to try to involve them in the anti-
     corruption cause.

The paper recommends changing the underlying system of incentives for KDP
actors, including lowering the potential costs of whistle-blowing. Monopolies should
be limited, the discretion of various actors should be clarified, and accountability
ramped up for the project as a whole. KDP staff should receive better training,
especially in information-sharing and transparency. Future strategies should take
into account the local contexts.

http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=220




                                                                                                                     61
 56                          2001

                             REVIEW OF THE KDP MICROCREDIT
                             APPROACH
                             Detlev Holloh
                             Published by: World Bank Group, Washington DC
                             This report reviewed KDP’s microcredit system to provide recommendations for
                             the KDP 2, which ran between January 2002 and June 2006. The review focuses on
                             the supply side of KDP’s microcredit system, supposing that if credit management
                             and services are adequate then loans will be unlikely to achieve their expected
                             impact. The report finds that:
                              •	 Participatory planning is incompatible with credit and revolving loan fund
                                 management.
                              •	 Revolving loan funds at the village level are probably not viable: “the village
                                 is not the place of social integration and control.”
                              •	 Village competition and the involvement of council and forums have not improved
 Project(s):                     performance or outreach.
 KDP                          •	 Systemic reasons for poor performance:
                                 o	 Poor financial management
 Study Location(s):              o	 Perception of credit as grants
 Yogyakarta, Lampung, West       o	 Corruption
 Java                            o	 Lack of expertise at all levels.
                              •	 A few Unit Pengelola Kegiatan (UPK) perform well, some have potential but
 Methodology:
                                 need help, most seem not to be viable—but KDP does not have the data to
 Mixed
                                 say which are which.
 Language(s):                 •	 Promoting linkages to Badan Perkreditan Rakyat (BPR) is unrealistic outside
 English                         Java, where rural BPRs are scarce. Even in Bali and Java, where BPRs are more
                                 common, they do not have village outreach.
 Keywords:
 Livelihoods, microcredit,   The report concludes that KDP should change its approach or stop providing
 UPK, financial management   microcredit. If the program does continue, it needs a planning approach oriented
                             to objectives and outputs. For microcredit to be viable, lending must be linked to
                             savings, which the current program does not provide. Credit must be managed by
                             well-trained staff following established principles, and kept fully separate from
                             KDP’s grant-making activities.

                             http://psflibrary.org/collection/detail.php?id=2071




62
INDEX

Titles                                                             Indonesia: Urban Poverty and Program Review	            16
                                                                   Infrastructure Census: Report on Infrastructure Supply
2006 Village Survey in Aceh: An Assessment of Village
                                                                        Readiness in Indonesia – Achievements and Remaining
      Infrastructure and Social Conditions	    44
                                                                        Gaps	10
An Analysis of Efforts to Replicate the Kecamatan Development
                                                                   Integrating Community-Driven Development Principles into
      Project	54
                                                                        Policy: From PNPM Mandiri to the Village Law	 6
Community-Based Reintegration in Aceh: Assessing the
                                                                   KDP2 Matching Grant Study Local Government	             53
      Impacts of BRA-KDP	 38
                                                                   Kecamatan Development Program (KDP) in Conflict Areas	
Consolidated Assessment of UPK Revolving Loan Funds in
                                                                        60
      Indonesia	20
                                                                   Kecamatan Development Program Qualitative Impact
Crises and Contradictions: Understanding the Origins of a
                                                                        Evaluation	46
      Community Development Project in Indonesia*	 48
                                                                   Lessons Learned from SPADA Planning and Service Delivery	
Delivering Assistance to Conflict-Affected Communities:
                                                                        31
      The BRA-KDP Program in Aceh	 39
                                                                   Local Conflict and Community Development in Indonesia:
Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a
                                                                        Assessing the Impact of the Kecamatan Development
      Field Experiment in Indonesia (NBER Working Paper No.
                                                                        Program	50
      14123)	41
                                                                   Marginalized Groups in PNPM Rural	36
Do Women Make Any Difference? KDP1 Gender Data Analysis:
                                                                   Micro Credit Strategy Formulation Mission for the National
      Interim Report	        59
                                                                        Community Empowerment Program or Program
Economic Impact Analysis of Kecamatan Development
                                                                        Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM)	           43
      Program Infrastructure Projects	         51
                                                                   Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
Enhancing Women’s Participation: Learning from Field
                                                                        Indonesia (NBER Working Paper No. 11753)	          56
      Experience	58
                                                                   Operation and Maintenance Overview for Program
Evaluation of PNPM RESPEK: Village Infrastructure and
                                                                        Pengembangan Kecamatan (PPK) and Program
      Institutional Capacity	30
                                                                        Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat (PNPM): To Assess
Evaluation of the Village Financial Assistance Program
                                                                        the Operation and Maintenance of PPK and PNPM
      (Bantuan Keuangan Peumakmu Gampong, or BKPG) in
                                                                        Implemented Micro-Infrastructure Projects in Indonesia
      Aceh Province	         4
                                                                        between 1999 and 2007	           40
Expanding and Diversifying Indonesia’s Program for
                                                                   Opportunities and Approaches for Better Nutrition Outcomes
      Community Empowerment, 2007-2012	 8
                                                                        through PNPM Generasi	           17
Final Report: Evaluation of Infrastructure Quality KDP Cycle IV	
                                                                   P2SPP/PNPM Integration Lessons Learned Study in Six
      52
                                                                        Districts	33
Gender Inclusion Strategies in PNPM	   9
                                                                   PNPM Gender Study 2012: Increasing the Quality of Women’s
Gender in Community Driven Development Projects:
                                                                        Participation	25
      Implications for PNPM Strategy	          45
                                                                   PNPM Mandiri Rural Infrastructure Technical Evaluation
Governance Review of PNPM Rural: Community Level Analysis	
                                                                        Report 2012 – Final Report: Findings and
      21
                                                                        Recommendations	24
Impact Evaluation of the Second Phase of the Kecamatan
                                                                   PNPM Peduli – One Year On: Independent Review of Lessons
      Development Program in Indonesia	        42
                                                                        Learned	26
Improving Management of PNPM	 22
                                                                   PNPM Rural Impact Evaluation	         27
Indonesia: Evaluation of the Urban Community Driven
                                                                   Process Evaluation of the Program Nasional Pemberdayaan
      Development Program	             15
                                                                        Masyarakat (PNPM)-Urban	         34
Indonesia Kecamatan Development Program: Building a
                                                                   Qualitative Study of the Proliferation and Integration of
      Monitoring and Evaluation System for a Large-Scale
                                                                        Community Empowerment Programs	 12
      Community-Driven Development Program	             57
                                                                   Rapid Appraisal of PNPM Neighborhood Development (and
Indonesian Village Health Institutions: A Diagnostic	   13
                                                                        Poverty Alleviation Partnership Grant Mechanism)	
Indonesia’s Kecamatan Development Program: A Large-Scale
                                                                        28
      Use of Community Development to Reduce Poverty	
                                                                   Results Evaluation: Sustainable Natural Resource
      55
                                                                        Management through PNPM Green Investments – A Rural
Indonesia’s PNPM Generasi Program: Final Impact Evaluation
                                                                        Livelihood Analysis	 18
      Report	35
                                                                   Review of the KDP Microcredit Approach	        62
Indonesia Urban Poverty Analysis and Program Review	
      23



64
Should Aid Reward Performance?: Evidence from a Field           Meuthia Ganie-Rochman 26
      Experiment on Health and Education in Indonesia (NBER     Micro-Credit Ratings International Ltd 20
      Working Paper No. 17892)	       19                        Moghaddam 9
Studi Kelompok Masyarakat PNPM	 14                              Monterio, Carolina 54
Studi Pembelajaran dan Pemanfaatan Pro-poor Planning,           Morel, Adrian 39
      Budgetting dan Monitoring (P3BM) Kajian Singkat di        Muhammad Syukri 12, 29
      Sembilan Kabupaten	 32                                    National Management Consultant 60
The Employment and Poverty Impact of PNPM	              47      National Management Consultants 52
The Impact of PNPM Rural: East Java – West Sumatra –            Neate, Neil 24
      Southeast Sulawesi	 29                                    Nelti Anggraini 17, 25
The Local Level Institutions Study 3: Overview Report	 11       Nurlily Basri 54
Village Capacity in Maintaining Infrastructure: Evidence from   Olken, Benjamin A. 19, 35, 41, 56
      Rural Indonesia	       37                                 Onishi, Junko 19, 35
Village Corruption in Indonesia: Fighting Corruption in the     Paler, Laura 38
      World Bank’s Kecamatan Development Program	 61            Papanek, Gustav F. 47
                                                                Perez-Arce, Francisco 23
                                                                PNPM Support Facility 4, 10, 15, 16, 22
Authorship                                                      Rabinovich, Lila 23
Adam Satu 46                                                    RAND Labor and Population 34
Adams, Paul 53                                                  Ratih Dewayanti 14
AKATIGA 36                                                      Rianingsih Djohani 33
Akhmadi 12, 29                                                  Rima Irmayani 26
Ancilla Y. S. Irwan 25                                          Scanlon, Megan McGlynn 25
Arya Gaduh 37                                                   Schuler, Nina 28
Asep Kurniawan 12                                               Siti Barokah 54
Azarbaijani, Sippi 9                                            Siti Ruhanawati 17
Barron, Patrick 38, 50                                          Srinivasan, Sinduja 23
Beattie, Kevin 54                                               Steffen Johnsen 18
Burger, Nicholas 23                                             Suhirman 32, 33
Community Development Agency Ministry of Home Affairs           Sulton Mawardi 29
     60                                                         Tatag Wiranto 55
Dewi Ratna Sjari Manaf 30                                       The PATTIRO Institute 31
Diprose, Rachel 50                                              Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan Kemiskinan 6
Donny Setiawan 32                                               Torrens, Anthony 51
Dwiyani, Risye 28                                               Vivianti Rambe 18
Early Dewi Nuriana 26                                           Voss, John 27, 42
Edwar Fitri 26                                                  Watanabe, Makiko 39
Friedman, Jonathan 8                                            Weinstein, Jeremy 38
Glick, Peter 23                                                 Wetterberg, Anna 11
Grayman, Jesse Hession 17                                       Wong, Susan 19, 35, 55, 57, 59
Guggenheim, Scott 48, 55                                        Woodhouse, Andrea 21, 61
Harmein Rahman 30                                               Woolcock, Michael 49, 50
Hastuti 12                                                      World Bank 4
Holden, Donna Leigh 26                                          World Bank Group 45
Holloh, Detlev 62                                               Wrobel, Robert 39
Hoppe, Michael 46                                               Yayasan MICRA 43
Humphreys, Macartan 38                                          Yogana Prasta 55
Independent Research & Advisory Indonesia (IRAI) 22             Yoong, Joanne 23
Indriana Nugraheni 14                                           Yulia Indrawati Sari 30
Jellema, Jon R. 11                                              Yusuf, Tasnim 25
Kartawijaya 12
KDP 44, 58
                                                                Keywords
Kecamatan Development Program Secretariat 52
Kulongoski, Ted E. 40                                           access 10
Leni Dharmawan 11, 14                                           access to justice 61
McLaughlin, Karrie 13, 46                                       accountability 6, 21, 29



                                                                                                                  65
advocacy 13                                                       Monitoring and evaluation 57
affirmative action 9                                              natural resource management 18
APBN 31                                                           New Order 48
auditing 34                                                       NGOs 11, 12, 13
audits 56                                                         online budgeting 22
BPD 14                                                            oversight 21
budgeting 19, 32                                                  participation 4, 9, 25, 29, 30, 39, 54, 58, 59
collective action 11, 46                                          participatory planning 6
community monitoring 30, 56                                       planning 12, 32, 37
competition 46, 54                                                Planning 31, 33
conflict 38, 39, 44, 55                                           plebiscites 4, 41
conflict resolution 50, 60                                        PMD 22
consumption 42                                                    Posyandu 13, 17
corruption 20, 21, 22, 31, 54, 56, 61                             poverty 27, 29, 36, 42, 47
CSOs 8, 11, 12, 26, 57                                            poverty mapping 32
data 13                                                           project selection 41, 59
databases 32                                                      pro-poor 32
decentralization 48, 55                                           Puskesmas 13
delays 22                                                         quantitative 41
DPRD 31, 33                                                       randomized controlled experiment (RCT) 19
education 10, 19, 35                                              reintegration 38
elite capture 17, 30, 36, 46                                      reporting 12
employment 47                                                     representation 6, 15, 41, 46
empowerment 36                                                    Revolving Loan Fund 20
exclusion 36                                                      Revolving Loan Funds 43
ex-combatants 39                                                  rural infrastructure 24, 27, 40, 44, 51, 52
facilitators 12, 14, 15, 18, 22, 30, 33, 36, 45, 50, 58, 59, 61   satisfaction 41
female-headed households 4                                        scaling up 8, 55
financial management 6, 20, 55, 62                                services 31
frontline services 10, 12, 17                                     setrawan 33
gender 4, 25, 45, 46, 54, 58, 59                                  SKPD 33
governance 11, 14, 21, 27, 46, 55                                 social accountability 56
health 10, 19, 35                                                 social capital 48
health services 17                                                social cohesion 38
historical context 48                                             socialization 4
humanresources 22                                                 social protection 16
impact 29, 47                                                     solidarity 9
incentives 19, 35                                                 Southeast Asian monetary crisis 48
inclusion 25, 54                                                  spatial planning 28
information 13                                                    spillover 8, 14, 46
information flows 21, 61                                          sustainability 18, 20
infrastructure 10                                                 targeting 15, 16, 23, 32, 34, 39
internally displaced people (IDPs) 44                             technical facilitators 24, 51
land issues 24                                                    traditional birthing assistants 17
livelihoods 18, 26, 39, 62                                        transparency 6, 29, 52
local capacity 11                                                 unemployment 42
local government 52, 53                                           UPK 20, 62
mainstreaming 9                                                   urban infrastructure 28
maintenance 24, 37, 40, 51, 52, 54                                urban planning 16
malnutrition 17                                                   urban poverty 15, 16, 23, 28, 34
management 8                                                      utilization 30
marginalized groups 26, 27, 36, 45, 54                            village heads 11
microcredit 43, 47, 62                                            village infrastructure 30, 37
midwives 13, 17                                                   village institutions 11, 14, 46
Millennium Development Goals (MDG) 32                             Village Law of 1979 48
minimum service standards 32                                      Village Law of 2014 6
MOHA 22                                                           voting 41


66
women 9, 25, 45, 46, 54, 58, 59                                    Jamkesmas 16, 23
                                                                   KDP 8, 37, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54,
                                                                        55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62
Locations                                                          Kecamatan Development Program. See KDP
Aceh 4, 5, 24, 31, 38, 39, 44, 54, 60, 64, 69                      NUSSP 45
Bangka-Belitung 14                                                 P3BM 32
Banten 22                                                          PEKKA 4
Bengkulu 18                                                        PNPM Generasi 8, 13, 17, 19, 24, 35
Central Java 11, 12, 14, 16, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 28, 32, 33, 34,   PNPM Green 18, 24
     37, 43, 46                                                    PNPM Healthy and Smart Generation. See PNPM Generasi
Central Kalimantan 60                                              PNPM Integration 33
Central Sulawesi 14, 31, 40, 60                                    PNPM Peduli 8, 26
DKI Jakarta 26                                                     PNPM RESPEK 8, 30
East Java 16, 17, 21, 23, 29, 34, 41, 43, 50, 51, 54, 64           PNPM Rural 6, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 29,
East Nusa Tenggara 9, 10, 11, 13, 17, 20, 24, 25, 31, 32, 33,           36, 37, 40, 45, 47, 48
     35, 37, 40, 43, 50, 51, 54                                    PNPM Urban 15, 16, 23, 28, 34, 45, 47
Gorontalo 13, 40                                                   Raskin 16, 23
Jambi 11, 33                                                       Revolving Loan Funds 20
Lampung 24, 37, 54, 62                                             SPADA 24, 31
Maluku 10, 24, 40, 60                                              UPP 43
North Maluku 10, 24, 31, 40, 60                                    World Bank 16, 51
North Sulawesi 18, 24, 40, 46                                      WSLIC-2 45
North Sumatra 16, 18, 23, 34, 41, 51, 54
Papua 8, 10, 24, 30, 36, 40, 60
Riau 40
Southeast Sulawesi 28, 29, 32, 40, 41, 64
South East Sulawesi 18
South Kalimantan 14, 25, 28, 33, 46, 54
South Sulawesi 9, 12, 16, 18, 21, 23, 26, 28, 34, 36, 37, 40,
     43, 51
South Sumatra 46
West Java 13, 16, 17, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 33, 34, 35, 36, 62
West Kalimantan 24, 26, 31, 36, 37
West Nusa Tenggara 12, 13, 14, 26, 32, 36
West Papua 10, 30, 40
West Sulawesi 24, 40
West Sumatera 24
West Sumatra 9, 20, 29, 36, 54, 64
Yogyakarta 16, 20, 23, 26, 33, 34, 62


Projects
ACCESS 13, 45
AIPMNH 13
Australian Community Development and Civil Society
     Strengthening Scheme. See Projects: ACCESS
Australian-Indonesian Partnership on Maternal and Neo-
     natal Health. See Projects: AIPMNH
Bantuan Keuangan Peumakmu Gampong. See Projects:
     BKPG
Bantuan Langsung Tunai. See Projects: BLT
Beras Miskin. See Projects: Raskin
BKPG 24
BLT 16, 23
BRA-KDP 38, 39
Community-Based Reintegration Assistance for Conflict
     Victims program. See BRA-KDP


                                                                                                                                67
GLOSSARY

 ACCESS                 Australian Community Development and Civil Society Strengthening Scheme
 Adat                   Customary law
 ADD                    Anggaran Dana Desa or village allocation fund
 AIPMNH                 Australian-Indonesian Partnership on Maternal and Neo-natal Health
 APBD                   Anggaran Pengeluaran dan Belanja Daerah or district budgets
 ARLS                   Aceh Reintegration Livelihood Surveys
 BAPPEDA                Badan Perencanaan Pembangunan Daerah or District Development Planning
 BAPPENAS               Badan Perencanaan Pembangunan Nasional or National Development Planning Ministry
 BKAD                   Badan Kerjasama Antar Desa or Intervillage Cooperation Boards
 BKM                    Badan Keswadayaan Masyarakat or Community Self-Help Groups or Community Trust
 BKPG                   PNPM Mandiri Bantuan Keuangan Pemakmue Gampong
 BLT                    Bantuan Langsung Tunai or unconditional cash transfers
 BPD                    Badan Permusyawaratan Desa or Village Consultative Body
 BPR                    Badan Perkreditan Rakyat
 BP-UPK                 Badan Pengawas-Unit Pengelolaan Keuangan or UPK Monitoring Body
 BRA-KDP                Community-Based Reintegration Assistance for Conflict Victims program
 BUMDES                 Badan Usaha Milik Desa
 CDD                    Community Driven Development
 CSOs                   Civil Society Organizations
 DPRD                   Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah or District Assemblies
 Dusun                  Hamlet
 EIRR                   Economic Internal Rate of Return
 FK                     Fasilitator Kabupaten/Kecamatan/Kelurahan
 IDP                    Internally displaced people
 IFLS                   Indonesian Family Life Survey
 Jamkesmas              Jaminan Kesehatan Masyarakat or community health insurance
 KDP                    K ecamatan Development Program or Program Pengembangan Kecamatan (PPK)
 Kelurahan              Urban district
 Kepala desa            Head of village
 LKM                    Lembaga Keswadayaan Masyarakat or Community Self-Help Groups
 LLI 1/2/3              Local Level Institution 1/2/3
 MAD                    Musyawarah Antar Desa or Intervillage Discussion Forum
 M-CRIL                 Micro-Credit Ratings International Ltd
 MFI                    Microfinance institutions
 MHP – ROI              Micro-Hydropower – Return on Investment
 MIS                    Management Information System
 MOHA                   Ministry of Home Affairs
 Musrenbangdes          Musyawarah perencanaan pembangunan desa or village planning meetings
 ND                     Neighborhood Development
 NGOs                   Non-Governmental Organizations
 NMC                    National Management Consultants
 P2SPP/PNPM Integrasi   Program Pembangunan Sistem Perencanaan Partisipatif or the Participatory System Development
                        Program



68
P3BM            Pro-Poor Planning, Budgeting and Monitoring
PAR             Portfolio at risk
PAUD            Pendidikan Anak Usia Dini or early years education
PEKKA           Pemberdayaan Perempuan Kepala Keluarga or Women Headed Household Empowerment
PKK             Pembinaan Kesejahteraan Keluarga
PNPM Mandiri    Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Mandiri or National Community Empowerment
                Program
PNPM-Generasi   PNPM Mandiri Generasi Sehat dan Cerdas
PNPM-RESPEK     PNPM Mandiri Rencana Strategis Pembangunan Kampung
PNPM-Rural      PNPM Mandiri Rural
PNPM-Urban      PNPM Mandiri Urban
PODES           Potensi Desa
Posyandu        Pos Pelayanan Terpadu or village health post
PP              Peraturan Pemerintah
PPK             Program Pengembangan Kecamatan
PSF             PNPM Support Facility
Puskesmas       Pusat Kesehatan Masyarakat or community health center
Raskin          Beras Miskin or Rice for the Poor
RKP             Rencana Kerja Pemerintah
RLF             Revolving Loan Funds or pinjaman dana bergulir
RW              Rukun Warga or neighbourhood leaders
Setrawan        Public servants charged with promoting community empowerment
SKPD            Satuan Kerja Perangkat Daerah or local government technical agencies
SMP             Sekolah Menengah Pertama or junior high school
SPADA           Support for Poor and Disadvantaged Areas Project  or PNPM Mandiri Daerah Tertinggal dan
                Khusus
SSN             Social Safety Net or Jaringan Pengamanan Sosial ( JPS)
SUSENAS         Survei Sosial-Ekonomi Nasional or National Socio-economic Survey
TK              Taman Kanak-kanak or kindergarten
TPK             Tim Pengelola Kegiatan or Project Management Team
TNP2K           Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan Kemiskinan
UPK             Unit Pelaksana Kegiatan
UPK             Unit Pengelolaan Keuangan or Financial Management Unit
UPP             Urban Poverty Program
UU Desa         Undang-Undang tentang Desa or Village Law
WSLIC-2         Water Supply & Sanitation for Low Income Communities Phase 2 atau Program Air Bersih dan
                Sanitasi untuk Masyarakat Miskin Fase 2




                                                                                                      69
