                                                                              101921


Remarks by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim
Announcing $2 Billion for Myanmar
                                        January 26, 2014




World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
North Dagon Township Hospital, Yangon Myanmar

As Prepared for Delivery


Thank you very much for joining us today.

First I’d like to thank the people of Myanmar for the warm welcome I’ve received today on
my arrival.


I am a doctor by professional training, so I was particularly pleased to have the opportunity
to visit the township hospital in Hlaing Thar Yar with Minister of Health, Dr. Pe Thet Khin,
and to learn more about Myanmar’s challenges on its path to universal health coverage.


I believe that everyone should have access to affordable, quality health services.


With less than two years to go until the Millennium Development Goals deadline, we need
to focus on expanding access to vital services, especially for poor women and children.


No one should be forced into poverty, or be forced to remain in poverty, in order to pay for
the health care they need.


Today, I’m happy to announce that the World Bank Group plans to invest US$2 billion
dollars to support key development priorities in Myanmar, including dramatically improving
access to health care and energy for all.
This includes funding of around US$200 million from the International Development
Association, the Bank’s fund for the poorest, to help Myanmar make progress towards
MDGs 4, 5, and 6, on child mortality, maternal health, and diseases such as HIV/AIDS and
malaria.


It also includes US$1 billion in financial support to expand electricity generation,
transmission and distribution, to help everyone in the country gain access to electricity by
2030 which will have broad development benefits, for health, education, and expand
opportunities for business in urban as well as rural areas.


The energy investment will also support development of a National Electrification Plan,
enhance institutional capacity, and promote regulatory reforms that are needed to promote
private sector participation, which is critical to meet Myanmar’s vast development needs.


I am greatly encouraged by the government’s commitment to reforms.


I also know that Myanmar and the World Bank Group share a common goal – to end
poverty and build shared prosperity.


I look forward during my visit to see how the international community is coming together to
help Myanmar, and explore how the World Bank Group can help to make transformative
changes to improve the lives of all the people of Myanmar.
