                                                                                101936


Speech by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim:
Preparing for Peace and
Prosperity: Steps Ahead for the
Arab World
June 3, 2014

World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Ministry of Education
Beirut, Lebanon

As Prepared for Delivery


Your excellency, members of Parliament, faculty, students, friends,

I would like to thank you for your gracious invitation and for bringing me together with the
future, and by that I mean the aspiring students from different universities in the audience. It
is you who are called upon today to take your country forward.

I’m here with what I hope will be a message of measured hope and optimism, to share a
vision for a path forward, to a just and sustainable future in the Middle East and North
Africa.

I know that it is extraordinarily difficult to feel optimism in the shadow of the catastrophe
unfolding in Syria. The scale is larger than anything you may have seen in your lives so far.
It is larger than anything most of us have witnessed. Millions are refugees in their own land.
Millions have sought refuge in neighboring countries: Turkey, Jordan, Iraq, Egypt, and most
of all Lebanon.

But let me take you back to 70 years ago, to 1944, while the guns were still firing during
World War II.
It was difficult to envision peace at that moment – Europe was experiencing a scale of
human tragedy that dimmed the hopes of Europeans the same age as you. But then, in the
small town of Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in the United States, a group of allies met for
22 days and began to plan for the day when peace would come. They created the
International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, which today is part of the World Bank Group. These institutions would help
finance the reconstruction of Europe and the rehabilitation of its economies.

The World Bank’s articles of agreement, written then, remain relevant today, especially to
this audience. Article number one says that the purpose of the World Bank is, and I quote:
“to assist in the reconstruction and development of territories of members by facilitating the
investment of capital for productive purposes, including the restoration of economies
destroyed or disrupted by war, the reconversion of productive facilities to peacetime needs
and the encouragement of the development of productive facilities and resources in less
developed countries.? End quote.

It’s important for us to remember that Europe’s economic output in 1951 was 35 percent
higher than before the war.

We know that it’s possible to build back better, even after the most devastating conflicts.

A little more than a half-century ago, Korea, my birthplace, was emerging from a civil war
and outsiders were calling it a basket case. But today, Korea is one of the great success
stories in the world.

Today can be the 1944 moment for Syria and for the entire Arab world.

Today must be the day that the international community, led by Arab leaders, begins
preparing for peace and economic opportunities in Syria and lays the groundwork for a
more prosperous future for all people in this region.

The Middle East and North Africa Region is at a crossroads. In one future scenario, the
political crises, violent conflict and deteriorating economic conditions of the last three years
could deepen and possibly spread to neighboring countries.

But there’s another scenario -- the region could build on the political opening of the Arab
transitions, address long-standing problems of exclusion, mobilize an international effort to
end the searing conflicts in Libya, Iraq and Syria, and realize its potential for sustained
growth. The World Bank’s strategy in this region is squarely aimed at that second scenario
– a way forward that is supported by the principles of co-existence, tolerance, compromise,
transparency, good governance, and inclusive economic growth.

No one knows how or when this war will end – and sadly there are no signs of it ending
anytime soon. But this is exactly the right time for us to prepare for the peace that surely will
come. The international community, including the World Bank Group, the United Nations,
and key donors, must put together a plan that will help not only Syria rebuild, but also will
help Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq recover from the massive spillover effects of the
war.

There will be better days ahead for Syria, for Lebanon, and for the entire region. And while
the situation remains dire across much of the region, there are at least some signs of
hope.

Last January, the world watched the Middle East with anticipation while the members of the
Tunisian constituent assembly voted in the new constitution that adopted the principles of
pluralism and brought to successful fruition the first phase of the democratic transition.

In Yemen, the National Dialogue brought together the full range of political parties, civil
society, women and young people. For the first time women had significant representation,
at over 30 percent. None of this has been easy for Yemen, but their commitment to dialogue
over conflict is an inspiration for us all.

The region must take advantage of all its resources to build just and sustainable societies.
One of its most valuable resources is the region’s 100 million young people.

Look, I know there are skeptics among you. The turbulence and uncertainty of the last
three years and the persistently high unemployment rates, especially for women and young
people, has generated pessimism about the region’s prospects.

Here in Lebanon, there’s been a frustrating lack of progress on energy and electricity
reforms. At a regional youth debate we organized in Tunis earlier this year and a related
event in Washington at our annual Spring Meetings, we heard disappointment in the
changes that have been delivered so far. In an online poll before the Tunis debate, 71
percent felt that young people were worse off now than before the Arab Spring. Sami
Boubakri, a young man from Tunisia, told us – and I quote - “there is more freedom, but the
same misery.? Shatha al-Harazi, a young Yemeni activist who was a member of the
National Dialogue, questioned the commitment to reform. She said that Yemen already had
a constitution but that it was kept locked in a closet – its laws ignored.

Indeed, enormous challenges exist. So what will it take to build on the optimism generated
by the Arab Spring and make real progress?

First, it will take improving the quality of education. While great strides have been made in
access to education, the quality of teaching has not kept up and far too many students
graduate without the skills needed by the labor market. This is not a problem of investment.
The average public investment in education across the region is above 5 percent of GDP.
It is a problem of governance and accountability. Schools and universities, like all
institutions, must respond to citizens and be held accountable for their educational
outcomes. As a lifelong educator, I am making a personal commitment to you today to help
build educational institutions in the region and improve the quality of education.

Second, it will take the rebuilding of trust between governments and citizens. Development
is a partnership that requires a commitment to transparency on the part of governments,
and well informed citizens to hold governments accountable.


Morocco’s new constitution has specific provisions that guarantee the right to information.
The government has begun acting on this right by publishing a citizen’s budget, making
information on public finances available in an accessible format.

In Tunisia, the civil society group, al Bawsala, live-tweeted the activities of the constituent
assembly, which kept citizens informed about the drafting of the new constitution. It is our
sincere hope that their constitution will never end up in a closet.


One of the ways to rebuild trust is through reforms designed to end the crony capitalism that
has plagued this region and many regions of the world. In Tunisia, for instance, our
analysis found that 20 percent of the countries profits were seized by the Ben-Ali family.
The answer for countries in the region is to now level the playing field, erase the economic
legacy of the past, and open competition that spurs inclusive growth.

Third, it will take helping women overcome the multiple legal and cultural constraints that
have kept their labor force participation in the region at 29 percent -- the lowest in the world.
And linked to these efforts to improve education, build trust with citizens, and integrate more
women into the workforce, we must also have an economic development plan that will link
the capitals and the ports and build a regional economic powerhouse.

This vision may seem like a mirage in the desert, but in fact it is a real possibility waiting for
people with conviction to make it happen.

This region is no different from any other. Peace, stability, growth and opportunities come
when people and countries realize that they have a common interest in living, developing
and thriving together, irrespective of national, ethnic or sectarian divisions.

In this region, integration is the key. And we, at the World Bank Group, have started by
fostering integration within countries, beginning with a transport and logistics corridor in
Iraq. This project is opening the way to more national integration and will create new
opportunities for trade and economic development in a country that is deeply fragmented,
with many forces seeking to pull it apart.


We are working as well on transport and trade integration between countries in the region,
beyond national borders, such as linking the port of Basra, through Jordan, to the port of
Aqaba through road infrastructure upgrades. These projects will open up a broader regional
synergy agenda, bringing in the Gulf countries who themselves are becoming better
connected through large road and rail projects. This integration also connects the Gulf with
Turkey, Lebanon, and when the war ends, Syria. Such connectivity shows the potential for
the Middle East to act as an essential bridge between east and west, a Middle East that is
indeed open for business.


In such a revitalized Arab world, we must also face one of the region’s greatest challenges
– climate change. Its impact is especially acute in this region. It threatens both lives and
livelihoods. The region’s large coastal cities are at risk of rising sea levels.

At the heart of the issue is lack of water, and new scarcities due to the increasingly harsh
impacts of climate change. Even before the Syrian conflict, a three-year drought forced 1.5
million people to migrate. The region has been adapting to climate change for thousands of
years but the pace of change has now accelerated requiring new strategies and more
urgent action. We must now include the impact of climate change in policymaking, in areas
ranging from urban planning to agriculture.
Last year, the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and I took two trips together to the Great
Lakes and the Sahel regions of Africa. It was on one of those trips that the Secretary
General made a simple and powerful statement. He said, “We cannot have development
without peace, but we also cannot have peace without development.?

As the Secretary General knows, as all of you know, development and peace are
inseparable. For Syria, and for Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq, this process of preparing
for peace, jobs, and opportunities for the next generation will not be easy.

But this war will end. We must commit ourselves to seize the moment and prepare concrete
plans for that day when Syria’s guns fall silent and when an internationally recognized
government ensures peace and stability.

Then, without delay, the international community must help Syria. It also must further help
its neighbors. We need to communicate this vision so that there is no doubt that the
dividends from peace will be transformational, giving those involved in the conflict an
incentive to end this madness.

You stand at the crossroads of the future of the Middle East and North Africa. For the
young people here and throughout the Arab world – all 100 million of you -- your generation
deserves a chance to grow up in a region that is focused on creating jobs, not on conflict,
that is focused on inclusive growth, not on growth for just the elite, and is led by
governments that invest in its people with strong education and health systems. This is the
Middle East that must rise in the years ahead, making these years of ruin a distant memory
and unleashing the vibrancy of a region that will, at long last, be at peace.

Let me close with verses by Abu El Kacem El Chebbi, which relates to taking hold of your
destiny. And since I believe that some of you may have memorized this in your early days
in school, please feel free to say it along with me:

Itha echaabou yawmane arada al hayat[1]

Fa la boudda ane yastajeeba al kadar

Wa la boudda li el layli an yanjali

Wa la boudda li el kaydi an yankassir

Shukran Jazeelan - Thank you very much.
[1] If the people one day have the will to live
So destiny must and shall answer
and so the night must and shall fade away
and so the chains must and shall tear.
