                                                                              101943


World Bank Group President Jim
Yong Kim's Remarks at AGOA
Forum
August 4, 2014


World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Washington DC, United States

As Prepared for Delivery


Good morning Excellencies, Secretary Kerry, ladies and gentlemen. I’m happy to be here
with you today to launch these important discussions on the US African Growth and
Opportunity Act.

I’ll make just two points before turning to our keynote speakers today.

The first is to remind ourselves that African countries have enormous potential to expand
trade in order to drive growth, reduce poverty and deliver jobs. Countries must now find the
right approaches to take advantage of opportunities to greatly expand trade within Africa
and throughout the world. One opportunity, for instance, is in the light manufacturing sector,
which could help African countries in terms of industrialization, export diversification, and
job creation. Recent analysis from the World Bank Group suggests that if this sector grows
in Africa at the same speed it did in East Asia, it could create 7 million new jobs on the
continent. Exploiting export opportunities in agriculture and agribusiness is also essential to
reducing poverty in many countries.

Trade preference schemes such as AGOA – now in its 15th year -- can play an important
role in helping Africa realize this opportunity. AGOA helps African countries diversify their
exports, and move away from dependence on minerals and commodities to reach more
diversified and inclusive sources of export growth.
AGOA has also played a key role in increasing exports and employment in the apparel
sector in countries such as Lesotho and Madagascar, attracting foreign investment and
generating new jobs in the private sector. In Madagascar, for instance, thanks to AGOA and
a set of proactive and targeted policies, apparel now accounts for a larger share of exports
than any other industry.

My second point is that in order for African countries to realize their export potential and
take full advantage of AGOA, they must address several constraints.

One is an infrastructure challenge. Our studies show that the poor state of infrastructure in
Sub-Saharan Africa– including electricity, water, roads, and ICT – cuts countries’ economic
growth by 2 percentage points every year and reduces business productivity by as much as
40 percent.

A second constraint is the lack of capacity of local firms and workers. There are few
industry-specific training institutions dedicated to the apparel industry, and the ones that do
exist often don’t provide skills that meet the needs of employers.

And a last constraint is that policy reforms are needed to improve trade and
competitiveness and support the development of competitive firms across the value chain.

The World Bank Group is helping countries in Africa tackle these constraints. Working
closely with our development partners, we are providing financial and technical assistance
to help African governments improve their infrastructure, build the skills of local workers and
firms, and adopt policies to increase trade and investment across the continent.

We believe it will be critical to first reduce barriers to the regional integration of goods,
services and investment. Following trips with the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon last
year, for instance, we are building regional economic integration efforts in both the Great
Lakes and the Sahel regions of Africa. More intensive regional integration will give African
firms the opportunity to exploit nearby markets, gain knowledge and experience, achieve
economies of scale, and increase their competitiveness in the U.S. and global markets.

A range of non-tariff and regulatory barriers still raise the transaction costs and limit the
movement of goods, services, people, and capital across borders. The end result is that
Africa has integrated with the rest of the world faster than with itself.
The costs of these regional trade barriers fall disproportionately on the poor. Building better
regional linkages means more than simply removing tariffs. It is about addressing real world
constraints that paralyze the daily operations of ordinary producers and traders.

We hope that AGOA will continue beyond 2015. We also hope AGOA is strengthened so
that Africa’s doors to trade with the world open even more widely. For that to happen, I urge
those of you here today to focus your discussions on a few key proposals, including
increasing product coverage, relaxing rules of origin for non-apparel products, and
recognizing the special needs of fragile states. Progress on these issues will help us not
only ensure that AGOA’s solid track record continues, but that it helps African economies
expand their exports even more rapidly in the future.

We look forward to your discussion today. The World Bank Group is committed to
deepening engagement with our African partners on trade and competitiveness. We are
committed to helping African firms use AGOA and other trade programs to propel exports in
the United States and across the world. And we are deeply committed to helping our African
partners end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity for its people.

It is now my pleasure and honor to welcome Secretary Kerry, who for more than a quarter
century has been one of the world’s leaders in promoting international trade and in
particular trade between Africa and the United States and the rest of the world. Please join
me in welcoming Senator Kerry. Thank you.
