                                                                            101935


Speech by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim at
Maternal, Newborn and Child
Health Summit
May 30, 2014

World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Maternal, Newborn and Child Health Summit
Toronto, Canada

As Prepared for Delivery

Thank you, Mrs. Brown.

Prime Minister Harper, Mr. Secretary-General, President Kikwete, Director General
Margaret Chan, Partners and Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen:

We stand today on a critical threshold for global health and development. A quarter century
ago, more than half a million women worldwide died annually due to childbirth, and more
than 12 million children perished before the age of five, mainly from preventable causes.
Today, with the Millennium Development Goals -- and thanks to the collective efforts of so
many in this room -- these numbers have been nearly cut in half.

The 2010 Muskoka G8 Declaration was a pivotal moment in securing high-level political
support for maternal, newborn, and child health. Canada’s leadership and commitment was
critical for all our current efforts.

And Muskoka, in turn, paved the way for the Every Woman, Every Child partnership, to
scale up global advocacy and support for women’s and children’s health. Mr. Secretary-
General, thank you for your leadership.

And Prime Minister Harper, I want to thank you for your stunning announcement yesterday
that Canada is committing an additional $3.5 billion for maternal, newborn and child health,
    beyond 2015. Once again, Canada is leading the charge to ensure that we meet our
    commitment to improve maternal health and reduce child mortality.

    Four years after Muskoka, it’s the right time to reflect on how far we’ve come. While we can
    point to progress, we know that it’s been uneven. Too many women and children are still
    dying because they lack access to quality health care – especially in the least developed
    countries.

    Over 6 million children under age five died in 2012 – that’s nearly 18,000 every day. The
    maternal and child mortality rates in the least developed countries are about 30 times those
    in high-income countries, with half the global burden in sub –Saharan Africa.
    It doesn’t have to be this way. A baby in Cameroon and a baby in Canada should have the
    same opportunity to be born safely, and to have her mother survive childbirth to care for
    her.

    The future should be brighter for every woman and every child. As the Lancet Commission
    on Investing in Health shows, a global convergence on maternal, newborn, and child health
    is possible within a generation – that is, if governments and donors invest sufficiently and
    smartly. And these investments will not only save lives, they will drive economic growth and
    prosperity.


    So what are the smartest investments? The first is results-oriented service delivery. Shifting
    our focus from inputs to paying for results has been proven to be extremely effective in
    getting high quality, essential health services to women and children.

    Empowering frontline health workers -- with the autonomy and resources to develop
    strategies to improve service delivery -- has resulted in transformational changes in access
    and quality.

    This results-oriented approach enables health systems to innovate, and become more
    efficient and accountable for delivering timely and quality services.

    Coupled with independent verification, it ensures accountability and transparency in the use
    of donor and government resources.

    The evidence of this approach speaks for itself:

   Argentina reduced neonatal mortality by 74 percent.
   In Zambia, the use of modern family planning increased by 109 percent in just one year.
   And in Zimbabwe, child immunization rates nearly doubled from 33 to 62 percent in a single
    year.

    I’m proud that the World Bank Group has been able to support mothers and children
    through our partnership in results–based financing. We’re supporting programs totaling 2.5
    billion dollars in 32 countries.

    As they view results from our successful pilots, more governments are allocating their own
    budget resources to sustain and scale up successful programs.

    The Republic of Congo, for example, is providing $100 million dollars from its domestic
    budget to scale up the program nationwide -- that’s 80 percent of the total cost.

    We’re also excited to see our partners, such as UNICEF, GAVI and the Global Fund,
    leveraging this approach to provide additional in-country financial support.

    Results-based financing is helping us make progress on our promises at Muskoka and the
    promises of Every Woman, Every Child: More money for women’s and children’s health,
    and more women’s and children’s health for the money.


    So with 580 days to go until the deadline for the Millennium Development Goals, it’s time for
    all of us to double down.

    With an additional 510 million dollars in grant funding linked to IDA, we estimate that by
    2020, we can save the lives of an additional 61,000 mothers and 1.1 million children, of
    which 56,000 are newborns.

    With an additional 1 billion dollars in grant funding, we can make an exponential leap and by
    2020, save the lives of 183,000 mothers and 3.3 million children, including 1.7 million
    newborns.

    This more than doubles the pace of global death reductions.

    I urge every development partner and donor in this room to join with us and follow Canada’s
    lead to help scale up investments in maternal and child health.
A second smart investment to improve maternal and child health is to build a well-
functioning civil registration and vital statistics system. Prime Minister Harper, thank you for
bringing much-needed attention to this issue.

To stop mothers and young children from dying, we first need to know who is dying, from
what causes, and where.

Vital statistics systems are also a keystone of any country’s development
infrastructure. Policymakers can’t plan and allocate resources effectively unless they have
accurate data on the health and welfare of their citizens.

Vital statistics promote accountability by providing a baseline for measuring progress, and
for better targeting of health and other development programs -- like education and safety
nets.

And vital statistics provide legal rights to families, for example, in conferring property.

Only 34 developing countries have high quality, easily accessible data on something as
important as the causes of death for their citizens.


Two-thirds of all deaths globally are not counted at all.


In some countries, particularly in Africa, as many as 80 percent of deaths go unreported.
Part of the problem lies in outdated, inaccurate definitions. Take the example of birth
registration. The current definition of registration “at birth? is children registered by age 5.
Only 10 percent of births are registered in the first year. This means that most still births and
neonatal deaths go unregistered. This means that those lives are not counted.
This is unacceptable – but it’s a problem that the global community can solve.

We have the technology. In 2014, no country should have to rely on passive, paper-based
records systems.

We have the human resources. Health workers are present at vital events of birth and
death, and we can empower them to record these events in real time.

We have the know-how. If we can attend every delivery, then we can register every
maternal and child outcome.

Our vision is to register every single pregnancy and every single birth by 2030.
In partnership with Canada and many others, we’ve developed a plan to improve and scale
up existing registration systems. Every country should have a 21 st century, active, digital,
and truly “vital? system.


These smart investments in results-oriented service delivery and vital statistics systems will
help countries achieve the goal of universal health coverage.

More than one billion people lack access to health care, and about 100 million people fall
into poverty every year from paying out-of-pocket costs for health care. Universal health
coverage is the progressive pathway that will save lives, increase economic growth, and
help millions of people lift themselves out of poverty.

Universal health coverage and saving women’s and children’s lives are mutually reinforcing
goals.

Universal health coverage is about ensuring that everyone – women, men, and children –
can access a package of essential health services. No one should fall into poverty or be
kept in poverty to pay for the health care they need. Universal health coverage is about
equity, and delivering on the social contract.

A growing number of countries at all income levels are pursuing universal health coverage.
They are responding to their emerging health needs and disease burdens, closing gaps in
access to quality care, and protecting their poorest and most vulnerable populations. As
more countries move toward universal coverage, fewer mothers die in childbirth, and more
babies are born healthy.

Peru has nearly doubled its health coverage from 37 percent to 65 percent of the
population, which has helped lead to a significant reduction in maternal and child mortality.

Ghana has nearly quintupled its health coverage from 6 percent to 35 percent of the
population. Now, 30 percent of insured poor women deliver their babies in a health facility
with a skilled birth attendant, as compared to just 10 percent for uninsured households.

The December 2015 Millennium Development Goals deadline, and the emerging post-2015
development framework, present us with some critical choices.

We can continue to invest in a myriad of health programs that are not very well-coordinated
and have limited impact -- or, we can begin to consolidate and leverage our resources
around the most equitable, effective, and efficient initiatives, backed by evidence.
The people in this room have done some extraordinary things. As a global health and
development community, we have collectively mobilized once unthinkable resources over
the last decade and saved hundreds of millions of lives.

Let’s leave this summit committed to deliver essential, quality health care
to everywoman, every child, every family, everyone, everywhere. Thank you very much.
