                                                                              101991


World Bank Group President Jim
Yong Kim Opening Remarks at the
Press Conference in Beijing
July 17, 2015


Jim Yong Kim
Press Conference in Beijing
Beijing, China

As Prepared for Delivery

Thank you for coming to the World Bank Group’s office in Beijing.


I would like to thank the Chinese people and Chinese leaders – especially Premier Li
Keqiang - once again for the warm welcome and hospitality they have extended to me.
Today, I’ll talk about three subjects – first, the Chinese economy, second, China’s global
role in development, and third, health care reform.


China has built the world’s second largest economy and it has undertaken significant
reforms aimed at providing all of its citizens with an opportunity to enjoy greater
prosperity. While China’s growth has gradually slowed since 2012, signaling what President
Xi has called the “new normal,? China remains the largest contributor to world
growth since the global financial crisis. Over the last couple of years, roughly 30 percent of
global growth came from China alone. Growth in China last year was 7.4 percent and we
project about 7 percent growth for 2015 – still the envy of the world.


In light of the stock market fluctuations recently, I’d like to emphasize that we believe
China’s economy is strong and its fundamentals are sound. The country’s leaders are
moving forward resolutely on their ambitious program of economic and social reforms
aimed at transforming China’s growth model toward more efficient, equitable, and
environmentally sustainable growth.
We’ve seen progress in several reforms, including lower credit growth, better regulation of
shadow banking, and better management of local government borrowing. These reforms
hold the key to China’s continued economic success.


On my second point, China is a global leader in development – lifting more than600
million people out of poverty in the last 25 years, more than the rest of the world combined
during that time.


Today, there’s no question that China is increasing its role in development around the
world. I can report on two examples just yesterday. First, China established a $50 million
dollar trust fund with the World Bank to finance efforts to fight poverty. And second, I met
with the leadership team at the AIIB Multilateral Interim Secretariat, and we discussed
expanding our collaboration. I would particularly like to recognize Secretary General Jin
Liqun for his strong leadership in moving swiftly to get the AIIB started.


More funding for infrastructure will ultimately help the poor, and we are pleased to be
working with China and others to support the AIIB as it becomes operational. We agreed
with Secretary General Jin Liqun and the interim secretariat to explore co-financing options
in the coming months. We plan to hold a meeting later this year in Washington, D.C., to talk
about specific projects in which we would be co-investors. We regularly enter into such
arrangements with multilateral development banks because it broadens the pool of
financing available for a range of infrastructure projects -- bridges, water treatment plants,
roads, and telecommunications, to name just a few.

The AIIB is an important new partner that shares a common goal with the World Bank
Group: to end extreme poverty by 2030. With strong environment, labor and procurement
standards, the AIIB will join us and other development banks in addressing huge
infrastructure needs that are critical to ending poverty, reducing inequality, and boosting
shared prosperity.

And third, I had very good discussions with Premier Li Keqiang and Finance Minister Lou
Jiwei about our health care reform study with the government and the World Health
Organization. China, like all countries in the world, face major challenges in health care. But
I came away from my meetings yesterday convinced that the leadership is fully committed
to health care reform. All of us understand that a better functioning, more efficient health
care system will lead to a healthier population, boost economic growth and become an
engine for job creation.

I’m happy now to take your questions.
