                                                                              101972


Remarks by World Bank Group
President Jim Yong Kim at the
Foreign Correspondents Club of
Japan
March 13, 2015

World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim
Tokyo, Japan

As Prepared for Delivery


Thank you all for coming today. For the first time in its history, the World Bank Group has
two goals that shape its mission: ending extreme poverty by 2030 and boosting shared
prosperity. To accomplish the first, we aim to lower the number of people living on less than
$1.25 a day to below 3 percent of the world’s population within 15 years. To accomplish the
second, we need to ensure gains from economic growth accrue at a higher rate to the lower
40 percent of income earners in developing countries than the national rate. We now know
that the only way to reach these goals is to accelerate a kind of economic growth that’s
more inclusive, socially sustainable, and protects the environment. That’s precisely our
plan.

These targets are ambitious, but how humbling it is to know that we are the first generation
in human history that can actually end the scourge of extreme poverty in a generation. If we
succeed in just 15 years, close to 1 billion fewer people will no longer experience what one
of my predecessors, Robert McNamara, called in 1973, “a condition of life so degraded by
disease, illiteracy, malnutrition, and squalor as to deny its victims basic human necessities.?

I’m in Japan for the UN’s Disaster Risk Reduction Conference because without better
disaster risk management it will be extremely difficult to accomplish our goals. The
government of Japan has shown exceptional leadership in improving disaster risk
management around the world by supporting critical work in expanding expert knowledge
and by sharing its own expertise with the world. Prime Minster Abe and his cabinet have
been the lead partner in this area and Japan’s continued support is essential if we are to
help countries prepare for future disasters.

We could not be more serious about this issue. Disasters – whether they be geological,
meterological or biological – tragically result in loss of life and significant reductions in
economic growth. Over the past 30 years, the world has lost more than 2.5 million people
and almost $4 trillion because of natural disasters. More than three quarters of these
disaster-related deaths are in developing countries, with almost half of them in low-income
countries.

In 2010, the earthquake in Haiti destroyed more than a decade of growth. In 2013, Typhoon
Haiyan pushed nearly half a million Filipino households into poverty. In the worst affected
areas, poverty rates rose to 56 percent. And over the past 16 months, the Ebola epidemic
has killed nearly 10,000 people in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Let me state clearly
that we are still not done in controlling this epidemic and the economic consequences will
be continue to be severe until we get to zero cases. In 2015, for example, the World Bank
Group estimates that these three countries will forfeit $1.6 billion in economic growth
because of Ebola. Prior to the start of the epidemic, these three countries had some of the
highest growth rates in the world; now their rates are expected to be near or below zero.

The bottom line is that, to end poverty, we must continue to expand our understanding of
how to manage disasters and deploy this knowledge aggressively. Because of climate
change, the frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme climatic events will increase.
Thus, the disaster risk posed by droughts, earthquakes, and typhoons will only become
worse in the future.

Those with much to lose from these developments know these dangers well. According to a
Towers Watson survey in 2013, insurance industry executives identified pandemics,
hurricanes and earthquakes as the sources of risk that they feared most. And according to
this year’s Global Risk Report, compiled by the World Economic Forum, environmental
threats topped economic risks in the view of CEOs and business leaders.

These views are driven largely by our failure to adequately prepare for disaster risk. The
World Economic Forum’s Risk Report attributed the CEOs’ and business leaders’
conclusions to, in its words, the “marked increase in experts’ negative assessment of
existing preparations to cope with challenges such as extreme weather and climate
change.? We share this concern, and would add that risks and potential damage increase in
those countries that can least afford it.

Over the past two decades, the international community committed just under $110 billion to
disaster relief, prevention and preparedness. This is a small sum when you consider that
costs related to disaster recovery worldwide now average close to $200 billion per year,
with almost 75 percent of this due to weather-related disasters. And only a little more than
10 percent of disaster aid has funded prevention and preparedness. Compare this to Japan,
which allocates about 80 percent of its disaster risk management budget to preparedness.

There’s good reason for Japan’s focus on doing things before a disaster strikes: it saves
lives and money. In the fall of 2013, Cyclone Phailin in India tragically took the lives of 40
people. But a storm the same size in 1999 killed 10,000 people. The difference was that the
people of India were prepared: A new early warning system and a growing network of
cyclone shelters enabled 900,000 people to find a safe haven from the storm. We estimate
that every $1 invested in early warning systems can provide as much as $36 in economic
benefits because it prevents losses to property and businesses.

According to initial research by the World Bank and others, neglecting disaster prevention
may also cause slower economic growth, undermining the most powerful engine we have
for ending poverty. Specifically, inadequate prevention measures can lead to a culture of
excessive risk aversion when it comes to investment, especially for people who have
previously experienced a disaster. People and businesses simply choose not to put capital
at risk. We see a form of this in the Ebola epidemic. According to our models, aversion
behavior – where people decide not to engage in economic activity in attempts to avoid the
risk of exposure – has been driving much of the declines in growth in Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone.

Based on this knowledge, we are working to refocus developing countries on prevention
and preparedness when it comes to disaster risk management. For example, since last
July, we’ve been evaluating the development projects funded through the International
Development Association, our fund for the poorest countries, for exposure to these risks.
We’ve also incorporated this information into the country partnership frameworks, which
define our work in any given country. This means that, going forward, our projects in the
poorest and most vulnerable countries will be much better prepared for disasters and
climate change.
We’re also working with partners to reduce developing countries’ vulnerability to natural
hazards and adapt to climate change. Japan has been an especially good partner in this
regard. After the Sendai Dialogue in 2012, we set up a $100 million program to assist
countries in managing disaster risks. Run out of Tokyo, this initiative guides countries’
national programs, investors’ investment strategies, and the World Bank Group’s
operations.


One of the most important steps we can take to prepare for disasters is to ensure the
immediate availability of funding preparedness – something again that Japan knows well. In
2008, a Japanese agricultural cooperative, JA Kyosai, purchased a catastrophic bond from
a German reinsurance company, Munich Re, which would pay up to $300 million to the
cooperative in the event of certain pre-defined metrics. After the Great East Japan
Earthquake of 2011, this instrument became the first catastrophic bond to pay out on the
occurrence of a geological event.


Japan has been supportive of the World Bank Group’s efforts to make similar kinds of
innovative financing mechanisms available to governments of developing countries. Since
2008, we’ve approved $1.38 billion in contingency loans to help nine countries secure
response funding before disaster strikes. Using capital from Japan, we’ve also provided
financing for the Pacific Catastrophe Insurance Facility, which helped countries in the
Pacific Islands secure $43 million of earthquake, tsunami, and tropical cyclone risk
insurance coverage in 2014.

Given the success of these initiatives, we’re examining whether similar approaches could
work in crisis situations where financing is absent, such as pandemics. The Ebola crisis
shows why this is needed. Once we recognized the severity of the epidemic, the World
Bank Group committed more than $500 million quickly to the governments of Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, to help finance their immediate response. But this money only
started flowing about eight months after the outbreak began because we and the
international community failed to recognize the urgency of the crisis.

We must remember this important lesson from Ebola: We need to respond much more
quickly to the next outbreak. To help do this, the World Bank Group is currently developing
the concept of a pandemic emergency facility. Our goal is to work with partners to create a
financial instrument that rapidly disburses a large amount of funds within eight hours, not
eight months, of an outbreak that meets certain objective criteria.
The other main goal of a pandemic facility is to promote greater country investments in
preparedness, which starts with having a strong, resilient health system. The Ebola crisis
lays bare the consequences of inadequate public health capacity, from disease surveillance
and laboratory analysis to frontline health services and community health workers: People
die; economic growth rates decline; and countries, their neighbors, and the entire world, are
put at risk. These consequences show why Japan’s recent $20 million contribution to
support our Ebola recovery efforts is so important.

As we take a look at all we’ve learned from the largest Ebola outbreak in history, we can
begin to piece together what a global response capacity that’s truly equal to the challenge of
even the worst pandemic, might look like.

It might look like this – rapidly disbursing financial mechanisms, strong global technical
coordination led by a much bolstered World Health Organization, and well-rehearsed and
tightly choreographed interventions involving corps of medical professionals; logistics
experts; transport, pharmaceutical and communications companies; a United Nations-wide
response; and support from multilateral and private sector financial institutions.

And perhaps the most important element of preparedness is to build strong health systems
in every country.

The goal of a strong health system must be to achieve universal health coverage: Everyone
must have access to essential health services; and poverty must not be a litmus test to
qualify for care. We know that investing in health systems is an investment in both better
health and stronger economic growth. Japan has once again been the global leader in
promotion of universal health coverage, and ensuring access to health care for all has been
very important for both low and middle-income countries. We are proud to have such a
close partnership with this country around two concepts that will hold the key to protecting
millions of people and the global economy from the next pandemic – disaster risk
management and universal health coverage.

We expect to present more detail on this pandemic emergency facility proposal in the next
few months. For the reasons I’ve stated, we’ll be drawing on Japan’s experience in
preparing for disasters and universal care. That accumulated wisdom has shown the world
that taking the proper precautions can save thousands of lives as well as billions of dollars
in lost economic growth. It also can help end extreme poverty.

Thank you. I’m happy to take your questions now.
