                                                      102059
LOCAL GOVERNANCE AND SERVICE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (LGSIP)



          FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT REPORT



                        April 2015




                            1
Contents
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................... 3
Section 1: Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 5
   1.1 Program Design and Expenditure Framework .................................................................................... 5
   1.2 Institutional arrangements for Program Implementation .................................................................. 6
Section 2: Program Financial Management Systems: ................................................................................... 8
   2.1 Institutions involved in Program Financial Management ................................................................... 8
   2.2        Planning and Budgeting .............................................................................................................. 10
   2.4        Accounting .................................................................................................................................. 13
   2.5        Financial Reporting At MDLF Level(TBC):. ............................................................................. 14
   2.5 Controls and Audits .......................................................................................................................... 14
   2.6 Disbursement arrangements from the Bank ...................................................................................... 15
Section 3: Program Procurement Systems .................................................................................................. 15
Section 4: Fraud and Corruption Risks and Mitigation .............................................................................. 18
Section 5: Program Implementation, Audit and Disbursements: ................................................................ 20
Section 6: Program Fiduciary Risk Assessment ......................................................................................... 20
Section 7: Program Action Plan .................................................................................................................. 23
Section 8: Implementation Support............................................................................................................. 24




                                                                             2
Executive Summary


As part of the preparation of the Local Governance and Services Improvement Program (LGSIP), the
Bank task team carried out a Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) of the Program in accordance with
OP/BP 9.0. Based on the findings of the FSA, it is concluded that the Program Fiduciary Systems provide
reasonable assurance2 that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes, with due
attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and
accountability. . At the same time there are several gaps and weaknesses in the existing system that could
affect the ability of the Program to achieve its intended results. Considering these existing weaknesses in
Program Fiduciary systems, the residual fiduciary risk rating for the Program is rated as Substantial.


The Program will support the Palestinian Authority’s in strengthening the governance and financing
structure of all VCs to provide better coverage and improved quality of local services in a fiscally stable
manner. The PforR Program intends to strengthen the local government financing mechanism and
improve local service delivery in the target areas.

The design of the PforR Program relies on the existing institutions and systems of local Governance and
Public Financial Management in Palestine. The Program will be implemented through the Municipal
Development and Lending Funds and the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG), and will use the PFM
system of the PA. Program funds will be deposited into the Single Treasury Account and will be budgeted
for under the Ministry of Local Government allocation. Funds will flow from the Single Treasury
Account to MoLG, MDLF, and to large Village Councils (VCs). .

Procurement for the Program will be carried out in accordance with the new Public Procurement Law
(Law No. 8 of year 2014), which will come into effect in December 2015. The new Law, which applies to
all public procurement activities, including those carried out by local government units, represents a good
balance between the current means of the country and internationally accepted practices. It lays down an
acceptable institutional and organizational set-up for public procurement; provides comprehensive
provisions on procedural matters; sets out provisions on transparency and accountability; establishes a
complaint/dispute review mechanism; and provides for routine dissemination of information on public
procurement through a single portal procurement website. The Palestinian Authority, through the newly
established High Council for Public Procurement Policies (HCPPP), is putting in place the components
which are pre-requisites for effective implementation of the Law. Those include, inter alia: development
and issuance of National Standard Bidding Documents and National Procurement Manual, establishment
of a single portal procurement website, establishing the Dispute Review Unit and training of the
procurement workforce. Some of these components will need to be completed by Program effectiveness,
whereas others (e.g. capacity building and training of VCs/JSCs and MOLG on the new procurement
rules and procedures) will be supported by the Program or through parallel technical assistance.

Qualifying VCs and JSCs meeting the eligibility criteria will be responsible for implementing individual
and joint capital investment projects, including project design and preparation, procurement and contract
management, under MoLG and MDLF supervision, respectively. MoLG will be responsible for carrying
out procurement under Component III. The fiduciary systems assessment has concluded that the
procurement processes and procedures introduced by the new Law and the existing capacities within the


                                                    3
various entities are adequate for the efficient implementation of the Program, provided that a set of pre-
requisites and improvements detailed in this assessment are introduced.

. The Program will rely on the existing systems for the mitigating fraud and corruption risks in the
Program. The Palestinian Anti- Corruption Commission (PACC) is responsible for the investigation of
complaints relating to corruption. In accordance with the INT’s guidelines for PforR operations, the
Bank will rely on the PACC for the investigation of any complaints/allegations involving Fraud &
Corruption (F&C) and will accept the findings of such investigation. The MDLF will maintain an updated
list of contractors in the Program and make sure that no contractor from the World Bank’s debarred list of
contractors is involved with any aspects of the Program. e..




                                                    4
Section 1: Introduction


As part of the preparation of the PforR Program, the World Bank task team carried out a Fiduciary
Systems Assessment (FSA) of the Program in accordance with OP/BP 9.0 of the World Bank Operations
Manual. In addition, the FSA was carried out according to the OPCS Guidance Notes for PforR
Operations. The objective of the Assessment was to examine whether Program systems provide
reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for their intended purposes, with due
attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability.

The FSA was carried out by an experienced team of World Bank staff that included Financial
Management and Procurement Specialists. The team went through the existing country and sector reports,
discussed with client counterparts both at the Central Government as well as at the Local Government
levels. The team also visited a sample of VCs and JSCs to assess the systems on the ground. The initial
findings were discussed with client counterparts to get validation on the findings and conclusions. Based
on the feedback, the draft assessment was finalized. The findings of the assessment will be incorporated
in the Program documents for the proposed PforR operation.

Program Design and Expenditure Framework:
The proposed PforR Program involves a total financing of $25 million ( a grant of $5 million from the
World Bank and $20 million cofinancing from other Development Partners). The development objective
of the proposed LGSIP is to strengthen the local government financing mechanism and improve local
service delivery in the target areas. The proposed PforR operation takes a subset of the Government’s
program and supports it. This subset called the Bank financed Program (the “Program”) i ntends to
support the following components:

 Delivery of local services through VCs: VCs will utilize the Capital grants to implement various
investment projects that are approved under their annual plan and are included in their annual budget.


       . The Program intends to strengthen the systems and capacities of eligible VCs by providing a
        untied capital grant based on pre-specified eligibility conditions. VCs who qualify for entry to
        the Program (upon satisfying the entry criteria set by the Program) will receive an annual capital
        grant that they can use to implement their participative annual investment plan. The participating
        VCs who receive the capital grant will be responsible for the implementation of projects and
        activities in the annual investment plan in accordance with the Procurement procedures for local
        governments. While large VCs can use the capital grant to implement projects on their own, small
        VCs will be implementing their projects through the JSCs.

   Infrastructure Service Delivery through joint projects: This component would finance capital
    investment grants for projects that cut across VCs and are identified in a joint or consolidated ACIP.
    The JSC is an institutional structure set up by the Government to address the inability of small VCs to
    implement projects and activities in an efficient and effective manner due to shortage of adequately
    trained staff in core areas such as project design, contracting, project management and supervision.
    Accordingly, the VCs as part of their mandated responsibility will be responsible for the preparation
    of annual investment plans. All VCs will be required to be a member of a JSC. Capacity Building


                                                    5
      for strengthening local governance at the Central and Local level: This sub-component would finance
      capacity building activities to support VCs and JSCs meeting the program eligibility criteria,
      preparing and implementing ACIPs, and strengthening their core functions such as planning,
      procurement and financial management. The sub-component would also finance institutional
      strengthening targeting central level institutions to improve local governance, service delivery and
      financing. Activities to be financed would be identified and updated in an annual capacity building
      plan prepared by the MoLG.
     The preliminary fiduciary assessment, which was based on sample field visits and inquiry with MoLG
      staff, identified that a number VCs maintain satisfactory financial managements arrangements
      including: 1) timely submission of annual budgets, 2) qualified FM staff, 3) proper accounting
      system, 4) submission of audited financial statements.

      The Program will be implemented by the MoLG and the MDLF. MoLG would be responsible for all
      fiduciary supervision arrangements for eligible large VCs. Also MoLG would be responsible for
      delivering the capacity building packages designed as part of the Program. While MDLF would be
      responsible for all supervision arrangements for joint projects under component II. . MoLG and
      MDLF would use Program funds exclusively for the implementation of the agreed Program using the
      government financial procedures that are currently used by the MoLG and MDLF respectively.

1. Institutional arrangements for Program Implementation: VCs will utilize the Capital grants to
implement various investment projects that are approved under their annual plans and are included in
their annual budget. Capital Grants will be allocated according to a predetermined allocation formula.


1.1 Program Implementation at the VC level: Generally, s. Most VCs lack capacity and many hire only
    a few staff on less than full time or none at all. Not having a permanent core staff (e.g. Accountant)
    will negatively affect sustainability and revenue collection. However, the program will mitigate this
    risk through requesting VCs to satisfy certain minimum “entry criteria” upon which they will be
    allotted their eligible annual Capital Grant allocations. Depending on the size of the VCs, the entry
    criteria is determined as follow:
    - Under Component I large VCs will be required to achieve some minimum eligibility conditions
         before they get funds from the Program. The first of these eligibility conditions is to have access
         to a minimum corps of essential staff such as , an accountant, administrator and an engineer. The
         VC may either have these staffon a full or part time basis or can make arrangements for getting
         access to such staff on a sharing basis with other VCs or the Provincial Governorates. l;These and
         other eligibility conditions such as the submission of annual budgets electronically and the timely
         preparation of the ACIP in a participative manner provide assurance on the efficient utilization of
         the capital grants provided through the Program. . Large VCs in the Program will be responsible
         for the custody and management of the financial resources transferred to them directly as part of
         their annual budget, and will utilize them in accordance to the provisions of the LG FM Manual 1.
         Eligible large VCs will \ be subject to MoLG’s fiduciary supervision, and will be required to meet
         the program’s minimum entry criteria on an annual basis.

      -   Small VCs do not maintain satisfactory financial management arrangements. The expenditure
          cycle in such VCs is not subject to independent review procedures, and capacity constrains exists
          in the fiduciary function. Although MoLG has to approve VCs annual budget, MoLG exercises
          limited control and oversight procedures on VCs budget execution. However, small VCs will

1
    LG FM Manual issued by MoLG in June 1999

                                                     6
        delegate the implementation of their annual investment plans to JSCs who will implement the
        projects under the technical and administrative oversight provided by the MDLF as the Program
        Manager.

Program Implementation at the MDLF level: MDLF has a proven track record of effectively operating
in the complex political and institutional environment West Bank. This record has been established over
the last 5-8 years in successfully implementing three Bank-supported Projects. During this period, MDLF
has effectively administered Bank and donor funds, and their respective fiduciary arrangements.
Furthermore, MDLF Financial and Administrative department includes experienced and qualified
financial management team. The Finance and Administration Department structure is comprised from
Finance and Administration Manager, Financial Controller, Senior Accountant, and two Accountants
which allows for proper segregation of duties. MDLF will act as a program manager and would be
responsible for the implementation of Financial Management (FM) and Disbursement arrangements for
medium and small VCs. Also, MDLF would be responsible for ensuring that VCs meet minimum entry
criteria, each year during the life of the Program, and for supporting the effective selection and
implementation of investments, funding including fiduciary responsibility for sub-project implementation.

Program Implementation at the MoLG level: As mentioned above, the Program will use existing
government Public Financial Management systems. MoLG will be responsible for monitoring and
overseeing the implementation of the ACIP in large VCs as well as the implementation of the capacity
building activities under the Program.   . A Program Committee would be established to ensure
coordination among the main program stakeholders and development partners towards meeting the
Program results.



1.3 Transparency and Accountability

In Palestine, the lack of access to information is perceived as the major constraints to operate effectively
as a watch dog holding government accountable for its actions and decisions. The Program aims at
ensuring that VCs undertake public expenditures and deliver local services in a transparent and
accountable manner. It will strengthen accountability systems at the VCs and will support: (a) transparent
and independent annual financial audits of VCs to ensure their financial accountability; (b) systems and
processes to bring greater transparency in VCs affairs and strengthen citizen voice in planning, budgeting,
execution and monitoring. (c) Training elected VCs staff on financial management, procurement and
project management. VCs are subject to the oversight of the existing system of public sector oversight
that includes the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) in Palestine.
Transparency: The Governance system in Palestine is making rapid progress to embed the principle of
transparency in the public sector including local governments.

The Program aims to strengthen transparency through the following specific measures:

   VCs Strategic planning and development initiatives are performed in a participative manner with
    citizens
   VCs Budget preparation process is performed in a participative manner.
   VCs audit financial statements are made available to the public.




                                                     7
Accountability: The current local government laws put in place a sound accountability framework for
local governments. The PforR Program reinforces this mandate through the capital grants system that will
provide resources to VCs to meet local service delivery responsibilities. VCs will be incentivized to
prepare Annual Plans and Budgets in a participative manner, which will need to be validated by their
residents in dedicated public meetings. VCs will be accountable to their citizens as well as to the Central
Government for meeting their institutional and service delivery responsibilities. The Program will
strengthen downward accountability of the VCs to its citizens, and better reflect citizens’ service priorities
through the strengthening of citizen participation in the municipality’s planning and budgeting process.


Section 2: Program Financial Management Systems:
Financial Management of the Program is proposed to be carried out using the Palestinian Authority’s
existing systems and processes for Public Financial Management. The Program will be part of the
country’s budgetary framework that will rely on existing institutional systems for implementation.

2.1 Institutions involved in Program Financial Management
    1. The Ministry of Finance: According to the 2013 PEFA indicators, the PFM system revealed a
        more positive picture compared to 2007 assessment. While the PA achieved significant progress
        during the past years such as increased transparency and scrutiny, and improved accounting,
        significant weaknesses in other areas such as budget preparation and execution were also
        revealed. The PFM system is deemed to be adequate insofar as the Bank’s criteria and standards
        for approval of pforR operations are concerned. However, more improvements need to be
        adopted to further consolidate progress and address the challenges facing the PFM systems. As
        part of the NDP process, a PFM strategy was developed by the PA. Key elements of the strategy
        with respect to fiduciary control include:
         Significant improvements are needed in expenditure planning and control in budget
             execution. Reducing generation of new arrears requires a Cash Plan and a commitment
             control system to limit incurrence of additional expenses to the forecasted cash available. An
             annual cash Plan on a monthly basis is in place since early 2014 with non-discretionary and
             optional expenses. This was seen as a positive achievement.
              Strengthening accounting and reporting by fully adopting International Public Sector
               Accountings Standards (IPSAS), and by increasing budget transparency. Financial statement
               for the year ended 2010 have been audited by SAACB in 2013 with a number of
               qualifications against IPSAS (especially on financing gap). Financial statements for 2011
               have recently been issued with a delay of around three years with correction of error balance
               of more than USD 100 million. This correction of errors related to the reconciliation between
               2010 ending balances and 2011 beginning balance and banking statements. The Bank has
               provided substantial TA on IPSAS and how to issue financial statements (3 TA missions in
               Oct 2013, March 2014, and July 2014 this latter in cooperation with SAACB).
              Enhancing the legal framework of the SAACB that supports its audit responsibilities. The
               World Bank recently provided technical assistance support to the SAACB through the
               preparation of the Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) Performance Measurement Framework
               (PMF)2. SAACB experiences de jure and de facto limitations to its independence from the

2
  The SAI PMF is a comprehensive assessment of performance that will help the SAACB in its strategic and capacity development. Donors,
including the Bank, can also use the SAI PMF results to target their provision of support

                                                                  8
                Executive. Despite these factors, SAACB has been able to position itself as an important
                contributor to increased accountability and transparency in the use of public funds in the
                West Bank.3 An important example is the audit and publication of the final accounts of the
                PA for 2010. This audit revealed several shortcomings in the financial management in the
                Palestinian public sector. The SAI PMF assessment shows that SAACB has laid the
                foundations for providing high standard audits to the PA authorities and the public, but that
                more work is needed to sustain and institutionalize recently improved audit methodologies.
                More importantly, the limited independence and limited legal protection of the President of
                SAACB from the Executive also entails a constraint against improved performance, as he/she
                can risk removal from office for performing his/her duties4. This has been confirmed with the
                Donors partners who recommended strengthening the legal framework of the SAACB to
                comply with INTOSAI independence standards.
               Building capacities for financial management at the MoF. Assuming the current political
                context, additional risks may be associated with situations of conflict and fragility such as
                liquidity constraints, potential diversion of funding, weakening of payroll and other
                expenditure controls, and limited capacity of financial management to perform relevant tasks,
                among others.
     2. The Ministry of Local Government (MoLG): The Ministry of Local Government is taking the
        lead on policy formulation and oversight of the local government sector. The MoLG is mandated
        with a monitoring and supervision role as well as a policy and advisory role towards VCs. The
        MoLG approves VCs Budget and monitors its implementation, and in particular, in relation with
        the donors’ grants transferred to VCs. The General Directorate of monitoring and direction that is
        in charge of managing the implementation of VCs’ budget and transfers to VCs from central
        government. To date, there is no mechanism in place to ensure that VCs receive equitable and
        transparent transfers for current spending.
     3. On average, VCs revenue collection practices are weak and there is scope for significant
        improvement. At the same time, efforts are needed to unify local tax administration systems, and
        strengthen the link between improved revenue collection and better services for citizens. In the
        absence of a predictable and transparent intergovernmental transfer system, almost all VCs
        struggle to remain fiscally viable and to finance even basic operating costs. The MoLG made
        annual budget document submission mandatory for VCs in 2013 and 2014; hence data on the
        VCs’ budgets is available.
     4. However, the FSA concluded that MoLG suffers from serious capacity limitations in overseeing
        VCs financial management arrangements. Furthermore, monitoring and oversight over VCs is
        weak with respect to outputs, costs, quality, and so on, and data are scattered and not aggregated
        at the central level. MoLG supervision seems to be irregular and inefficient. The expenditure
        cycle for VCs is not subject to the same controls as for central government expenses. There is
        control review of payments at the commitment stage. The lack of the ex-ante control increases
        fiduciary risk. The team confirmed this assessment with SAI team responsible for auditing the
        local government sector. The Program task team was informed of this assessment and has
3
 The assessment covered SAACB’s audit activities carried out in the West Bank, as the branch office in Gaza is not operational .
4
  In early June, 2014, the media announced that the President of the SAACB had been replaced. This change was confirmed by the PA
Presidency. Currently, a new permanent SAI president (Dr. Iyad Tayem) was officially assigned for Palestine yesterday. Dr. Iyad Tayem was the
deputy Minister for the Ministry of Justice, is a judge, and is an active member in the Supreme Judicial Council.




                                                                     9
        designed targeted capacity building packages to both MoLG and VCs to strengthen their
        capacities.

    5. The Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF): The MDLF has the legal mandate to
       provide direct development assistance to municipalities through transparent, rules-based and
       efficient financing. MDLF is also the PA’s preferred mechanism for channeling reform and
       development assistance to local governments.


2.2 Planning and Budgeting
    6. The budget allocations for Program elements will be transferred from the Treasury Current
       Account at the MoF. The Program will be included in the annual budget of the PA under the
       budget head for MoLG. The allocation for the three components of the Program will be identified
       through three specific line items. . , The Annual budget allocations will be disbursed from the
       MoF to the MoLG within a specified time perioed. The MoLG will then transfer Program Funds
       to large VCs and the MDLF. During Program preparation several discussions were held with
       MoF and MoLg to ensure that the funds flow within the Program will be carried out in a speedy
       and efficient manner. These arrangements will be finalized by Program appraisal. . anually In
       case the annual capital grant allocations are not fully spent within a fiscal year, they will be
       carried forward to the following year, and the carry forward will follow main budget
       classification. The budget department controls all carry forward transactions to ensure
       correctness, accuracy and completeness..



Flow of Funds:

. There are three types of fund flow arrangements (see flow of funds diagram below) that will be applied
to the program as follow:


1   Funds Channeled from MoF to MoLG: In accordance with the general budget and its detailed
    provisions, MoF informs line ministries about their available budget ceiling on a quarterly basis, and
    the cash is deposited in a designated account- linked to the Single Treasury System to be managed by
    the line ministries. Likewise, MoF will inform MoLG of the available budget for component I and for
    the ceiling for the capacity building packages . The payment will be transferred from MoLG to the
    VCs. No special designated account will be opened at MoLG.

2   Funds Channeled from MoF to MDLF: Program Funds will be disbursed from MoF to MDLF
    bank account. However, funds will not be channeled to small VCs, and MDLF will have the sole
    responsibility to disburse on behalf of small village councils to suppliers and contractors. Similar to
    the ongoing Municipal Development Program II, subproject payment requests will be reviewed and
    approved first by the technical team before being further processed to provide assurance that
    payments related activities are in line with physical progress and for goods actually supplied and
    installed. To minimize the risk of commingling of Project’s funds with other financing partners’
    funds, MDLF will maintain a comprehensive sub-grants allocation sheet, this sheet should include all
    VCs. This tool will enable MDLF to track the financial and the physical status of each sub-project.

                                                    10
3   Funds Channeled from MoF to large Village Councils: Large VCs that satisfy program
    minimum entry criteria will receive funding for their annual investment plan. Fund flow for results
    would be transferred to such VCs following established government processes similar to the
    processes for transferring the PA contribution of transportation taxes to VCs.




                                                  11
      Flow of Funds Diagram:


         One Disbursement                         World Bank
         request on behalf of
         all implementing
         entities

                                           World Bank transfer funds once
                                           results are verified by the Bank




                                           Single Treasury Account
                                                    (MoF)




                      MDLF                             Large VCs                     MoLG




          No     funds    will   be
          transferred to small VCs
          (MDLF         pays      to
          contractors    on    their
          behalf)




The following table presents total funds transferred from MoF treasury account to support VCs “development
projects” (in million USD):

Description                                     2012             2013         2014
Development projects from capital budget           24               8          12
LGU support/ from operating budget                 4.5              1           2
Total                                             28.5              9          14




                                                      12
2.4 Accounting


      Accounting At MoF Level: The unified government accounting system (BISAN) will be used by
       MoF to record program funds. BISAN is part of the country systems and is capable of recording
       project transactions by implementing entity and by Donor. BISAN is a computerized accounting
       system. It is not linked to MDLF or VCs accounting systems, but it is linked to MoLG
       (decentralized to all line Ministries). BISAN accounting system is capable to track and report on
       Project’s funds separately by Component and by Financing Partner.

      Implementation of Integrated Financial Management System (IFMIS): The IFMIS has been
       rolled out to all line ministries and is considered the official country system to account for public
       financial resources. Transactions are entered by the line ministries with approval for the
       transaction by Financial Controllers who are decentralized to all line ministries. IFMIS modalities
       have been updated which has led to improvements in terms of consolidation of the financial
       statements, quality of financial reports and the orderly exchanges between line ministries and the
       MoF. The IFMIS has controls for payments against cash ceilings but it is not used to prevent
       arrears from being accumulated. The IFMIS also has a commitment module but this module is
       generally not used.

      Single Treasury System and Bank Funded Projects: The PA budget preparation and execution
       process has been supported by IFMIS since 2009. All tax revenue is paid directly into the treasury
       account, and most operational payments and transfer expenditures are executed by line ministries
       in a devolved Treasury model. Reconciliation between the Treasury subaccount and payment is
       made on a daily basis. There are three main Treasury Accounts: (i) Clearance Revenue Account;
       (ii) a Donor Fund Account; and (iii) an account catering to domestic revenues and expenditures.
       Each Treasury Accounts has subaccounts which are consolidated each day to ensure zero
       balances in the subaccounts. All accounts are managed online and a daily cash report is produced.

      Accounting at MoLG Level: A separate cost center on BISAN will be authorized and opened by
       MoF to account for program transaction, MoLG will use this cost center to record financial
       transaction pertinent to Component I and Component III.

      Accounting At MDLF Level: MDLF maintains an acceptable, Oracle based, accounting system.
       The accounting system is not part of the country systems since MDLF is an independent semi-
       government organization. The accounting system is not linked to MoF accounting system.
       However, the accounting system is computerized, and is able to capture Component II related
       transactions. The accounting system is capable to track and report on Project’s funds separately
       by Component, Financing Partner, and by each beneficiary VC. In close coordination with MoF,
       and MolG, MDLF will maintain the consolidated accounting records by combining/ compiling
       (MoF and MoLG) accounting records.
      Accounting At the VCs Level: VCs follow the financial management manual approved by the
       MoLG in 1999. This manual details the chart of accounts for the formulation of the Budget as
       well as for accounting. This is a cash-based double entry accounting. Eligible VCs will use their

                                                   13
       accounting system to record capital grants and to report on the receipts and uses of funds. On the
       other hand, small VCs will not receive any funds, and MDLF will record relevant financial
       transaction in its Oracle accounting system.


2.5 Financial Reporting At MDLF Level (TBC): MDLF will be responsible for preparing the
    Program’s consolidated financial statements and the semiannual (IFRs). The consolidated financial
    statements will comprise of (i) Consolidated Statement of Cash Receipts and Expenditures, showing
    funds received from the World Bank and from all financing partners separately, for each period and
    cumulatively from program inception. They will also include expenditures (by category, component
    and subcomponent for each financing partner) for each period and cumulatively from Project
    inception; (ii) Comparison of Budget vs. Actual for the period and cumulatively from project
    inception, with justification of significant variance; .
    The Audited Program Financial Statements should be submitted to the Bank no later than 54 days
    after the end of the fiscal year. . Supporting documents will be kept in MDLF and MoLG respectively
    for three years from the closing date, after the last audit of the project.

2.5 Controls and Audits
Currently the MDLF follows a good set of internal control procedures before making disbursements to
municipalities. The funds are released through a check which cannot be used for other purposes than the
payment it is meant to cover. The MDLF keeps a separate accounting ledger for each municipality and
VC.

      MDLF has no Internal Audit Department. In 2012, MDLF hired an Internal Audit Manager,
       but the latter was not performing satisfactorily. Therefore, MDLF has to discharge him from his
       responsibilities. However, MDLF is currently is in the process of hiring a new internal auditor.
      Internal Control at MoLG: it was concluded during the FSA that the current public
       disbursement process of development projects executed by VCs is not efficient. There is a
       prolonged delay (ranges from 3-4 months) between submitting payment request to contractor and
       issuance of check. Briefly, the disbursement process is as follow:
      After approving VCs budget and securing funds, the contractor performs the contracted works
       and submits invoice to VC.
      VC acknowledges the delivery of work and sends payment request and all supporting documents
       (e.g. invoice, guarantees...etc) to the Project unit at MoLG. Projects unit performs technical
       review and approves, and sends file to Finance department for review, then to MoF to reserve the
       funds and obtain Minister of Finance signature, then to MoLG financial controller, then to MoLG
       Minister, the again to MoLG finance department to record the transaction and issue the check to
       the contractor.
      It is worth to mention that, in the current public Financial Management System and due to limited
       to VCs fiduciary capacity, VCs do not receive funds. Rather, MoLG pays to contractors on their
       behalf. VCs could play a substantial role in increasing the efficiency of the disbursement process.
       Therefore, building their FM and procurement capacitates would result in submitting complete
       supporting documents in accordance with MoLG procedures and regulations, thus reducing
       disbursement delay.


                                                   14
       Internal audit: The central Internal Audit Department (IAD), at MoF, covers MoLG. The IAD
        was created in 2004 within the MoF with the dual mandate of performing the central internal
        audit, and decentralizing the internal audit function from the MoF to line ministries. The scope
        of the Internal Audit Function across the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) is governed by
        regulation No. 11/2011 (the Charter) issued in August 2011, which clarifies roles and
        responsibilities of the IAD as well as reporting requirements. A Central Harmonization Unit
        (CHU) was established within the MoF pursuant to article No. 5 issued by the Minister of
        Finance. According to the law, the CHU is responsible for setting and updating the internal audit
        methodology as well as providing advice to the internal audit units in line ministries. The CHU
        also supervises the decentralization transition process and reports to the Internal Audit
        Committee. The IAD adopted the International Internal Auditing Standards (published by the
        Institute of Internal Auditors) that were customized to meet the country context. In practice, the
        internal audit and the CHU are not yet fully operational and decentralized due to capacity and
        financing constraints.

       External Audit: During the past 2-3 years, MoLG has requested from all VCs to submit external
        audit reports of their accounts as part of the budget approval process. In other words, all VCs are
        required to submit their external audit reports in order for MoLG to approve their annual budget.
        Independent external audits on an annual basis are an important instrument for ensuring oversight
        as well as to enforce public sector accountability. In Palestine, the Supreme Audit Institution
        (SAI) has the mandate to carry out the external audit of VCs. However, due to the wide mandate
        to complete the audit of the Central Government and its agencies, the SAI is not able to carry out
        the audit of the VCs on a regular and timely manner. Currently, the SAI audits a sample of VCs,
        but with an average regularity between 3 to 5 years. These audits are meant to be compliant with
        INTOSAI norms and vary in intensity and modalities based on the size and risk level of the VCs.
        As part of the Program design, it has been agreed that a private external audit firm, acceptable to
        the Bank, will carry out annual external audit of the Program within a reasonable time period
        after the end of the financial year.

2.6 Disbursement arrangements from the Bank

Disbursements of the Program proceeds will be made at the request of the recipients upon achievement of
DLIs. Grant proceeds will be disbursed into a single treasury account held at the MoF. MoF will submit
disbursements requests to the Bank using the Bank’s standard disbursement forms. It was identified that
advances up to 25% under the PforR operation might be necessary in order to allow the recipients to
achieve the results for several DLIs, quantification of specific needs for advancement as well as
determination of the need of prior results are identified in the body of the Program appraisal document.


Section 3: Program Procurement Systems


3.1 Country Procurement System

Public procurement in the Palestinian Authority has so far been subject to two principal laws (Law No. 9
of 1998 on General Supplies, and Law No. 6 of 1999 on Procurement of Public Works). Local

                                                    15
government procurement has so far been governed by the Regulations for Procurement and Execution of
Public Works in Local Government (Decree No. 1 of 1998) issued by MOLG, which grants the
responsibility to Local Government Units (LGUs) for carrying out procurement, under the supervision of
MOLG. In April 2014, the Palestinian Authority promulgated a new Public Procurement Law (no. 8 of
year 2014) and issued its implementing regulation (no. 108 of year 2014) in November 2014. The new
Law, which applies to all public procurement activities, including those carried out by local government
units, represents a good balance between the current means of the country and internationally accepted
practices. It lays down an acceptable institutional and organizational set-up for public procurement;
provides comprehensive provisions on procedural matters; sets out provisions on transparency and
accountability; establishes a complaint/dispute review mechanism; and provides for routine dissemination
of information on public procurement through a single portal procurement website.

Procurement arrangements under the new Law are a mixture of centralized and decentralized
procurement. The implementing regulation to the new Law set thresholds for procurement to be carried
out by the various categories of procuring entities (ministries, municipalities and village councils).
Procurement for contracts estimated to exceed the set thresholds (see table 1) are to be issued centrally
through the Central Tenders Department of Ministry of Public Works and Housing, in the case of works
and consulting services; or by the General Supplies Department within Ministry of Finance, in the case of
Goods and Non-Consulting Services. The new Law also includes provisions for entering into framework
agreements for commonly used goods and services.

Table 1- Financial Thresholds for Procurement to be handled by Village Councils

               Procurement Type                                      Threshold (US$)
Goods                                                                     40,000
Works                                                                    150,000
Non-Consulting Services                                                   25,000
Consultants’ Services                                                     15,000


Open Bidding is the default procurement method set by the new Law. The thresholds for various
procurement methods, as defined in the implementing regulation to the new Law, are listed in table 2.

Table 2- Financial Thresholds for Procurement Methods

                Procurement Type                                   Threshold (US$)
Shopping -Goods                                                         20,000
Shopping Works                                                          50,000
Shopping-Non-Consulting Services                                        10,000
Direct Contracting (Goods, Works or Non-                                 5,000
consulting services)
Consultants Services without advertising a REOI                        100,000
Procurement for LGSIP will be carried out in accordance with the new Law, which will come into effect
in December 2015. In the meantime, the Palestinian Authority, through the newly established High
Council for Public Procurement Policies (HCPPP), is putting in place the components which are pre-
requisites for its effective implementation. Those include, inter alia: development and issuance of
National Standard Bidding Documents and National Procurement Manual, establishment of a single

                                                   16
portal procurement website, establishing the Dispute Review Unit and training of the procurement
workforce. Some of these components will need to be completed by Program effectiveness, whereas
others (e.g. capacity building and training of VCs/JSCs and MOLG on the new procurement rules and
procedures) will be supported by the Program or through parallel technical assistance.

The new law indicates that procurement decisions by LGUs will be subject to prior approval by MOLG,
based on a specific instruction to be issued by HCPPP, in consultation with MOLG, for this purpose.
Moreover, the Law assigns the responsibility for ex-post review of procurement decisions to the State
Audit Bureau (SAACB).

3.2 Procurement Responsibilities

Under Component 1- Local Service Delivery by VCs, eligible VCs will utilize per-capita investment
grants to implement various investment projects either directly (provided that they meet the qualification
criteria for implementation) or through a qualified JSC. Qualified VCs and JSCs will be responsible for
the entire procurement process, under MOLG supervision and oversight. This will include planning,
preparation of bidding documents, receipt and evaluation of bids, award of contract, to contract
supervision and management, and processing of payments to contractors/suppliers.

Under Component 2: Infrastructure Service Delivery through Joint Projects, eligible JSCs (or alternative
equally strong entity) will implement joint investment projects for the benefit of eligible VCs, under
MDLF supervision. The JSC will handle the whole procurement process and will advise MDLF on the
release of funds to the respective contractor/supplier.

Under Component 3: Capacity Building to strengthen local governance, MOLG will be responsible for
handling procurement and selection of consultants for the delivery of MOLG Annual Capacity
Development Plan, which covers the needs of MOLG departments and district offices as well as VCs and
JSCs.

3.3 Capacity assessment of entities involved in procurement

As part of the FSA, the Bank team assessed the capacity of the various entities involved in the project for
handling procurement; either through implementation or supervision/oversight. In general, the various
entities were found to possess the capacity to implement procurement for the Program, provided that they
receive support in terms of staffing and training.

VCs/JSCs: a sample of VCs and JSCs were assessed. Large VCs and JSCs were found to have experience
implementing procurement for investment projects and possess adequate capacity, whereas small VCs
tend to lack such capacity. To be qualified for project implementation, VCs and JSCs would be required
to have access to a qualified engineer with procurement experience. The Program will finance capacity
building of eligible VCs and JSCs on procurement and contract management.

MOLG: MOLG will be responsible for providing procurement oversight and supervision for individual
VC projects, as well as for implementing procurement under Component 3. Two MOLG District Offices
were assessed and found to possess the capacity to provide procurement oversight for VCs and JSCs. The
detailed responsibilities for such oversight (between MOLG Projects Department and District Offices),
prior review thresholds and business standards for the provision of approvals will be defined in the Local

                                                    17
Government Procurement Instruction, which has to be adopted by MOLG as a prior result. Staff of
MOLG Projects Department and MOLG District Engineers will receive training under the Program on the
new procurement rules and procedures. On the other hand, MOLG capacity to handle procurement for
Component 3, which would mainly consist of consulting services, is limited. MOLG relevant departments
will receive training on the selection and management of consultants contracts.

MDLF: MDLF will provide procurement oversight for joint projects. MDLF has long experience
implementing procurement under Bank-financed projects and possesses good capacity (both in terms of
knowledge and staffing) to assume this responsibility. The procurement audit and control structure
currently in place for MDP will be used for joint projects under LGSIP.

3.4 Handling of Procurement-Related Complaints:

The new Law establishes a robust complaint handling mechanism and sets standard times for responses to
be provided by the procuring entities to the complainants. Furthermore, the new Law sets up a dispute
review unit (DRU), within HCPPP, to look into appeals filed by bidders who do not receive an acceptable
response to their complaints from the respective procuring entity. The implementing regulation to the
Law specifies the grievances of the DRU, the procedures of filing, the procedures of dealing with the
compliant, the decision of the DRU and mechanism of issuing the DRU's decisions. Complaints which
prove to involve fraud and corruption practices will be forwarded by the DRU to the PACC for further
investigation and prosecution.


Section 4: Fraud and Corruption Risks and Mitigation
The fiduciary assessment also specifically examined the potential fraud and corruption risks to the
Program and the risk mitigation steps. . Discussions were held with key institutions responsible for the
policy and implementation aspects of addressing fraud and corruption. This section summarizes the
findings of the assessment and proposes a Program Action Plan that recommends additional measures to
mitigate the risks relating to governance and corruption for the proposed Program.

The Palestinian Authority has shown that it is getting more serious about its responsibility to continuously
to combat fraud and corruption. In this view, a national anti-corruption plan, namely “The National
Strategy on Anti-Corruption (2012- 2015)” was developed to coordinate and join the efforts of official
institutions, civil society organizations and all the parties charged with monitoring and accountability.
However, the lack of a functioning legislative assembly in Palestine continues to undermine the
possibility for oversight and control over the executive. Therefore, the role of the civil society
organizations becomes at particular importance.

The Palestinian Anti-Corruption Commission (PACC): The PACC is tasked with collecting,
investigating, and prosecuting allegations of public corruption. The anti-corruption commission is also
responsible for public information on corruption. It is also in charge of holding declarations of financial
status and request any additional information or clarification, reviewing the financial status of those
subject to the provisions of this law and investigating reports of illicit gain.

The Palestinian Anti-Corruption Commission (PACC) has the main responsibility in both policy
and implementation aspects of addressing fraud and corruption in the PA legal system. In the
absence of a functional PLC, the PACC was formed under presidential decree No. (7) in 2010


                                                    18
Pertaining to the Amendment of the Law of Illegal Gain No. (1) 20055. This law gives them the
right to question everyone in government including the president, members of legislature and the
judiciary, among others6. They can and have prosecuted ministers in the past. This law also
established the Corruption Crimes Court, which is a specialized court where fraud and corruption
cases are tried. The PA has acceded to the United Nations Convention Against Corruption
(UNCAC)7 and has also signed an Administrative Cooperation Agreement with OLAF, the
European Anti-Fraud Office8.

Complaints Handling: The PACC has a well-functioning complaint mechanism where anyone
can make a complaint. They take complaints over the phone, fax, email, facebook, or their
website http://www.pacc.pna.ps/ar/index.php?p=complain. The complaints can be anonymous
and they have a legal mandate to ensure the protection of the informant9. They also have their
own committees who track media reports and hold discussions with civil society organizations
and non-governmental organizations and can follow up if there are suspicions of fraud or
corruption. After a process of documenting and verifying the complaint, they have an in-house
legal team which decides whether to refer the complaint to other units of government such as the
police or the state audit or whether they will investigate and prosecute if necessary.

The PACC has an in-house legal team which prosecutes the cases in the specialized court. All
trials are open to the public. There are some delays in the judicial system but the law specifies
timelines that they try to abide by.

Institutional Arrangements for Program Oversight: The PACC system for handling complaints
is adequate as described above and will be relied on for the Program. If complaints are received
regarding the Program, the PACC will use the existing complaints handling mechanisms and will
use their process to investigate and prosecute as necessary. The PACC will relay any results to
the Bank. For the VCs receiving individual funds, if a system of complaint handling is not
already in place, the PACC will provide training to the VCs to set up such a system. The
Program Manager and the MoLG will also report to the PACC any irregularities found in annual
audited financial reports provided to them by the VCs or JSCs. The Operating Manual will
describe the procedures of the complaints handling mechanisms and the procedures of sharing
the results of the investigation. The assessment of the country level institutions for handling
complaints and for the investigation of instances of Fraud and Corruption Risks have been found
to be satisfactory and acceptable to the Program.

The INT guidelines for PfoR Operations will be applicable to the Program. Based on the
assessment of the country level institutions and systems for complaints handling and
investigation of complaints relating to Fraud & Corruption, it was agreed that the Bank will rely
on the country system for the investigation of specific complaints relating to Fraud and
Corruption in the Program. Upon receipt of any such complaint the PACC will investigate the

5
  Improving Governance and Reducing Corruption , World Bank, 2011.
6
  Article (5), Parties Subject to the Provision of the Law,
http://www.pacc.pna.ps/ar/cp/plugins/spaw/uploads/files/Anti-Corruption%20Law%202010%5b1%5d.pdf
7
  http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/CAC/signatories.html
8
  http://ec.europa.eu/anti_fraud/documents/international-cooperation/list_signed_acas_en.pdf
9
  Article (11), Provision of Information, http://www.pacc.pna.ps/ar/cp/plugins/spaw/uploads/files/Anti-
Corruption%20Law%202010%5b1%5d.pdf

                                                      19
complaint in accordance with its procedures and the the Bank will rely on the findings and
conclusions of such investigation.The Bank will retain the right to do any additional
investigation only on a case to case basis and after discussion and agreement with the
Government counterparts.

Debarment of Contractors: In accordance with the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines for P4R
operations “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-
Results Financing” dated 2012, the Program must take steps to ensure that debarred individuals
or entities are not awarded contracts. MDLF will maintain a database of all contractors awarded
contracts under their respective components, which will be updated on a monthly basis for all
projects. MDLF will periodically check all names in the database against the Bank’s list of
debarred contractors to ensure that no such contractor is awarded a contract under the Program.


Civil society: While there are more than 4,000 active NGOs in Palestine10, few focus specifically on
governance and corruption issues. The most active of these is as the AMAN Coalition for Integrity and
Accountability, the Palestinian chapter of Transparency International (US Department of State, 2011).
According to both AMAN and Global Integrity, NGOs do not experience harassment as a result of their
corruption related activities and operate in a relatively positive and supportive environment. There have
been no known attempts by the government to hinder the establishment and operations of anti-corruption
organizations. The lack of access to information is perceived as the major constraints to operate
effectively as a watch dog holding government accountable for its actions and decisions.




Section 5: Program Implementation, Audit and Disbursements.

MDLF will act a project manager and will be responsible for maintaining the fiduciary aspects regarding
the capital grants to of small VCs. While MoLG will be responsible for maintaining the fiduciary aspects
regarding capital grants for individual projects, as well as managing the fiduciary aspects of the related
capacity building and TA activities.

The program consolidated financial statements will be subject to an annual audit by an independent
external audit firms, acceptable to the Bank and in according to terms of reference (ToR) approved by the
Bank. The audit will be comprehensive and will cover all program grants. In addition to the financial
audit, the ToR will include a provision for technical audit.


Section 6: Program Fiduciary Risk Assessment
It is assessed that Program’s Financial Management arrangements relying on country system are
acceptable in terms of procedures and results after appropriate mitigation. However, Program’s FM
systems present significant risks against result achievements, with respect to Program resources
management and financial information for the stakeholders. The country system helps central government
and local governments (i) to keep close control of fiscal risks and to maintaining overall budget
discipline, (ii) to plan and execute the budget in line with its set priorities; and (iii) to manage public

10
     http://www.transparency.org/files/content/corruptionqas/314-Overview_of_corruption_in_Palestine.pdf

                                                       20
resources to deliver services. The country PFM system at central and local levels gives assurance that
fiduciary risks would be maintained at Substantial level and could be mitigated through the
implementation of appropriate mitigation measures. The Program can be implemented through the
existing PFM system, provided that some identified challenges, at the country and local levels, are
addressed, through accounting and reporting, internal and external audit. Based on the elements above,
the overall fiduciary risk is rated Substantial.

Assessment of Program Financial Management Systems: limited FM capacity was observed at the
VCs level, in particular at small VCs. There are weaknesses in the VCs revenue management system. For
example, there are no unique names for tax payers to track collections, and no quality assurance
procedures to monitor the expenditure process and to ensure accuracy of data entry.

The FSA concluded that the overall FM risk rating for the Program is “Substantial” after mitigating
measures, mainly due to:
 Risk of cost overruns and liquidity shortfalls due to non-delivery or insufficient outputs by VCs.
 MoLG supervision is not robust and is not satisfactory, and constitutes a major risk of not achieving
   Program desired results, mainly due to weaknesses in implementation and monitoring capacity.
 The control and external audit framework related to VCs provides some level of fiduciary comfort,
   but at the same time, these controls are redundant and overlapping and seem to create risk of delay in
   disbursement.
 Lack of coordination between implementing entities.

The following measures are designed into the proposed Project to mitigate FM-related risks:
    The Program design has included a set of Mandatory Minimum Conditions (MMCs) that VCs
        need to comply with before access is granted to the capital grant funds.
    To strengthen the accountability framework of VCs it has been agreed with the MoLG that VCs
        will have to submit annual audited financial statements conducted by an independent external
        auditor.
    The capacity-building element of the Program will provide the necessary support to the MoLG
        and VCs accordingly.
    To coordinate efforts, a Program Committee would be established for decisions requiring all key
        stakeholders.


FM Remedial actions to be included in the Program Action Plan: The following activities are suggested
under the Program Action Plan for improving the performance of financial management systems
supporting the Program implementation:

   Improve the financial management capacity of the MoLG to improve budgetary and accounting
    standards as well as the quality of financial information for VCs.
   Improve the quality of information provided in the central government financial information (Budget,
    annual accounts) on fiscal transfers to VCs.

Assessment of Program Procurement Systems:

Overall, the procurement processes and procedures introduced by the new Law and the existing capacities
within the various entities were found to be adequate for the efficient implementation of the Program,


                                                   21
provided that a set of pre-requisites and improvements are introduced to address the weaknesses and
mitigate the associated risks. The adoption of the instruction, to be issued by HCPPP, on the prior review
of LGU procurement decisions by MOLG (or MDLF), was agreed as a prior result. In addition, the
following components of the system will have to be completed by Project Effectiveness:

    -   National Standard Bidding Documents for Goods, Works and Consulting Services issued by
        HCPPP for use by all procuring entities, including LGUs, and National Procurement Manual
        prepared. The issuance and mandatory use of the SBDs and manual presents a number of
        advantages for the procurement system including: helping to standardize and harmonize
        implementation of procurement proceedings; promoting transparency and predictability in public
        procurement proceedings, helping to mitigate the effects of low levels of procurement capacity in
        the public sector; facilitating participation by small businesses; facilitating oversight, regularity
        control, and audit of procurement proceedings;

    -   Introductory training of all VCs and JSCs, and MDLF and MOLG concerned staff on the new
        public procurement system. The training will familiarize participants with the key aspects and
        innovations in the new legal, institutional and procedural framework and to provide participants
        with a basic introduction to the key steps and procedures in the procurement process, from
        planning through acquisition (bidding and contract award), until the completion of contract
        implementation and administration;

    -   Setting up the Dispute Review Unit (complaint handling mechanism); and

    -   Developing the single portal procurement website, where all procurement notices, procurement
        plans and contract award notices will be published.

Moreover, the Program will support the following capacity building activities during the first year of
program implementation:

    -   Training of large VCs and qualifying JSCs on National Standard Bidding Documents and
        Contract Management; and

    -   Training of MOLG respective departments on the selection of consultants and the management of
        consultants contracts.


The main procurement risk to the program arises from possible delays in putting in place the above-
mentioned necessary components for effective functioning of the new public procurement system. Other
possible risks include delays in the processing of procurement by the two central departments within
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Public Works and Housing of contracts above the applicable
thresholds. Moreover, the local government procurement instruction could be prepared to include low
prior review thresholds and excessive prior review requirements, which could result in substantial delays.
Based on the assessment the procurement risk is rated substantial.

Assessment of Fraud and Corruption Risks Mitigation Systems:

The FSA found that the current PACC system for handling complaints is adequate and will be relied on
for the Program. If complaints are received regarding the Program, the PACC will use the existing
complaints handling mechanisms and will use their process to investigate and prosecute as necessary. The

                                                    22
PACC will relay any results to the Bank. For the VCs receiving individual funds, if a system of
complaint handling is not already in place, the PACC will provide training to the VCs to set up such a
system. The Program Manager and the MoLG will also report to the PACC any irregularities found in
annual audited financial reports provided to them by the VCs or JSCs. The Operating Manual will
describe the procedures of the complaints handling mechanisms and the procedures of sharing the results
of the investigation. The Bank will retain the right to investigate.

Based on the assessment, it is concluded that the Program Fiduciary Systems is adequate to manage the
capital investment grants and are capable of producing accurate and timely information and reports.
However, there are significant gaps and weaknesses in these systems which need to addressed as part of
Program implementation. These gaps and weaknesses have the potential to make the fiduciary risk of the
Program to be high thereby impacting the ability of the Program to achieve its intended results. Therefore,
a Program Action Plan is prepared based on the findings and conclusions of the Fiduciary Risk
Assessment that will mitigate to a large extent the fiduciary risks and weaknesses identified. Considering
the existing weaknesses in Program Fiduciary systems and the time and effort required to implement the
Program Action Plan and the capacity building initiatives, the residual fiduciary risk rating for the
Program is rated as Substantial.


Section 7: Program Action Plan
Sl Program Action                     Base line          Responsibility Schedule               Verification
#
1. All VCs to submit their           Currently 40% MoLG          and       Starting with       Annual
     budgets and annual plans,       of VCs submit VCs                     the                 Performance
     annual financial statements     their    budgets                      second year of      Assessment and
     and audit reports to the        and       annual                      the Program         Program Reports
     MoLG.                           plans,    annual
                                     financial
                                     statements and
                                     audit reports to
                                     the MoLG
2.   VCs Councils to prepare No such action           VCs                  Starting from       Annual
     annual action plan to address plan exists                             the first year      Performance
     audit findings within a period                                        audit    report     Assessment and
     of six months after the receipt                                       received            Program Reports
     of the audit report
3.   Staff capacity and skills of    No such          MoLG                 Starting from       Performance
     VCs in financial management assessment is                             the first year of   Assessment
     to be assessed and a suitable   in place                              the Program
     capacity building program to
     be designed and implemented
4.   Training of all VCs and JSCs, No            such MOLG       and       Prior to project Training Reports
     and MDLF and MOLG training exists                MDLF         in      effectiveness
     concerned staff on the new                       coordination
     public procurement system,                       with HCPPP
5.   Qualified VCs, JSCs, MDLF SBDs             being HCPPP,               Starting from
     and MOLG use National finalized                  MOLG       and       the first year of
     SBDs in procurement under                        MDLF                 the Program

                                                    23
         the Program
6.       Qualified VCs, JSCs, MDLF      Single    portal HCPPP,    Starting from
         and MOLG post their            does not exist   MOLG,     the first year of
         procurement and contract                        MDLF, VCs the Program
         award notices on single                         and JSCs
         procurement portal
7.       Procurement        complaint   DRU does not HCPPP               Starting from       Complaints
         handling mechanism and         exist                            the first year of   database
         Dispute      Review    Unit                                     the Program
         operational
8.       Training of large VCs and      No          such MOLG       and First year of        Training Reports
         qualifying JSCs on National    training exists  MDLF         in the Program
         Standard Bidding Documents                      coordination
         and Contract Management                         with HCPPP


           Proposed DLIs for Program

           1. Local Government Procurement Instruction adopted by MOLG prior to project effectiveness


Section 8: Implementation Support


Implementation support will focus on implementation of the Program Action Plan, and will be part of the
implementation support provided by the World Bank for the LGSIP. From a fiduciary perspective, the
implementation support will focus on the following:

          Fraud and corruption: Supervise the implementation of the agreed fraud and anti-corruption
           measures under the program and provide guidance in resolving any issues identified;
          Financial Management: the task team will review the Program financial statements and audit
           reports as well as the Program reports such as the Results Verification reports prior to
           disbursement. The task team will coordinate the results reporting for the DLIs with the
           disbursement of the IDA credit funds.
          Procurement: the team willreview of procurement performance of LGUs and oversight provided
           by MOLG and MDLF. And help coordinate and follow up the capacity building provided to
           LGUs.

The Bank has a strong fiduciary team based in West Bank and Gaza who will play the lead role in
implementation support. Additional support will be provided by international staff as part of the
implementation support missions.




                                                    24
