                                                           102048




                  FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT


TANZANIA – STRENGTHENING PRIMARY HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR RESULTS




                           MARCH 2015
Table of Contents

Table of Contents



1         Executive Summary

2         Background and the Program Institutional Arrangements
    2.1        Program Description


    2.2        Institutional Framework and Implementation Arrangements
          2.2.1 Legal Framework for Public Financial Management ...................................................... 7
          2.2.2 Financial Management .................................................................................................... 7

3         Program Fiduciary Performance and Significant Fiduciary Risks
    3.1        Financial Management Risk Consideration
          3.1.1    Planning and Budgeting .................................................................................................. 9
          3.1.2    Accounting and Financial Reporting ............................................................................... 9
          3.1.3    Treasury Management and Funds Flow .......................................................................... 9
          3.1.4    Internal Controls (including Internal Audit) ................................................................. 11
          3.1.5    External Audit ............................................................................................................... 12
    3.2        Procurement Risk Considerations
          3.2.1 Fraud and Corruption Analysis ..................................................................................... 15
          3.2.2 Fraud and Corruption Risks for this PforR ................................................................... 16
          3.2.3 Alignment with Anti-Corruption Guidelines for PforR Operations ................................ 20

4         Fiduciary Risk and Mitigation Measures
    4.1        Overall Fiduciary Risk Rating

5         Financial Covenants

6         Implementation Support Plan




                                                                        i
Acronyms
ACG         Anti-Corruption Guideline              NKRA       National Key Results Area
AFROSAI-E   African Organization of Supreme        OP/BP      Operational Policy/Bank Procedure
            Audit Institutions in English-         PCCA       Prevention and Combating of
            speaking Africa                                   Corruption Act
AO          Accounting Office                      PCCB       Prevention and Combat of
BRNH        Big Results Now for Health                        Corruption Bureau
CAG         Comptroller and Auditor General        PDB        Presidents Delivery Bureau
CF          Consolidated Fund                      PE         Procuring Entity
CHM         Complaint Handling Mechanisms          PEFA       Public Expenditure and Financial
DLI         Disbursement Linked Indicator                     Accountability
DP          Development Partners                   PEMANDU    Performance and Delivery Unit
F&C         Fraud and Corruption                              (Malaysian Prime Minister)
GoT         Government of Tanzania                 PFM        Public Financial Management
GPSA        Government Procurement Services        PFMRP      Public Finance Management
            Agency                                            Reform Program
HCF         Health Care Facilities                 PforR      Program-for-Results
HR          Human Resources                        PI         Performance Indicator
IDA         International Development              PMO        Prime Minister’s Office
            Association                            PMO-RALG   Prime Minister’s Office Regional
FSA         Fiduciary Systems Assessment                      Administration and Local
IFMS        Integrated Financial Management                   Government
            Information System                     PMU        Procurement Management Unit
INT         Integrity Vice Presidency, World       PPA        Public Procurement Act
            Bank                                   PPAA       Public Procurement Appeals
INTOSAI     International Organization of                     Authority
            Supreme Audit Institutions             PPRA       Public Procurement Regulatory
IPSAS       International Public Sector                       Authority
            Accounting Standards                   PRSC       Poverty Reduction Support Credit
IT          Information Technology                 PS         Permanent Secretary
LGA         Local Government Authority             HFGB       Health facility governing Board
LAAM        Local Authority Accounting             SIDA       Swedish International Development
            Manual                                            Cooperation Agency
LAFM        Local Authority Financial              TA         Technical Assistance
            Memorandum                             TANESCO    Tanzania Electric Supply
MDA         Ministries, Departments and                       Company
            Agencies                               TB         Tender Board
MDU         Ministry Delivery Unit                 TBD        To Be Determined
                                                   TDC        Transformation Delivery Council
MoHSW       Ministry of Health and Social          TZs/Shs    Tanzanian Shillings
            Welfare                                USAID      United States Agency for
MoF         Ministry of Finance                               International Development
MoU         Memorandum of Understanding            VFM        Value for Money
NAO         National Audit Office                  WDC        Ward Development Committee
NCB         National Competitive Bidding




                                               i
                                        FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

1    Executive Summary

1.        The objective of the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) was to examine whether Program systems
provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for their intended purposes, with due attention
to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability. The financial management
systems were assessed to gauge the extent to which the planning, budgeting, accounting, controls, funds flow,
financial reporting and auditing systems and practices provide a reasonable assurance on the appropriate use of
Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. Equally, the Program procurement systems have also been assessed to
establish the extent to which the planning, bidding, evaluation, contract award and contract administration
arrangements and practices provide a reasonable assurance in support of achievement of the program results. In
addition, the assessment considered how Program governance systems manage the risks of fraud and corruption and
how such risks will be mitigated. The assessment covered MoHSW, PMO-RALG and a sample of 8 regional
administrations, 22 Local Government Authorities (LGAs) and 38 Health Facilities in line with Operational
Policy/Bank Procedure (OP/BP) 9.00, Program-for-Results Financing. Teams visited a representative sample of
regions, LGAs, health centers and dispensaries to collect this data. The assessment takes into consideration the
BRN healthcare NKRA Lab report; Controller and Auditor General’s Report for LGAs and Central Governmen t for
FY13; Tanzania PEFA reports for 2006, 2010 and 2013; Annual Performance Evaluation Report of the Public
Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA); the Procurement and Value for Money Audit reports of selected LGAs
and specific assessments done on MoHSW, PMO-RALG and MSD. The NKRA Lab report identifies some major
challenges such as incomplete reporting by the HMIS, insufficient data analysis capacity, under funding of the
health sector, procurement bottlenecks, supply chain challenges, corruption and favoritism in health facilities, poor
adherence to guidelines, erosion of MSD working capital and weak inventory control among others. These will be
addressed by streamlining and improving the supply chain process, ensuring governance accountability at all levels,
performance targets and contracts, fiscal decentralization by devolution, strengthen financial management of MSD,
improve governance and accountability, use ICT platform, reduction of pilferages, support funding for medicines,
social accountability and implementation of star rating of health facilities.

2.        The FSA covers institutional and implementation arrangements, fiduciary management capacity and
implementation performance. The legal and regulatory framework for this Program’s fiduciary syst ems was found to
be comprehensive and in line with international principles and standards for public procurement and financial
management. However, at the health facility level it was noted that there are no fiduciary systems in place as the
facilities are not currently managing any financial and procurement activities. In that regard fiduciary systems’
analysis was carried out at the LGAs and MDAs. The assessment also considered how existing systems handle the
risks of fraud and corruption.

3.       Financial Management risk for the program is rated as substantial. Key risks include timely transfer of
funds from the treasury to the LGAs and health facilities, late submission of reports, weak audit committees at the
LGAs, challenges of the Epicor system, chart of accounts not able to track funds by individual source as well as lack
of FM systems and staff at the health facilities. Other risks include weak accounting and internal audit staff skills
especially at the LGAs in order to produce quality reports, accounts and conduct quality audits. The following
measures would need to be implemented to address shortcomings: strengthening audit committees in order to
monitor how audit issues are being addressed; addressing the challenges faced by the Epicor system, revising the
chart of accounts such that it can track funding from Development Partners; ensuring that discrepancies between
funds transferred from treasury to LGAs and health facilities are eliminated through putting in place transparency
measures such as displaying amounts transferred at both LGA and health facility levels; addressing the challenge of
delays in receiving financial reports from the Health Facilities and LGAs which will be addressed through
appointment of Ward accounting technicians and capacity building of the persons involved both at HFs and
councils. Furthermore, there will be need to strengthen auditing arrangements for Health Facilities as it will be a
challenge for the CAG to audit them given the large number of health facilities involved in the program. This will
be mitigated by contracting out the audit to private external audit firms acceptable to IDA.

4.       Procurement risk is rated as substantial. Main risks are inadequate staffing in LGAs; inadequate
knowledge of PPA 2011 and its Regulations, planning, bidding documents & request for proposals preparation and
evaluation of bids/proposals; inefficiencies in managing procurement processes; delays in vetting contracts above
Tshs 50,000,000 by the AG; weak records keeping and management system; weak contract management. The
following mitigation measures need to be considered both before as well as during program implementation to


                                                         5
address the risk: recruit/appoint qualified and experienced staff to fill the gap; conduct tailored trainings on PPA
2011 and its Regulations to PMUs and internal audit units; establish sound records management system in all LGAs
and participating MDAs; ensure procurements are processed as per the timelines in the procurement plan and
responsible organs play their roles as stipulated by PPA; ensure LGAs abide with all procedures for processing
quotations including publications of contracts awards as per the PPA; review to uplift vetting thresholds; and
conduct tailor made trainings on contract management.

5.        Fraud and Corruption (F&C). The Fraud and Corruption (F&C) risks have been identified and
embedded as part of the broader fiduciary risks and mitigation measures. F&C assessment also involved a review of
the complaint handling mechanisms in the sector and how it can be strengthened to be used in the program for
results. The GoT has committed to implementing the program within the Bank’s Anti -Corruption Guidelines.

6.      Overall, the FSA concludes that, despite some weakness that have been identified and for which mitigation
measures have been proposed, the Program fiduciary systems provide reasonable assurance that the financing
proceeds under the Program will be used for intended purposes.


2     Background and the Program Institutional Arrangements

2.1    Program Description

7. This PforR operation will support the Government’s primary health care (PHC) program for the 2015/16 –
2019/20.

8. PHC under the Health Sector Strategic Plan IV constitutes the Government’s program. In the structure of the
Tanzania health system, PHC is delivered at the district level and below, involving district hospitals, health centers,
dispensaries and community based health services under the management of Council Health Management Teams
(CHMTs). Over the next five years, PHC will be guided by the HSSP IV, which will drive major reforms and
implementation.


Big Results Now in Health

9. The 2015-2018 BRN in Health program aims to accelerate the reduction of maternal and neonatal mortality
through improving performance, governance and accountability in PHC. It was developed as part of Tanzania’s
Development Vision 2025 and has four national key results areas (NKRAs) as follows:


      (i) Performance Management: This result area aims to improve health workers’ performance. Interventions
            include (i) a stepwise accreditation scheme for all PHC facilities in the country (aka “Star Rating”
            initiative) which has both nation-wide assessment and a subsequent facility improvement program
            (including incentives) to help facilities improve their performances and star ratings, (ii) fiscal
            decentralization at the facility level, (iii) performance contracts and targets at individual health worker
            levels, and (iv) social accountability mechanisms.
      (ii) Human Resources for Health : This result area aims to improve the distribution of skilled PHC workers
            especially in nine regions with critical shortages in human resources for health (i.e. less than national
            averages). Interventions include (i) increasing PHC employment permits for such regions, (ii) engaging the
            private sector to provide skilled HRH for public health facilities through PPPs, (iii) redistributing health
            care workers within regions, and (iv) optimizing the pool of new recrui ts through “bonding” policy or
            compulsory attachments.
      (iii) Health Commodities: This result area aims to improve the availability of essential medicines in PHC
            facilities. Interventions tackle key issues along the health commodities supply chain and include: (i)
            introducing new governance and accountability mechanisms, (ii) developing new finance and business
            model for Medical Stores Department (MSD), (iii) engaging private sector in procurement and distribution,
            (iv) implementing quality improvement initiatives for inventory management, and (v) using innovative
            information and communication technology (ICT) to report stock-outs.
      (iv) Maternal, Neonatal and Child Health: This result area aims to improve the coverage and quality of MNCH
            along the continuum of care. Interventions include (i) ensuring dispensaries and health centers meet Basic
            Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care (BEmONC) requirements, (ii) expanding CEmONC to selected

                                                           6
                           hospitals and health centers, (iii) strengthening the corresponding satellite blood banks which serve
                           facilities with Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care (CEmONC), and (iv) extending
                           MNCH services to communities through the use of community health workers (CHWs) and awareness
                           campaigns. Five regions that are poorly performing on maternal and neonatal mortality indicators will
                           receive priority focus.


2.2                        Institutional Framework and Implementation Arrangements

2.2.1                      Legal Framework for Public Financial Management

7.       The 1977 Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania underpins the legal framework for Public
Financial Management (PFM), and there are various laws that relate to PFM. The table below provides PFM-related
laws that will be applicable to the Program.

Table 2: PFM related legislation in Tanzania
Area                                        Description
Budget preparation, execution, reporting &       Public Finance Act 2001 amended 2004 & 2010.
accounting.                                      Public Procurement Act, 2004, amended 2011
Decentralization                            Local Government Finance Act 1982.
External Audit                              Public Audit Act 2008, amended 2011
Legislative Oversight                       The Constitution and the Standing Orders of the National Assembly.
Source: Government of Tanzania 2013 PEFA Report.

2.2.2                      Financial Management

8.      The Government of Tanzania has undertaken a number of Public Financial Management (PFM)
reforms and is now in its fourth PFM Reform Program which commenced on July 1, 2012 . However, the
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 1 Performance Indicators for Tanzania for 2006, 2010, and
2013 show mixed results as shown in Figure 2 below.


                                           Figure 2: Tanzania Average PEFA Scores for 2006, 2010, and 2013
        Average scores (A=4 & D=1)




                                     3.5
                                       3
                                     2.5
                                       2
                                     1.5
                                       1
                                     0.5
                                       0
                                          Credibility comprehen Policy-     Predictabil Accountin External         Donor
                                            of the      siveness   Based      ity and        g       Scrutiny     Practices
                                            budget         and    Budgeting control in Recording and Audit        (D: 1-3)
                                           (PI: 1-4) transparen (PI: 11-12)   budget        and     (PI: 26-28)
                                                       cy (PI: 5-            Execution Reporting
                                                           10)              (PI: 13-21) (PI: 22-25)
                                     2006    3.25         2.67        3          2          2.5        1.67          2
                                     2010     2.5         2.33        2         2.3        1.75          2          2.67
                                     2013      2           2.5       2.5        2.4          2           2           3




1
  PEFA is a global partnership of bilateral and multilateral donors including the World Bank formed to assess the
condition of countries’ public expenditure, procurement, and financial accountability systems and to develop a
Practical sequence of reform and capacity-building actions (http://www.pefa.org/).

                                                                                    7
9.        These findings show improvements in predictability and control in budget execution since 2006 although a
lot more remains to be done in relation to the effectiveness of internal controls for non-salary expenditures (PI2 20).
There are also improvements since 2010 in policy based budgeting and accounting, recording and reporting although
the timeliness and regularity of accounts reconciliations (PI 22) needs to improve. External scrutiny and audit has
not improved since 2010. There are concerns about the credibility of the budget whose performance has been
declining since 2006 mainly because of the composition of expenditure out-turn compared to original approved
budget (PI 2) arising out of cash rationing due to resource uncertainty, commitment controls being bypassed and
insufficient access to excess liquidity in GoT bank accounts held in commercial banks. As a result, expenditure
arrears have accumulated and they are paid out of budgets in the following years at the expense of planned service
delivery.

10.      The Legal and Regulatory Framework for this Program’s procurement will be governed by the new
Public Procurement Act of 2011 (PPA 2011) and attendant Regulations 2013. Procurements at the Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare (MoHSW), the Prime Minister Office Regional Administration and Local Governments
(PMO-RALG), Medical Stores Department (MSD) and Local Government Authorities (LGAs) will follow the
Public Procurement Act No.7 of 2011 and the associated Regulations of December 2013 as well as Regulations for
Local Government Authorities (Establishment and Proceeding of Tender Boards) of 2007. Under the PPA 2011, the
procurement functions remain decentralized to procuring entities while the Public Procurement Regulatory
Authority (PPRA) continues to provide oversight functions. The PPA 2011 has strengthened some of the mandate of
PPRA including the power to cancel procurement proceedings after conducting an investigation and being
reasonably satisfied that there is a breach of the Act and its Regulations.


11.      The PPA 2011 has enhanced the definition of fraud and corruption in a broader term by including
definitions of coercive practices, collusive practices and obstruction that was missing in the PPA 2004. Furthermore,
the PPA 2011 vests powers in the PPRA to blacklist and debar a bidder who has been debarred by international
organizations, such as the World Bank, in cases related or unrelated to fraud and corruption for such period as is
debarred by the international organization plus a further period of 10 years (for fraud and corruption cases) or five
years (for non-fraud and corruption cases).

12.      For the implementation of the Act, a set of Regulations have been issued; the Public Procurement
Regulations, 2013; Government Notice No. 446 of December 20, 2013. These are supplemented by the Local
Government Authorities’ (Establishment and Proceeding of the Tender Boards) Government Notice No.177 of 2007
for procurements under the Local Government Authorities. In line with the issued Regulations, various documents
have been revised as working tools to be in line with PPA 2011; including Standard Bidding Documents
(Procurement of Works, Procurement of Goods and Procurement of Non-consulting Services), Standard Request for
Proposals, Guidelines on the Tenders Evaluation (Works, Goods and Non-consulting Services), Guidelines on the
Technical & Financial Proposals Evaluation and Report Preparation, Guidelines for Preparing Responsive
Proposals, Guidelines for Preparing Responsive Bids and Procedural Forms. All these documents are accessible on
the PPRA’s website free of charge.

13.       Procurement of medicines and medical supplies under PPA 2011 and its Regulations. The Regulations
made under the PPA 2011 have provisions dealing with procurement of medicines and medical supplies, including
maintaining a list of catalogue items to be published on a yearly basis in the Tenders Portal and Journal managed by
PPRA. The MSD is mandated to arrange for procurement of catalogue items. MSD may through framework
agreements, source catalogue items by placing call-off orders; such framework agreements, should be of no more
than three years. Under this arrangement, the procuring entities are required to place orders to MSD for any item
included in the price catalogue within one working day of reaching the buffer stock. In the event that the catalogue
items requested are not available, MSD is required within one working day of receipt of the request to issue a non-
availability (out of stock) notice to the procuring entities so that they can opt for another appropriate procurement
method.




2
    PI stands for Performance Indicator.

                                                          8
3       Program Fiduciary Performance and Significant Fiduciary Risks

3.1     Financial Management Risk Consideration

3.1.1      Planning and Budgeting

Overall FM objective - the program budget is realistic, is prepared with due regard to government policy,
and is implemented in an orderly and predictable manner.

14.       The planning and budget preparation processes are considered reasonably participatory and adequate for
the Program. The main shortcoming established during the assessment is the (very) late availability of budget
ceilings from the MoF contrary to requirements of the budget guidelines. Furthermore it was noted that facilities do
not understand the budgeting tools; and the CCHP Guidelines do not include revenue budget, and therefore facilities
are not required to prepare revenue budgets. Staff and members of facility governing committees will require
capacity building in budget preparation and monitoring, including the use of PlanRep. In addition, PlanRep structure
will need to be adapted to recognize primary health facilities as budgeting entities.


3.1.2      Accounting and Financial Reporting

Overall FM objective - adequate program records are maintained, and financial reports produced and
disseminated for decision-making, management, and program reporting.

The accounting policies and procedures for both central and local government (Local Government Accounting
Manual) are robust but there is the need to enhance the skills of staff, especially at LGAs on how to utilize them
effectively whilst producing accounts. The Epicor accounting software produces financial statements but at local
government level it needs its chart of accounts to be revised as it cannot show which Development Partner is
funding the program. In addition, the connectivity of the Epicor system needs to be improved as it creates
inefficiency in producing accounts. There is also a need to activate the asset management module of the system in
order to record assets on the system and compute depreciation. The PlanRep tool is used for planning and budgeting
at the LGAs but once the budget is complete, the tool cannot automatically upload the budget to Epicor. This is
manually done and subject to errors. In order to address the matter, there is need to have an integrator for the two
systems. Finally, the reporting module for Epicor needs to be enhanced in order to produce useful reports for
management to take action.

15.     Given that this will be a large and complex program covering the whole country, there is a risk that there
will be delays in submission of accurate financial reports given that there could be communication challenges
between the Health Facilities and the LGAs. There will be a need to train staff in order to enhance their skills in
planning and reporting. Also, PMO-RALG and MoHSW should jointly develop appropriate standardized reporting
templates to capture FM data required for program monitoring.

16.      LGAs do not have adequate capacity in terms of staff numbers, skills and working tools, e.g. computers and
vehicles for effective discharge of their duties given that they will have to visit Health Facilities to conduct
supervision. Staff technical skills in accounting should be strengthened and working tools provided to address this
issue. Ward level accounting technicians should be employed to provide first line FM support to health facilities
and bridge the existing supervision gap between council headquarter and facilities. These technicians will need to be
equipped for movement around facilities under their jurisdiction, preferably by paying them a monthly tax-free
transport allowance.


3.1.3      Treasury Management and Funds Flow

Overall FM objective - adequate and timely funds are available to finance program implementation.

No Designated or Special accounts will be operated for this operation. Funds will flow from IDA into the
government owned Holding Account for HBF and another for RBF both at BOT and denominated in United States
Dollars. From there funds will be transferred to the Consolidated Fund sub-account for the program denominated in
local currency also at the BoT. MoHSW, PMO-RALG, LGAs and health facilities will be paid through the
Exchequer Issue Notification and transfers from the Consolidated Fund sub-account for the program will be made


                                                         9
directly to their bank accounts mainly held by commercial banks. Payments will then be made from these accounts.
The details of the Holding Accounts for HBF and RBF as well as the Consolidated Fund sub-account at BoT and
their signatories should be submitted to the Bank between the signing of the Credit and its effectiveness. The
opening of bank accounts at MoHSW, PMO-RALG, LGAs and HFs should be in line with the existing government
guidelines as issued by the Accountant General. The chart of accounts in Epicor will need to be expanded to
incorporate individual facility bank accounts in order to capture funds transfers as revenue and payments as
expenditure. This will make it easier for audit verification of program funded transactions.

17.       The assessment revealed instances of delays in release of funds from Treasury to LGAs. On average funds
take at least 30 days to reach the LGAs as opposed to the standard 14 days. There is need to adhere to specific
disbursement timelines for all actors and implementing institutions within which action(s) must be taken or actual
disbursement must take place provided funds are available for program implementation and disbursement conditions
fulfilled. There is concern regarding the unpredictable nature of releases by the Ministry of Finance (MoF). Without
reasonable predictability, it is difficult to plan. MoF needs to ensure regularity in funds releases by committing to
transfer funds on a quarterly basis. PMO-RALG should monitor this and ensure prompt transfer of own source funds
to Health Facilities, by LGAs.
18.

Figure 3: Funds Flow Diagram for BRNH

   GoT                            IDA                                  HBF DPs




                     GoT US$ Holding                             Got US$ Holding account
                     account for RBF at BoT.                     for HBF at BoT.




     Project Sub-Account(s) in the Consolidated Fund Account
     at BOT



               Commercial Bank appointed by GoT




 PMORALG                  MoHSW                    Lump-sum to a Commercial
 Development              Development              Bank. Bank- Transfers to RAS,
 Account                  Account                  DED & health facilities’ bank
                                                   accounts.




                                                         10
3.1.4     Internal Controls (including Internal Audit)

Overall FM element objective - There are satisfactory arrangements to monitor, evaluate, and validate
program results and to exercise control over and stewardship of program funds.


19.      The basis for internal control procedures in LGAs is: the Local Authority Accounting Manual (LAAM) of
2009 and the Local Authority Financial Memorandum (LAFM) of 2010. The two documents set out detailed
processes to be followed and documentation necessary for comprehensive accounting system, segregation of duties,
approval hierarchies and filing of documents. However, in view of regular observations made and audit issues
raised by the Controller and Auditor General in annual reports, recommended procedures are not always adhered to.
The figure below presents an evaluation of internal control systems and good governance issues at LGAs for the
year 2012/2013.




Figure 4: An analysis of internal control weaknesses at LGAs

           Absence of documented fraud prevention
                                                                    67
                        strategy/ plan

 Inefficient performance of epicor and/ or Lawson                       78

         Absence of risk management & assessment                   57

        Inadequate performance of audit committees                           91

                   Inadequate performance of IAUs                             104

   ICT environment review & accounting systems                                106

                                                     0        20         40         60   80   100   120
Source: Controller and Auditor General External Audit Report on Local Government Authorities FY 2012/2013.


20.       The Government has taken a number of initiatives to address non-compliance and strengthen oversight to
ensure that audit findings are addressed timely and adequately by ministries and LGAs. Steps taken include creation
of an Internal Audit Unit in each ministry and LGA and the appointment of the Internal Auditor General with five
assistants, including Assistant Internal Auditor General responsible for LGAs; and strengthening of the three
parliamentary oversight committees which include: the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), the Local Authorities
Accounts Committee (LAAC), and the PMO-RALG Audit Committee in terms of training and providing adequate
funds for PAC to carry out its duties. However, despite having internal audit units, a number of challenges remain;
they include internal auditors not having access to Epicor 9.05 and therefore not able to audit the system.

21.       A review of internal audit units at the LGA level revealed they were under-resourced in terms of number
of staff, skills and working tools. Very few internal auditors had professional qualifications and in all visited
councils internal audit was regarded as an accounting discipline hence the need to sensitize LGAs about the role of
internal audit. Furthermore, council audit committees were noted to be generally weak and ineffective. PMO-RALG
needs to review the composition and structure of audit committee at LGAs to enhance independence and quality of
membership.




                                                         11
3.1.5     External Audit

Overall FM objective - adequate independent audit and verification arrangements are in place and take
account of the country context and the nature and overall risk assessment of the program.

The Public Audit Act no. 11 of 2008 grants the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) sole responsibility for
statutory audit of all MDAs and LGAs3. CAG discharges this responsibility either directly or through private
auditors contracted as agents. Outsourcing of the audits partly solves the challenge of staff constraints at the CAG
office. The CAG has regularly carried out external audits on time and issued reports within nine months of the year
end, as stipulated under the law. However, the major risk is the CAG having challenges of auditing the large number
of health facilities which can be addressed by outsourcing to private audit firms. The program will, however, need
to budget for this. As noted in the PEFA indicators there are delays in the scrutiny of CAG’s reports by relevant
parliamentary committees that need to be improved on by building their capacity. Audit terms of reference should be
agreed on an annual basis between CAG, MoHSW, PMO-RALG, LGAs and IDA to ensure there is an agreeable
scope coverage given the risk of the program. Should there be need to conduct other forms of audit, e.g. forensic and
value for money audits, these will be done by CAG that has departments handling these types of audit.


    3.2    Procurement Risk Considerations

22.       Procurement risk is rated to be substantial. Main areas of significant risk to the program are: inadequate
staffing in LGAs specifically in the procurement and internal audit unit; staff have inadequate knowledge of PPA
2011 and its Regulations, planning, bidding documents & request for proposals preparation and evaluation of
bids/proposals; and inefficiencies in managing procurement processes, delays in vetting contracts above TZS 50
million by the AG; weak records filing and management system and weak contract management. These risks will
need to be addressed, monitored and evaluated throughout the program.

23.      Procurement Planning. The PPA and its Regulations require all procuring entities to prepare Annual
Procurement Plans linked with annual work plan and budget. It is also mandatory for procuring entities to advertise
the Annual Procurement Plans in the form of General Procurement Notice in the newspapers and submit a copy to
PPRA for publishing in its website and for monitoring purpose. Based on the data gathered from the LGAs visited,
the average volume of procurement per LGA is about Tanzania Shilling 10bn/= per annum covering all sectors
including health. This volume is translated into about 100 packages for goods, works and non-consultant services
per year with most of the packages not exceeding the value of US$ 500,000.00. During the assessment, it was noted
that planning of procurement of medicines and medical supplies commence at the district hospitals, health centers
and dispensaries level whereby each hospital, health center and dispensary identify their needs. The aggregation of
medicines and medical supplies to be procured for the financial year is done at the district level and included in the
LGAs’ procurement plans ready for submission to the responsible ministry for final compilation bef ore tabling to
the budgetary parliament. The Bank’s assessment found that most of the plans are not comprehensively prepared,
user requirements are included in the APP with no aggregation, mixing of the templates for works/goods and
consultancy services, some of the APP include non-procurable items.

24.       Procurement Markets and Practices. PPRA is registering suppliers and service providers doing
business with the public sector and post the same to its website. By September 2013, only 324 suppliers and service
providers had been registered since the system for registration was introduced; only 10 (3%) of these are suppliers of
medicines and medical supplies and equipment. It was observed that LGAs are using shortlisted suppliers pre-
qualified through NCB. However, there are legal requirements that pharmaceuticals have to be registered with the
Tanzania Food and Drugs Authority (TDFA). Most of the pharmaceutical products in the country are imported by
MSD and the law requires that any person dealing with importation of the products must be registered by TFDA

25.       Procurement Processes and Procedures. The PPA and its associated Regulations require procuring
entities wishing to commence competitive tendering to provide all eligible bidders with timely and adequate
notification of the procuring entity’s requirements and an equal opportunity to tender for the required goods, works
or services. The Regulations spell out the contents of invitation to tender and it is mandatory that invitations to
tender be made in writing. The format of advertisement used to publish the advertisement is issued by PPRA and it
contains adequate information to the prospective bidders to make decision to participate. It is mandatory that the

3
  Audit at LGAs is governed by the Local Government Finances Act No.9 of 1982 (revised 2000) which stipulates
that accounts of every LGA shall be audited by the National Audit Office (NAO)

                                                         12
solicitation documents be issued immediately after first publication of the tender notice to all bidders who respond to
the tender notice. Under PPA 2011, it is mandatory for procuring entities to prepare a tender notice for national and
international tenders and submit the same to PPRA for publication in the Journal and Tenders Portal.

26.      Bidding Documents used are those developed by PPRA including: (i) standard bidding documents for the
procurement of goods, works, and non-consulting services as well as standard request for quotations; (ii) request for
proposal for selection and employment of consultants; and (iii) guidelines for evaluation of bids and proposals. The
PPRA has revised all standard bidding documents, guidelines and working tools to align them with the provision of
PPA 2011 and its Regulations. The standard bidding documents issued by PPRA have been reviewed and found to
be acceptable to the Bank with some exception on NCB procedures. However, the challenge has been to customize
the bidding documents to suit the requirements of a particular procurement. Generally all the LGAs are using these
bidding documents. As for the specifications for medicines and medical supplies, LGAs rely on the specifications
and catalogue issued by MSD. In terms of specifications especially for works contracts, LGAs rely very much on the
specification issued by the Ministry of Works with minor modifications depending on the circumstance.


27.      Bids evaluations are carried out by an evaluation committee constituted according to the PPA and it
Regulations. Evaluation committee comprises members from the user departments, technical staff and sometimes
from outside the LGAs where expertise is lacking internally. Generally, evaluations follow the
evaluation/qualification criteria specified in the bidding documents. However, the following weaknesses were noted
in the reviewed sample; post-qualification criteria are used in the preliminary stage; bids are rejected for being
below engineer’s estimate (works tenders); attachments such as a copy of advertisement and minutes of bids
opening are not attached.

28.      Distribution of medicines and medical supplies, storage and inventory management. Procurement of
bulk medicines and medical supplies is done by MSD headquarter through nine strategic zonal centers. The
inspection and quality assurance of deliveries from suppliers is carried out at MSD laboratories. The zonal stores
have the responsibility of delivering medicines and medical supplies to the respective hospitals, health centers and
dispensaries in accordance with the schedule agreed between the end users and MSD. The assessment revealed that
MSD is not issuing non-availability notice within one day as provided in the PPA 2011 and its Regulations 2013.
Hospitals, Health Centers and Dispensaries normally receive non-availability notice when medicines are delivered
as the notice is contained in the delivery notes which indicate items that are out of stock.

29.      The inspection of the delivered medicines and medical supplies at the level of district hospitals is done by
the Therapeutic Committee while at the health centers and dispensaries it is done by the Health Facility Governing
Committee. Generally, there is no robust quality assurance system at the facilities level for the medicines supplied
by private vendors apart from visual inspection and quantity verification. The main challenge noted by the
assessment team was inadequate space/room for safe and proper storage of medicines. The assessment team
observed lack of internal and external control mechanisms for inventory management. There was no evidence to
attest whether stock-takings at the facility level were done regularly.

30.       Inefficiency within User Departments, PMUs and Tender Boards. Significant delays have been noted in
processing procurement. Timelines indicated in the procurement plans are not followed and procurement processes
are not initiated on time due to delays in preparing specifications, statement of requirement or terms of reference.
Critical areas with inefficiencies included processing of requirements from user departments, preparing tender
documents, delays in appointing evaluation committees, reviewing tender evaluation reports and preparing contract
documents. The main reasons for inefficiencies within PMUs include: excessive ad hoc procurement due to poor
planning; inadequate staff in PMUs; inadequate knowledge and experience in procurement matters for some of the
PMUs staff; lack of experienced technical staff within PMUs (inappropriate staff composition); inappropriate PMUs
structure; and weak procurement records management systems. The main reasons for inefficiencies within Tender
Boards include: inadequate knowledge of PPA and its Regulations, and absence of members to form a quorum for
the meetings of the tender board. Inefficiencies of these organs lead to bids being awarded after expiration of bids
validity period and delays in service delivery and implementation of projects.

31.      Transparency is among the fundamental pillars of public procurement and disclosure of information is one
of the elements of transparency. On average in about 40% of the tenders awarded, unsuccessful bidders were not
informed on the award decisions and publications of awards were not published on LGA’s notice board or availed to
PPRA. The law requires PPRA to publish contracts awarded in its Journal and Tender Portal, the names of those
who have been awarded the contracts, contract amount, the date when the awards were made, contracts period and

                                                          13
final contracts amount. For PPRA to fulfill this requirement procuring entities are required to notify PPRA on the
awarded contracts for further publishing. However, from PPRA’s audit reports the compliance on the publication of
contract awards still a problem.

32.      Framework Agreements for Common Use Items and Services (CUIS) under GPSA. Most of the
goods/services in the LGAs are procured through Common Used Items Systems (CUIS) under Framework
Agreements introduced by the Government. The Government in February 2011 established the Government
Procurement Services Agency (GPSA) to be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the CUIS throughout
the country. According to PPRA’s performance report FY 2012/13, there is a decline in the use of the system. Some
of the challenges for implementing the system are; lack of adequate knowledge by some suppliers and service
providers to prepare bidding documents which leads to submission of non-responsive bids; some procuring entities
do not use the system, especially LGAs which still advertise tenders for CUIS; inadequate enforcement measures for
those who do not use the system as well as service providers failing to execute call off orders at contractual prices,
demanding a price increase within the validity of signed contract; while some service providers were reluctant to
give their prices because they are not sensitized enough to understand advantages of the system.

33.      Controls and Integrity. Procurement oversight at PMO-RALG, MoHSW, MSD and LGAs is done by
Internal Auditors, PPRA and Controller and Auditor General (CAG). Internal Auditors in LGAs prepare quarterly
audit reports which do not cover procurement issues adequately. According to PPA 2011, the Internal Auditor is
required to state in his/her report whether the Act and Regulations have been complied with; and the Accounting
Officer of the procuring entity after receiving the report is required to submit such report to PPRA within 14 days.
Upon receiving the report, PPRA may, if it considers necessary, require the Accounting Officer to submit a detailed
report on any procurement implemented in violation of the Act and Regulations for review and necessary action. It
was observed that this provision is not being complied with by procuring entities as most of them are unaware of the
requirement. It was noted that most of the Internal Auditors are not conversant with provisions of the PPA and its
Regulations and most of the units are understaffed.

34.      Audits. Procurement audits carried out by PPRA evaluate the compliance level and detect corruption using
the 13 performance indicators and Red Flags Checklist. Results of procurement audits and VFM are published in
local newspapers and PPRA’s website. Accounting Officers of non -performing procuring entities are summoned by
PPRA’s Board of Directors to discuss the findings and corrective measures to improve compliance in their entities.

35.       Procurement Capacity. In all LGAs visited there were procurement officers although the number of staff
is inadequate to match procurement volumes. Currently, experience of procurement officers vary significantly from
one LGA to another as there are LGAs with officers with experience and others with junior officers with no
adequate experience. Due to lack of adequate number of staff in most of the LGAs, PMU members are drawn from
different user departments to form ad-hoc committees to handle procurement issues, contrary to the requirement of
the PPA. Generally, the assessment revealed that there is inadequate knowledge in the application of provisions of
the newly enacted PPA 2011 and its Regulations.

36.       Records Keeping. The PPA and its Regulations prescribe procurement records that should be maintained
and archived by a procuring entity; these include procurement proceedings and decisions taken and the reasons for
those decisions. The records range from planning to contract closure and to be kept for five years after contract
closure. Generally, records in the LGAs are scattered, incomplete, with no proper filing and management system.
PMUs are maintaining and archiving records of tendering process while account departments are maintaining
payments records, and user departments are maintaining and archiving contract management records with
consequent difficulties to trace records of particular tender in one file. There is inadequate space for PMU staff and
documents storage.

37.      Procurement arrangements of medicines and medical supplies at the facility levels: In principle, no
procurement of medicine is undertaken at the facility level. MSD is charged with responsibility of procuring
medicines and medical suppliers and distributing directly to government hospitals including accredited private
referral hospitals/facility, district hospitals, health centers and dispensaries. LGAs undertake procurement of
medicines and medical supplies only when they receive the non-availability notice from MSD and procure using the
funds allocated in their budget. In this case, after receiving such notice, facilities channel their requirements to DMO
who consolidates all requirements including district hospitals’ requirements prior forwarding the same to the District
Executive Director (DED) for sanction and subsequent submission to PMU for processing. PMUs are responsible
for managing all procurement of medicines and medical supplies. During the assessment, it was noted that the



                                                          14
procurement of medicines and medical supplies from the private vendors were procured through competitive
quotations as a default method from the pre-qualified suppliers.

3.2.1    Fraud and Corruption Analysis

38.        The Prevention and Combat of Corruption Bureau (PCCB) was established under the Prevention and
Combating of Corruption Act. No. 11 of 2007 (PCCA 11/2007) and came into force on July 1, 2007. The overall
performance of the PCCB in terms of allegations and cases handled is reflected in the table below. As the table
below shows, the government’s convictions rates are low in most corruption cases, compared to the number of cases
investigated as compared to corruption cases in other countries. In Kenya, the Ethics and Anti-Corruption
Commission prosecuted 222 cases and obtained a conviction in 172 cases in 2014. Further, it is clear that the courts
are still dealing with a big backlog of cases from previous years, than the number of current year’s cases.

Table 5: Analysis of allegations received and cases investigated
Year     Allegations Cases           Admin     New       Total cases      Convictio      % of                 Assets
          received     Investigate   actions   cases     prosecuted       ns             convictions          recovered
                       d             taken     in                                        compared to          (in TZS
                                               court                                     cases                bln)
                                                                                         investigated
2011     4,765          819             30          193      709           52            6%                  4.6
2012     5084           1178            27          288      723           47            4%                  9.7
2013     5,456          1,100           19          343      894           89            8%                  4.2
2014* 2,765             391             6           166      837           87
    *Jan to June 2015
Source: PCCB Head office, September 2014
39.      Over the past six years, the major international indices have shown that the governance environment in
Tanzania has weakened. The Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) show a declining trend between 2007 and
2012 for four out of six governance indicators. With the exception of political stability and absence of violence, and
regulatory quality the other indicators including government effectiveness, voice and accountability, rule of law and
corruption have been declining. Recent statistics (2014) released by The Global Corruption Barometer, World Wide
Economic Forum (Executive Opinion Survey), World Governance Indicators and Ibrahim Index on Africa
Governance, all show a further decline in relation to control of corruption. Transparency International, on the other
hand, shows there is a slight improvement in the county’s ranking of corruption from 35.5 in 2013 to 38.9 in 2014.
Overall, there is a weak political will to fight grand corruption and, in most cases, corruption in service delivery is
widespread and attempts to mitigate it have not been successful.

 60

                                                                            Control of Corruption:
                                                                            Percentile Rank
 50
                                                                            Government Effectiveness:
                                                                            Percentile Rank
 40
                                                                            Political Stability and Absence
                                                                            of Violence/Terrorism:
 30                                                                         Percentile Rank
                                                                            Regulatory Quality: Percentile
                                                                            Rank
 20
                                                                            Voice and Accountability:
                                                                            Percentile Rank
 10
                                                                            Rule of Law: Percentile Rank


  0
        [2006]   [2007]   [2008]   [2009]   [2010]   [2011]    [2012]



                                                              15
                                  Source: Worldwide Governance Indicators (2014)


3.2.2    Fraud and Corruption Risks for this PforR

Based on the fiduciary risks identified in this FSA, and assuming that most of expenditures and procurement will
take place at MoHSW, PMO-RALG, and LGA level, the main corresponding Fraud and Corruption (F&C) risks for
this operation are the following: (i) collusion and fraud during procurement; and (ii) misappropriation of funds. The
main risks are related to: For FM: (a) weak internal controls at LGA level (low levels of training, lack of access for
internal auditors to Epicor, working tools and budget to carry out their responsibilities and weak oversight by facility
board); (b) lack of adequate levels of staff at LGA level; and (c) inadequate information on budgets and
expenditures available to facility managers. For procurement: (a) splitting of tenders, (b) delays in bid evaluations,
including adjudication of evaluation reports and awards recommendations; (c) weaknesses in publication of contract
awards; (d) poor record keeping; and (e) weak contract management. Evidence provided in this FSA on procurement
controls and integrity seems inconclusive, so it is difficult at this point to ascertain the implications for F&C. F&C
risks at LGA level related to FM and Procurement should be considered “ substantial”, especially considering the
program is nationwide. Risk related to MoHSW and PMO-RALG is substantial too.

Based on the current information, overall F&C risks appear as “substantial” in particular in a weak environment in
terms of control of fraud and corruption. Mitigation measures for lowering these risks, as well, as the risks of
detection of fraud and corruption are detailed below to include (a) strengthening the facility boards/committees
oversight of service delivery, and (b)strengthening the Complaints and Handling Mechanism.

Facility Boards/Committees

Each health facility is governed by a board or committee that is responsible for providing oversight of the health
services provided. The functionality of this board/committee is often poor with meetings that are supposed to be
held quarterly rarely taking place and records not kept or shared with the District management. The members of the
board/committee are also poorly informed about their role. Strengthening the functioning of facility
boards/committees is essential in improving accountability for service delivery at the facility level. In addition, the
boards/committees need adequate information on budgets, staffing and other service delivery inputs to be able to
carry out their oversight role effectively. This will help to ensure that the facilities performance is reported to the
community representatives, District management is able to track the facilities performance and hence make
supervisory visits more meaningful. Overall, well-functioning facility boards/committees should be able to raise
concerns on the quality of services to management and to ensure they are addressed.

Complaint Handling Mechanisms

The public sector in Tanzania has regulations that mandate different organizations including service delivery
facilities at different levels, to handle complaints. However, these mandates are not always followed in practice.
Visits conducted as part of the fiduciary assessments to LGAs and Health Facilities revealed that there are
constraints to effective implementation of these mechanisms at the facility level, including knowledge of the system
functionality, conflict of interest in handling of suggestion boxes, shortage of staff dedicated to handle complaints
and absence of complaints register. At the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare headquarters, PMO-RALG
headquarters and at the Local Government Authorities however, the Complaints Handling Mechanism (CHM) are
functional, but at this level, they have no significant impact on health services complaints which arise at the
hospitals, health centers and dispensaries. Few of the health facilities have a functioning CHM.


For the purpose of this PforR, the existing CHM mechanisms will be strengthened. The objective should be to
strengthen the oversight committees at the level of the health center and hospitals to ensure that they provide
appropriate oversight of the health service including ensuring a functioning CHM is in place. All complaints will be
reported to the Council Health Management Team. For F&C complaints, the Council Health Management Team will
send them directly to PCCB, which is independent and well resourced. Complaints unrelated to F&C will be sent to
the Council Health Management Team which should be tasked with reporting them to the PMO-RALG, following
the existing bureaucratic channels. In addition, as part of the programs information, education and communication
campaign, the program will inform potential users of the CHM the essential features of the system and how to
access it. There is a separate complaint handling mechanism for procurement.


                                                          16
On complaints purely related to procurement, the Committee would forward it to the procuring entity with an
instruction to respond to the complainant with a copy to the Committee and the Chairperson of the Health Facility
Board. Bidders not happy with the response from the procuring entity will appeal directly to the Public Procurement
Appeals Authority (PPAA) who will listen to each party and make a determination. The party which will not be
satisfied with the determination of the PPAA may seek a Judicial Review. One point the public raises is the absence
of mechanism to know if a complaint is addressed at all, other than corruption cases that go to court The Flow Chart
below depicts the summary of how a procurement complaint should be handled for the procurements at Health
Facilities level.




                                                        17
                   Flow Chart 1: Complaint Handling Mechanisms


                                         Community,
                                          citizens and
                                         users/patients




                                                                  Facility
                       Facility Head                             Suggestion
                                                                    Box



                                                                  Facility
                                                                 Committee/
                                                                   Board




                                       District Health
 LGA PCCB                              Management
                                           Team




  Regional
   PCCB


                                       Regional
                                       Health
                                       Management
                                       Team
   PCCB




Police
                                         PS PMO-
                   PS MoHSW
                                          RALG


         Auditor


                                       18
Flow Chart 2: Review of Procurement Complaints as per PPA 2011 and its Regulations 2013 (Two-tier
System)



                1st Level                                                                   2rd Level




        Accounting Officer of the                                             Public Procurement Appeal
           Procuring Entity-                                                  Authority [PPAA]




    A Complaint should to be submitted                                        All complaints that not settled amicably,
    within 28 days from the date the                                          decision not made within 14 days or
    bidder    became      aware     of                                        contracts have entered into force should
    circumstances.                                                            be submitted to PPAA within 14 days.




                Corruption               Yes     If corruption related,      Yes
                                                                                               Corruption
                 Related?                        share with PCCB for
                                                                                                Related?
                                                 investigation1




           No                                                                                                  No

                                                                                      PPAA within 45 days is
    Accounting Officer within 14 days                                                 required to issue a written
    after receipt of the complaint or                                                 decision stating the reasons
    dispute will deliver a written                                                    for the decision and the
    decision.                                                                         remedies grated.




    Where Accounting Officer does                                                     The decision of PPAA is final
                                                 A copy of decision of AO             unless    Judicial     Review
    not issue decision within 14 days
                                                 and PPAA submit to                   commence for review of
    or bidder dissatisfied with the
    decision, the bidder may submit a            PPRA within 14 days                  decisions made by bodies or
    complaint dispute to PPAA.                   after issuing of decision            failure of those bodies to
                                                                                      make a decision within
                                                                                      prescribed time limit.




                                                  19
3.2.3     Alignment with Anti-Corruption Guidelines for PforR Operations

3.2.3.1     Sharing of Debarment list of firms and individuals

The Government of Tanzania commits to use the Bank’s debarment list to ensure that persons or entities debarred or
suspended by the Bank are not awarded a contract under the Program during the period of such debarment or
suspension. Companies and individuals debarred by the Bank and the PPA will be posted and updated regularly on
the MoHSW (www.moe.go.tz) and the PMO-RALG websites (www.pmoralg.go.tz), and advertised publicly by
MoHSW. Both entities would take responsibility in ensuring that their websites are updated regularly with
information on the list of debarred firms and individuals and share this information with all procuring entities in the
Program, instructing them to comply by appending the debarment list to the annual transfer of Grant notification
which will be made public - and go to all Health Facilities in the Program.

In addition, the government also agreed that they would include some disclosure measures in bidding documents for
works, goods and services to be financed under the Program, including insisting that the firms and/or individuals
declare they have not been debarred or suspended and/or have any links with a debarred entity or individual.

3.2.3.2     Sharing information on fraud and corruption allegations

In line with the ACGs, the government (through MoHSW) will share with the Bank all information on fraud and
corruption allegations, investigations and actions taken on the Program, including on procurement as needed. The
Bank has been informed that under Tanzania's legal system, the primary agency for investigating corruption is the
Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau (PCCB). Where PCCB investigations reveal that a given case is
primarily one of fraud rather than corruption, the PCCB refers it to the police for further investigation and
prosecution. In this context, fraud and corruption allegations made in respect of Program funds will be referred by
the beneficiaries to the district offices of the PCCB. The PCCB gets monthly reports from the Regional Offices on
fraud and corruption and other relevant activities, but in the case of this program, the PCCB would compile and
share information on fraud and corruption once every 6 months to MoHSW who will share with the Bank. The
details of this reporting would include the types of allegations and the status of actions taken. A template for
recording and sharing the information with the Bank has been provided to the PCCB.

3.2.3.3     Investigations of fraud and corruption allegations

The GoT has advised that (i) the Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act permits the PCCB to cooperate and
collaborate with the Bank in the fight against corruption, and permits the PCCB and the Bank to undertake joint
investigations of sanctionable practices if and when the parties so agree; (ii) the Bank may also undertake its own
investigations of F&C allegations under the Program. In this context, the investigation of F&C allegations under the
Program will be handled through three possible modalities, depending on circumstances: (i) the PCCB will
undertake its own independent corruption investigations arising from allegations reported to it as detailed above; (ii)
the PCCB and INT will undertake joint corruption investigations. The initiation, scope and operational procedures
will be decided on a case-by-case basis by PCCB and INT; and (iii) INT will undertake its own F&C investigations.
To this extent, the Program Participation Agreements to be entered into between MoHSW and PMO-RALG will
ensure that both entities and INT are able to acquire all records and documentation that they may reasonably request
from the Program implementation Units regarding the use of Program funding.


4      Fiduciary Risk and Mitigation Measures
                              Integrated Fiduciary Risk and Mitigation Measures
    Fiduciary Risk         Description              Mitigation Measures                    Due Date         Responsibility
                                                  Appoint Sector Technical and                              MoHSW and
                                                  Program Steering Committees to                            PMORALG
                     Coordination due to the
                                                  provide oversight in ensuring
                     large number of entities
                                                  smooth program coordination at
                     involved.
Program Level                                     all levels. Establish a Program
                     Ensuring funds are used
                                                  Coordination Unit that includes      Completed
                     for purposes intended will
                                                  members from PMO-RALG
                     be a challenge.
                                                  which will be responsible for
                                                  providing overall supervision.

                                                         20
 Fiduciary Risk           Description                 Mitigation Measures                 Due Date        Responsibility




                                                                                      Within 12 months
                  Weak fiduciary capacity        Provide targeted capacity            of        project
                  in all fiduciary aspects       building to all fiduciary staff at   implementation
                  highlighted below              all levels.

Financial Management Risk
                                                 Earmark SPHCR funds using            Within 12 months    MoHSW, MoF
                                                 accounting codes at the              of project          and PMO-
                  Unfunded budgets               Consolidated Fund using a sub-       implementation.     RALG
                  Absence of reliable cash-      account for the project under
                  flows affecting                MoHSW.
                  implementation of
                  planned activities
                                                 Prepare reliable cash flow           Quarterly.
Planning and                                     budgets.
                  PlanRep may not
Budgeting
                  automatically upload the
                  budget to Epicor requiring                                          Within 12 months
                  it to be manually done         Acquire and install an integrator    of        project
                  which is subject to errors     to link the PlanReP and Epicor       implementation
                  and delays.                    for automatic uploading of
                                                 budgets onto Epicor.

                   Funds not being used for      Put in place FM systems and          Within 12 months    MoHSW,
                   purpose intended              guidelines at HCF level.             of        project   PMO-RALG
                                                 Appoint and train Ward               implementation      and MoF
                                                 Accounts Technicians who will
                                                 be responsible for FM at the
                                                 facility level
                   The chart of accounts         Revise the chart of accounts.        Within 12 months
                   may not show which                                                 of        project
                   Development Partner is                                             implementation.
                   funding the program
                   when funds are sent to
                   the LGA hence not able
                   to prepare accountability
Accounting and     for a Development
Financial          Partner’s funding.
Reporting
                   Poor connectivity             Strengthen the connectivity in
                   between the LGAs and          Epicor in order to efficiently use
                   the central servers.          the system.

                   Failure to record assets at   Activate the asset management        Within 12 months
                   all levels.                   module.                              of project
                                                                                      implementation

                   Epicor 9.05 not able to       Enhance financial reporting          Within 12 months
                   generate annual financial     module for Epicor in order to        of        project
                   statement and                 produce useful reports for           implementation
                   management reports.           management to take action.




                                                        21
 Fiduciary Risk           Description                 Mitigation Measures                  Due Date          Responsibility
                   Delays in submission of       Train staff who consistently
                   various financial reports.    send reports late to enhance their    Annually
                                                 skills as well as closely monitor
                                                 them at both health facility and
                                                 LGA levels to ensure timely
                                                 financial reports are received.

                   Absence of book-              Hire ward-level (or similar           Within 12 months
                   keeping skills at HCF is      group) accounting technicians to      of        project
                   going to impact               assist HCFs on an-ongoing basis       implementation
                   maintenance of reliable       to supplement limited capacity
                   financial records.            of LGAs.

                   Not all HCFs will have        Bank accounts are opened by all       Before funds are      MoF,
                   bank accounts                 HCFs before funds are                 disbursed to HCFs     MoHSW,
                                                 disbursed.                                                  PMO-RALG,
                   Delays in release of          Monitor the budget approval           Annually              LGAs & HCFs
                   funds from MoF to             process and endorsement by the
                   ministries, LGAs and          Parliament now tabled in April
                   HCFs.                         to June each year. Timely
                                                 disbursement will also be
                                                 monitored and concerns will be
                                                 brought to the attention of MoF
                                                 in a timely manner.

Treasury          Irregular release of funds     Request GoT commitment to
Management        by the Ministry of Finance     ensure release of funds to
and Funds Flow    to LGAs and HCFs.              Program on a quarterly basis.

                  Delayed release of funds       LGAs & HCFs to display
                  from LGAs to HCFs.             amounts transferred to them on
                                                 their notice boards and their
                                                 websites. Delays will also be
                                                 monitored and delays brought to
                                                 the attention of LGAs.
                  Funds may not be used          Carry out value for money             Midterm and end
                  efficiently and effectively    audits                                of program
                  to achieve the purposes
                  for which intended
                   Non-compliance with           Skills of audit committees and        Within 12 months      MoHSW,
                   internal control systems      internal auditors will be             of        project     PMO-RALG,
                   at both central and local     enhanced to effectively monitor       implementation        MoF and
                   government levels.            compliance of the internal                                  LGAs.
                                                 control systems and report on a
                                                 quarterly basis.
                  Weak internal audit            Strengthen internal audit units        Within         12
Internal          function in terms of skills,   through training and capacity         months of project
Controls          equipment, lack of access      building. Facilitate internal audit   implementation
(including        to Epicor system and           units with resources to conduct       and        annually
Internal Audit)   budget to monitor the          their operations.                     thereafter
                  internal controls put in
                  place.                         Production of quarterly audit
                                                 reports. Grant internal auditors
                                                 access to Epicor as well as
                                                 acquisition of internal audit
                                                 software.


                                                        22
  Fiduciary Risk             Description                 Mitigation Measures                  Due Date          Responsibility
                      Failure to audit a            CAG to contract private audit                               CAG,
                      reasonable sample of          firms to conduct audits on his                              MoHSW,
                      HCFs given the large          behalf.                                                     PMO-RALG.
                      number of HCFs
                      supported under the
                      Program.
                      Delayed submission of         Early appointment of auditors         Before end of FY
 External Audit
                      reports                       and agreeing of ToRs.
                                                    Carrying out of interim audits.
                      Slow scrutiny of CAGs         Enhance technical skills of PAC
                      audit reports by the PAC      and LAAC in order for them to
                      and LAAC which affects        improve on their efficiency in
                      the accountability process.   following up issues raised by
                                                    CAG’s audit reports.
Procurement Risks
 Procurement           Inadequate staffing in       Recruit/appoint qualified and         Within 12 months      PMO-RALG
 Capacity and          LGA procurement and          experienced staff to fill the gap     of project            & PPRA
 internal audit        internal audit units as      in the two units and conduct          implementation
 function              well as existing staff       tailored trainings on PPA 2011
                       have inadequate              and its Regulations and contract
                       knowledge of PPA 2011        management to PMUs and
                       and its Regulations          internal audit units
 Records keeping       Weak records                 Establish sound records               Within six months     PMO-
                       management system.           management system in all LGAs         of project            RALG/LGAs
                                                    and participating MDAs.               implementation
 Procurement           Inefficiencies in            Ensure procurements are               Throughout            PMO-RALG,
 Efficiency            processing and managing      processed as per the timelines in     project               LGAs
                       procurement activities.      the procurement plans                 implementation
 Transparency in       Lack of transparency in      Ensure LGAs abides with all           Throughout            PMO-RALG,
 procurement           processing competitive       procedures      for     processing    project               LGAs and
 process               quotations and               quotations                including   implementation        PPRA
                       publications of contract     publications of contracts awards
                       awards.                      as per the PPA.
 Delays arising        The AG has no capacity       Review the existing threshold         Within 12 months      PMO-RALG,
 from vetting of       to vet all contracts above   with a view to uplift vetting         of the project        AG and PPRA
 contracts before      TZS 50 million within 21     thresholds.                           implementation
 signature             days prescribed under
                       PPA.
 Weak Contract         Inadequate knowledge         Conduct trainings tailored to         Within 12 months      PMO-RALG,
 Management            and skills in contract       address the weakness to in the        of          project   LGAs
                       managements.                 contract management.                  implementation
                                                                                          and        annually
                                                                                          thereafter
 Delays in issuing Delays in issuing stock-         Establish the system that will        Within one year       MSD and
 out stock notice  out notice to the facilities     ensure out stock notices are          of          project   MoHSW
  to the facilitiesby MSD in order for              issued within one day as              implementation
      by MSD       LGAs to commence                 prescribed in the PPA 2011 and
                   procurement process of           its Regulations.
                   missing medicines and
                   medical supplies in a
                   timely manner
Fraud and Corruption Risks
                  A lack of citizen, media          Publish Clients Service               Within 12 months      MoHSW,
                  and suppliers pressure to         Charters; strengthen government       of          project   PMO-RALG,
 Transparency     eliminate collusive               websites to publish timely            implementation        LGAs       and
                  practices due to lack of          reports, budget, including            and        annually   Health
                  information.                      quarterly disbursement and            thereafter            Facilities

                                                           23
    Fiduciary Risk            Description                Mitigation Measures                 Due Date        Responsibility
                                                    execution reports; LGAs and
                                                    Health Facilities to publish
                                                    budgets and expenditures in
                                                    public places. CHMT to provide
                                                    budget and expenditure data to
                                                    health facilities to enable them
                                                    to improve performance.
                                                    Implement mechanisms or               Within 12 months   MoHSW and
                                                    partnerships with civil society       of project         PMO-RALG
                                                    organizations to enable citizen       implementation
                       Weak use of feedback
                                                    to log complaints or register         and annually
                       and complaints handling
Participation                                       comments and receive responses        thereafter
                       mechanisms by
                                                    from central government/Ensure
                       stakeholders.
                                                    information on SPHCR is easily
                                                    available to citizens to enable
                                                    monitoring and feedback.
                                                    Strengthen CHMT and Health            Within 12 months   MoHSW,
                                                    Facilities service boards; review     of project         PMO-RALG,
                                                    complaints register and ensure        implementation     LGAs       and
                      Weak response from            complaints are attended and           and annually       Health
                      central government and        feedback taken is adequately          thereafter         Facilities
                      LGAs to citizen               documented, responded to and
Accountability
                      complaints and to poor        posted to MoHSW & PMO-
                      performance on                RALG website twice annually.
                      assessment reports.           Nominate Complaint Desk
                                                    Officers at health facility level
                                                    and for CHMT dedicated
                                                    exclusively to health concerns.

      4.1   Overall Fiduciary Risk Rating

40.     Based on the above risk analysis, overall fiduciary risk rating is substantial.

5      Financial Covenants

41.     In order to strengthen fiduciary systems, the following Financial Covenants are proposed in addition to the
        usual standard covenants:
            Appointment of Ward Accounting Technicians to provide FM support to the HFs.
            Conducting annual independent procurement audits of the program.
            Conducting a value for money audit during the mid-term and end of the program.

6      Implementation Support Plan

        42. Implementation support will include the provision of capacity strengthening in procurement, financial
        management and governance and anti-corruption. An annual fiduciary review will be conducted for the
        program supported by mainly the Internal Audit Department and PPRA. Adequate budget will need to be
        allocated for this review. This review will be supplemented by on-site visits done by the Bank’s fiduciary staff
        at least twice per year. Reliance will also be placed on the annual audit reports produced by the Controller and
        Auditor General. In addition, desk reviews will be done for interim financial reports and procurement reports
        received during the financial year. In-depth reviews may also be commissioned by the Bank whenever deemed
        necessary.




                                                           24
