The Seven Sins of Flawed
Public-Private Partnerships
  by Augusto de la Torre and Heinz Rudolph
                         The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships 1
                                                            by Augusto de la Torre and Heinz Rudolph




          There are three stakeholders in a public-private partnership (PPP): (a) the
government in ofﬁce, (b) private ﬁrms (ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial) and investors (individual
and institutional), and (c) ﬁnal beneﬁciaries (taxpayers or users, present and future). The
raison d’être of PPPs is threefold: (i) to crowd in private ﬁrms and investors into projects that
they would otherwise not undertake; (ii) to transfer to the private sector a signiﬁcant part of
the risks and costs that the government would otherwise fully absorb; and, (iii) to ensure that
the project’s efﬁciency/quality is at least equal to that obtained if the government alone
carried all costs and risks.

          Several important (yet often ignored) implications follow. First, outsourcing (e.g.,
construction and maintenance) to the private sector does not by itself constitute a PPP if all
risks and costs are, in one way or another, still borne by the government. Second, a PPP
does not reduce total risk; it simply distributes it differently, involving private sector ﬁrms
and investors.2 Third, the total costs borne by the ﬁnal beneﬁciaries would be lower under a
PPP (compared to a project whose costs and risks rest completely in the government’s
balance sheet) only if the PPP achieves efﬁciency gains; otherwise, what beneﬁciaries save
in taxes they would pay in user fees, although, under a PPP, more of the costs would be
assigned to direct beneﬁciaries/users, than to taxpayers at large. Fourth, that a PPP can
provide (cash) budget relief may be a welcome corollary for the government in ofﬁce but it
is not a core objective of a PPP. 3

          The problem is that achieving in practice the raison d’être of PPPs is much more
complicated than often believed. In particular, things are biased against ﬁnal beneﬁciaries.
Why? Because, under a weak PPP policy, regulatory and institutional framework, the interests
of private ﬁrms and investors, on the one hand, and those of the government in ofﬁce, on the
other, do not naturally coincide with the interests of present and future taxpayers and users.
The government in ofﬁce has incentives to get the projects on the ground as soon as possible
(the “monument effect”) without affecting today’s budget but leaving liabilities to future
governments (the “myopic cash saving” effect).4 It also has incentives to underestimate or
hide contingent liabilities associated with PPPs (the “concealment” effect). For their part,
private ﬁrms and investors involved in PPPs have incentives to earn as much proﬁt as possible
while transferring as much of the costs and risks as possible to the government (the “one-sided
bet” effect—heads I win, tails the government loses). In the absence of a sound PPP policy




1.   This policy discussion note was prepared by Augusto de la Torre and Heinz Rudolph, both from the
     World Bank.

2.   As regards risks, this note focuses only on the idiosyncratic risks associated with a particular PPP. Aggre-
     gate and systemic risks, which affect economic activities within a given national jurisdiction across the
     board, by deﬁnition cannot be diversiﬁed away within that jurisdiction. Aggregate and systemic risks are
     incorporated in sovereign risk ratings and can only be reduced slowly overtime via sustained economic
     development and institutional improvement.

3. Any     contingent liability that the government bears under a PPP remains in reality in the budget
     (inter-temporally), regardless of whether it is disclosed or not in the budget numbers. Moreover, as
     noted, taxpayers and/or users still get the entire bill of a PPP (and not just the part borne by the govern-
     ment), if not via taxes, via user fees; although they may also (and hopefully) get some efﬁciency beneﬁts.

4. Democratically     elected governments are typically pressured during the four to six year term to inaugu-
     rate some visible infrastructure projects. Considering that a construction period of a typical highway,
     port, or airport may take three to ﬁve years, the lag time for negotiations is limited, hence the tendency
     to negotiate poorly and over-guarantee.

                                                                                                                    1/7


The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
framework, therefore, the dice are indeed loaded against ﬁnal beneﬁciaries, whose interests
are not well represented in the PPP design and selection process.

           Hence, to ensure that PPPs actually add value to society, a well-designed policy
framework (including well-designed laws, regulations and procedures) is of the essence. Such
a framework would adequately represent the interests of the ﬁnal beneﬁciaries, by promoting
efﬁciency gains, by greatly reducing the incentives of the government in ofﬁce to over-guarantee,
and by signiﬁcantly curbing the incentives of private ﬁrms’ and investors’ to unduly shift costs and
risks to the government. The rest of this note highlights seven deadly sins of poorly designed
PPPs, the key things to avoid when designing and implementing PPP policy.

                       Sin #1: Provide excessive government guarantees

          As noted, the combined incentives of the government in ofﬁce and private ﬁrms and
investors work in favor of excessive government guarantees. Over-guaranteeing provides a quick
ﬁx for a cash-strapped government in ofﬁce and for private players but at the expense of vitiating
project selection, distorting resource allocation, saddling future governments with large ﬁscal
obligations, and increasing the chances that costs to the ﬁnal beneﬁciaries are higher than they
otherwise might be (and the quality of services lower than they otherwise might be).

           To avoid over-guaranteeing, it helps to keep in mind that an important subset of PPPs
may require minimal or even no government guarantees. There are indeed infrastructure
projects that are not constructed by private ﬁrms alone not because risks are high, but
because of coordination failures. In those cases, governments could award PPP projects
simply by playing a catalytic role rather than by offering guarantees. By offering active
coordination services and assigning the PPP on a ﬂexible term basis (more on this below,
under Sin #3), for instance, the government can shift much of the construction and demand
(e.g., trafﬁc volume in the case of a highway) risks to the private sector. There are in fact
successful experiences of PPP highway concessions with no government guarantees on
demand or construction.5 These projects require a good concession contract and a relatively
sophisticated (deep and diverse) ﬁnancial services industry.

           If government guarantees must be provided, four important considerations can
help. First, it is in general preferable to separate subsidies from ﬁnance. Hence, it would be
better no to embed any subsidy that the PPP structure may contain (where warranted by
identiﬁable un-internalized externalities) into the price of a government-originated
guarantee or loan. Instead, governments should strive to price their loans or guarantees as
fairly as possible using a price that reﬂects the best feasible estimate of expected loss.

           Second, even where government guarantees are provided within a PPP structure at a
fair price, it is in general superior for the government not to guarantee 100% of the risk (i.e., of
the variance around the expected loss) or for the government-originated loans not to cover
100% of the ﬁnance. Government guarantees that cover 100% of construction or demand risks
create incentives for private construction or maintenance ﬁrms to shirk or take excessive risks. If a




5. SeeEngel, Eduardo, Ronald Fisher and Alexander Galetovic (2013). “The basic public ﬁnance of
 public-private partnerships.” Journal of the European Economic Association. February.

                                                                                                        2/7


The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
government guarantee granted to a private creditor covers 100% of, say, the default risk, the
private creditor would have no incentive to screen and monitor the project adequately. By
offering only partial yet fairly priced guarantees, the government separates subsidies from
ﬁnance and ensures that the private players involved in the PPP have skin-in-the-game,
which is essential to align the incentives of the agent (the private ﬁrms and investors) with
those of the principal (the government and, ultimately, the taxpayers).

         Third, government guarantees should be transparently booked and disclosed.
Guarantees increase the government’s contingent liabilities, transferring risks to future
generations. Absent sound accounting and disclosure standards, the contingent liabilities
embedded in government guarantees not only undermine inter-temporal budget discipline
but taxpayers (citizens) are deceived by the government in ofﬁce into holding a heavy bag
that they did not know existed. A solid accounting and disclosure framework for PPP-related
contingent liabilities is, thus, essential.

          And fourth, exchange rate guarantees should be limited, to the extent possible.
Pressures for governments to provide exchange rate guarantees are likely to be higher
where: (i) the local currency is not the preferred store of value and, as a consequence, the
dollar is heavily used for ﬁnancial contracts; (ii) there is not signiﬁcant market for local
currency-denominated long term ﬁnance; and (iii) exchange rate regimes are relatively
inﬂexible. By yielding unduly to pressures to provide exchange rate guarantees, govern-
ments could reduce the maneuvering space for monetary and exchange rate policy. To be
sure, however, the decision would depend on the counterfactual. For instance, in the
extreme, if in the absence of a PPP governments would undertake the infrastructure project
on their own, the counterfactual would be an explicit rise in dollar-denominated govern-
ment debt, with similar implications for policy space.

                             Sin # 2: Miss opportunities for market tests

         This sin is bound to be committed if sin #1 is also committed. However, even if
government guarantees are partial, fairly priced, and adequately booked and disclosed, a
sound PPP policy should involve conscious efforts by the government to take advantage of
market tests. For example, provided that private players have sufﬁcient skin-in-the-game,
governments can and should leverage on the private sector comparative advantages in
screening and monitoring projects. By not seizing this type of market test, the scope for
projects with low private (let alone social) rates of return grows wider. Missing market tests
is more likely to happen where PPP-based projects are ﬁnanced largely by govern-
ment-owned (commercial or development) banks.

         True market tests arise only if there is sufﬁcient skin-in-the-game of well-informed,
sophisticated private investors. For instance, the infrastructure bond market is suitable for
qualiﬁed investors, and the provision of insurance against, say, construction risks, is suitable
only to well-run insurance ﬁrms. This implies that involving at the margin only small, unso-
phisticated investors does not offer a true market test and may instead widen the scope for
abuse of small, unsophisticated investors by sophisticated brokerage institutions. It also
implies, unfortunately, that true market tests are in relatively short supply in underdeveloped
ﬁnancial systems.




                                                                                                   3/7


The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
           Sin #3: Award concessions based on the wrong bidding parameters

           Auctioning a concession helps dissipate rents and allows the ultimate beneﬁciaries (the
users of the PPP-based infrastructure) to appropriate much of the consumer surplus, as long as
there is no undue renegotiation of the concession terms after it is awarded. Hence, bidding
criteria should be set pragmatically and with an eye at reducing the time inconsistency problem,
whereby bidders have incentives to bid low, win the concession contract, and subsequently
re-negotiate and extract additional beneﬁts.

          Such a time inconsistency problem is exacerbated when the concession is awarded by
an insufﬁciently informed government agency to a bidder that offers the lowest user fees (the
lower tolls in the case of a highway) or the shortest length of the concession period. Once the
concession is awarded, the government is so to speak “on the hook” and winning bidders can
take advantage of the situation to renegotiate and ask for additional government guarantees or
other concessions.6 This problem is not mitigated by complicating the bidding criteria, for
example, by awarding concessions based on a weighted average of several parameters, including
user fees, length of the concession, amount of guarantees, and payments to the government (if
any). Such an approach may not only not reduce the time inconsistency problem but may add
unnecessary complications.

         Renegotiation of contracts can transfer back risks to the government in a signiﬁcant
magnitude but in a less transparent manner. Analyzing a large set of infrastructure concessions in
Latin America in the 1990s, Guasch (2004) ﬁnds that more the 50 percent of the PPP contracts are
renegotiated, with renegotiation typically initiated by the concessionary company.7

          There are at least two complementary ways of mitigating the time inconsistency
problem that leads to post-auction repeated contract renegotiation. One is for the government
agency to have more complete information about the technical and ﬁnancial feasibility of the
project so as to be better prepared at the time of the auction and, thus, more readily identify
unrealistic bids. But even then, signiﬁcant uncertainties and risks will remain. Since the bidder
may not be able to predict well the future demand, in the presence of a ﬁxed-term contract
he/she may have incentives to renegotiate the contract as soon as it gets the concession award.
Renegotiations are typically settled with extensions of the concession period.

          Hence, a second, complementary way to reduce the scope for ex-post renegotiation is
to use ﬂexible-term PPP contracts. Under this modality, bidders compete by disclosing their
target present value of user fee-based revenues (PVR), the government sets the maximum user
fee and the discount rate to be used in calculating the PVR, and the duration (i.e., the number of
years) of the concession contract is left open. The winner (i.e., the bidder that offered the lowest
PVR) then operates the concession for as long as needed to collect such PVR, and once that is
achieved, the concession contract expires. In addition to drastically reducing the scope for
ex-post renegotiation, this auction modality can mitigate signiﬁcantly the need for governments
to provide guarantees to cover demand risks. This risk is transferred to the concession company,
which manages and absorbs it over time, under a ﬂexible-term contract. In the presence of less
developed capital markets, this type of PPP contracts may still require government to provide
some form of targeted guarantees, such as backstop facilities to give comfort to ﬁnanciers.



6. This  time inconsistency problem is often referred to as the “winners curse”—having offered to charge
     unrealistically low user fees, once in possession of the concession contract, winners will try to recover
     some of their expected losses via repeated renegotiation.

7.   Guasch, J. Luis (2004). Granting and Renegotiating Infrastructure Concessions: Doing it Right . WBI
     Development Studies. The World Bank. Washington, DC.

                                                                                                                 4/7


The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
                Sin #4: Have multiple PPP agencies within the government

          A problem common to many countries is that almost any ministry with a government
can initiate and award PPPs. This is inefﬁcient and wasteful. Indeed, there are strong
arguments in favor of centralizing PPP capacity in a single governmental agency.

         On the one hand, the PPP contractual technology requires a high degree of
expertise and sophistication on the side of the regulator. On the other hand, such
technology, once mastered, can be applied to all sorts of PPP projects, from highways to
hospitals, from airports to jails. Hence, a specialized, professional, and credible government
agency that can deal with these contracts in a centralized manner is a superior alternative to
dispersed PPP initiators with weak capacity. Since learning on the job is necessary, the
agency would need to attract top talent and provide an interesting career path to high
performers. In addition, having sufﬁcient in-house expertise would enable the specialized
PPP agency to leverage and adequately supervise external expertise, from local and
international sources.

         The PPP agency should advise on the type pf projects that are more suitable for PPPs. It
should also be able to identify the sectors where PPPs provide the highest value for money
compared to other options (i.e. privatizations or government procurement contracts). A
high-quality PPP agency, furthermore, would signiﬁcantly mitigate the asymmetry of information
between concession companies and the government.

          Sin #5: Fail to adequately address conﬂicts of interest and disputes

         Given conﬂicts of interest, it makes sense to separate the awarding function from
supervising function in PPP policy frameworks. The agency that grants the concessions
should not be the same as the agency that supervises the implementation of contracts.
Experience suggests that the incentives for contract renegotiation have been greater in
cases where the same agency performs both functions. Contract renegotiations are, in some
cases, a consequence of omissions or mistakes made by the agency that granted the
concessions. When that agency is also in charge of supervision, it would tend to avoid
escalating the conﬂict with the concessionary company and be thus more inclined to yield to
renegotiation pressures.

          The supervisory agency needs to have the authority to supervise and to impose
signiﬁcant pecuniary sanctions on the concessionary company in cases of breach of contract.
This is an additional reason to allow as bidders only concessionary companies with a sound
capital base that they will defend by avoiding, to the extent possible, breaches of contractual
agreements.

         It is also essential that PPP frameworks put in place an efﬁcient mechanism for dispute
resolution. Disputes between the concessionary company and the government may arise due
to different views on the nature and extent or risk sharing. They may also arise when
unforeseen changes in technology lead to an early termination of the contract that calls for fair
compensation to the concessionary company. In addition, contracts may not have provisions
to resolve all types of differences. A credible an efﬁcient conﬂict resolution is thus needed.




                                                                                                    5/7


 The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
          Note that avoiding Sins #4 and #5 goes a long way into fending off Sins #1 and #2.
In effect, seizing the opportunities for market tests, on the one hand, and ensuring proper
due diligence, checks and balances, and accountability in the process of screening,
awarding and monitoring risk sharing structures, on the other hand, is not realistic in the
absence of an appropriate organizational structure, composed of highly professional but
separate governmental agencies for awarding and supervising PPPs, alongside a sound
dispute resolution mechanism.

                              Sin #6: Assume that deﬁned-contribution
                                pension funds provide a silver bullet

           While commercial banks have been one of the largest supporters of project ﬁnance in
the past, the introduction of new capital rules (Basel III) will make it more expensive for banks to
participate in the market of long-term ﬁnancing. Therefore capital markets, particularly via
institutional investors, are likely to play a more relevant role in the ﬁnancing of infrastructure in the
future. Privately-administered deﬁned-contribution pension funds (i.e., 401[k]-type individual
savings accounts for retirement) have become an important type of institutional investor in many
Latin American countries. A common error, however, is to assume that these funds offer a
silver-bullet solution to PPP-based infrastructure long-term ﬁnance.

           To be sure, deﬁned-contribution pension funds can be part of the solution (and
there is room to improve their role as long-term investors), but they are far from being the
whole solution. The main limitation of these funds arises from the simple fact that they are
pure asset managers (they do not have a formal liability and, hence, are not asset-liability
managers). Although they manage savings for old age, they tend to behave like any mutual fund
with shorter-term horizons (with an eye to the next quarterly or monthly report). All the risks are
fully borne by the workers that put their savings into these pension funds, and not by the fund
managers. Managers try not to deviate from the performance of their peers, which fosters a
herding behavior. In all, under current regulations, deﬁned-contribution pension funds do not
have an inherent and consistent vocation to invest in truly long-term assets. They invest in long
assets only if such assets command high secondary market liquidity (which tend to be, for
instance, the case of government bonds). Infrastructure-related ﬁnancial assets, however, are
typically illiquid.

            A fundamental solution to long-term infrastructure ﬁnance denominated in local
currency can come only from well-regulated (prudent) institutional investors that have formal
long-term liabilities and, hence, are systematically in need of long-term assets to match their
liabilities. This is the case, for example, of life insurance companies that sell ﬁxed annuities to
retirees. These institutions are dedicated long-term investors because they have a contractual
obligation to provide a ﬁxed stream of payments to individuals for many years after retirement.
Hence, infrastructure bonds can easily prosper in the context of a national ﬁnancial system that
has this type of dedicated long-term asset-liability managers. In most of the Latin American
countries with deﬁned contribution pension funds, annuity providers are incipient and face
regulatory challenges that inhibit their development.

         Engaging deﬁned contribution pension funds in long-term bonds, including infrastructure
bonds, is not impossible, but it would require regulatory changes that induce pension funds to
operate with longer investment horizons. For example, regulations can be amended to measure




                                                                                                            6/7


The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
the performance of a deﬁned-contribution pension fund against long-term benchmarks
commensurate with the long-term nature of savings for old age, rather than against
short-term indicators (e.g., the average performance of the industry) as is typically
mandated in many Latin American countries today. 8

             Sin #7: Assume that construction and concessionary companies
                                  are good substitutes

          The traditional business of construction companies is to build infrastructure and make a
proﬁt from this activity. The business of concessionary companies in the PPP context is rather
different. It involves not only building and maintaining the infrastructure project, but also ﬁnding
investors willing to ﬁnance the construction based on the expected revenues from the operation
of the asset during the concession period. Those in the construction business are skilled at
building; those in the concessionary company require more long-term ﬁnance skills.

           In addition, capital structures needed by both types of company are different. PPP projects
typically require high leverage, and investors want sound capital structures to provide buffers as well
as solid projects with good rates of return. These capital structures are rare in construction companies
which, typically, seek to extract the maximum proﬁt during the construction stage and do not care
what happens after the construction is completed and they get paid.

        Thus, the set of skills, governance and capital structure of concessionary companies
should be a key factor for selecting eligible bidders for PPP-based projects.




8.   See De la Torre, A. and H. Rudolph (2015). “Sistemas de Capitalización Eﬁcientes: Fricciones de Mercado
     y Desafíos de Política.” in Fortaleciendo los cimientos del sistema de capitalización individual para
     asegurar su sostenibilidad. FIAP.

                                                                                                               7/7


 The Seven Sins of Flawed Public-Private Partnerships
