Report No. 102015-TR




             PERFORMANCE OF FEMALE
              EMPLOYERS IN TURKEY




                       December 2015
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey




                                                Tolga Cebeci1




1
  The World Bank, tcebeci@worldbank.org. I thank very much to Mediha Agar, Ana Maria Munoz Boudet, Carolina
Sanchez-Paramo and Cagla Okten for providing very useful comments on the draft of this paper. All remaining errors
are mine. The findings expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of
the World Bank or the Ministry of Family and Social Policies.


                                                                                                                  1
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey




© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World
Bank, and it has been produced as part of the “Increasing Women’s Acccess to Economic Opportunities in Turkey”
Project (2012-2017) which is funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and
implemented by the Ministry of Family and Social Policies (MoFSP) of the Republic of Turkey and the World
Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of
MoFSP, SIDA, the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does
not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other
information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning
the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without
permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The
World Bank and the Ministry of Family and Social Policies (MoFSP) of the Republic of Turkey encourages
dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.




                                                                                                                   2
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey




                                    TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION                                             4

2. CHARACTERISTICS OF FEMALE EMPLOYERS                      5
2.1 INCIDENCE OF BEING A FEMALE EMPLOYER                    5
2.2 BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF FEMALE EMPLOYERS               6
2.3 SURVIVAL ANALYSIS                                       8
2.4 THE PATH TO BECOME AN EMPLOYER                          9

3. INCOME COMPARISON OF MALE AND FEMALE EMPLOYERS           10

4. DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF SUCCESSFUL FEMALE EMPLOYERS   14

5. CONCLUSION AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS                    15

REFERENCES                                                  17

APPENDIX                                                    19
A - INCOME COMPARISON OF MALE AND FEMALE EMPLOYERS          19
B- DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF SUCCESSFUL FEMALE EMPLOYERS   20




                                                             3
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


1. INTRODUCTION

1. It is well documented that economic participation of women is very low in Turkey compared
to that of men in the country2. This gender disparity in economic participation is valid not only
for participation in the labor market as a wage employee but also for entrepreneurship. Although
women lag behind men in entrepreneurship in most countries3, gender disparity in
entrepreneurship is particularly large in Turkey.

2. To illustrate, in none of the 44 developed and developing countries (excluding Turkey) analyzed
by Estrin and Mickiewicz (2011) using Global Enterprise Monitor survey, female/male start-up
ratio are lower than 25%. In 14 of them the ratio is between 25% and 40% and in the remaining
group it is above 40%. In contrast, Okten (2013) document that only 7.4% of employers and 17.2%
of own-account workers (OAW) were women in 2012 in Turkey.

3. Using European Union Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (SILC) dataset, this paper
attempts to provide new insights on the high gender disparity in entrepreneurship in Turkey with
giving special emphasis to distinguishing characteristics of successful female employers. SILC
dataset covers the 2007-2010 period. Agriculture sector is excluded in the study to identify
entrepreneurship patterns in non-agriculture more precisely as patterns in agriculture is usually
very different from other sectors. The final dataset includes 49,035 observations of 17,202
individuals. A unique feature of the dataset is that it is a panel dataset. As an individual can be
followed over 2-4 consecutive years, it is possible to monitor transformations of individuals
across activities. Although entrepreneurs refer to both employers and OAW, this paper focuses
on employers due to its importance over OAW in creating jobs and increasing the impact of
women in the economy4. All tables and figure in this paper make use of the SILC dataset.

4. The paper documents that female employers are in minority in Turkey not only among all
working women but also among all employers in the economy. Moreover, female employers earn
less than their male counterparts and their firms are generally smaller. As for their background,
there is a low churning among female employers and majority of new female employers are
transformed from inactivity and very few from wage employment.

5. The paper confirms the importance of university education in closing gender gap. Proportional
income gap between male and female employers is lowest among university graduates and
highest among primary school and vocational high school graduates. It is also noteworthy that
female employers are less educated than female full-time employers but male employers are
more educated than full-time male employees.



2
  See for example Hausmann et al. (2012).
3
  See for example Estrin and Mickiewicz (2009), Georgellis and Wall (2005), Kim (2007), Minniti and Naude (2010) , De Bruin et
al. (2006), Minniti et al. (2005), Reynolds et al. (2002), Verheul et al. (2006).
4
  Okten (2013) show that employers and OAW have important differences. 90% of female and 60% of male OAW work informally
whereas only 21% of female employers and 20% of male employers are in the informal sector.


                                                                                                                            4
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


6. Besides, average tenure of female employers is significantly less than that of their male
counterparts and this has a significant role in female employers’ earnings being lower than
earnings of male employers. Finally, it is found that female employers are mainly concentrated
in less profitable retail and wholesale trade, manufacturing industry and other services sectors
including washing and cleaning of clothes as well as beauty services.

7. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section II first attempts to identify basic
characteristics of female employers in comparison to male employers and other female work
groups. The section concludes with survival and transformation analysis. Based on the insight
obtained in Section II, Section III evaluates the success of female employers in terms of income
they generate. As the second step, income of female employers belonging to different sector,
educational attainment and background categories are compared to each other. Finally, Section
IV discusses results and concludes.

2. CHARACTERISTICS OF FEMALE EMPLOYERS

8. This section first investigates the prevalence of being a female employer by providing the share
of female employers among all working women and among all employers. Second, basic
characteristics of female employers are given in comparison with those of male employers and
other working female groups. Third, survival rates of female employers are analyzed. And finally,
previous positions of female employers are studied to shed light on the path leading to be an
employer.

2.1 INCIDENCE OF BEING A FEMALE EMPLOYER

9. Female employers are in minority in
Turkey not only among all working
women but also among all employers
in the economy. In contrast to a
moderate 7% employer rate among
working men, only 2% of all working
women were employers in 2010
(Figure 1). On the other hand, 16% of
working men and 11% of working
women were Own Account Workers
(OAW). In addition to that full-time
wage employment is more popular
among women than among men.
Around 3/4th of all working women are
full-time wage employees in contrast
to 2/3rd of all working men.




                                                                                                 5
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


10. Over the 2007-2010 period,
only 7-8% of all employers were
women, although female share in
all working people in the economy
was 23-24% (Figure 2). As for other
work types, share of women in
total OAW in the economy showed
an increase from 12% to 18% over
the period. Besides, around 25-
27% of all full-time wage
employees and 19-23% of all part-
time wage employees in the
economy were women5.

2.2 BASIC CHARACTERISTICS OF FEMALE EMPLOYERS

11. Educational attainment of employers, full-time wage employees and OAW by gender are
given in Figure 3 for the 2007-2010 period.
Share of those with a higher education
(university) degree among female
employers is higher than that among own-
account female workers but lower than
that among full-time female employees. In
contrast, share of female that have at
highest a primary school degree6 among
all female employers is less than that
among own-account female workers but
higher than that among full-time wage
employees. 25% of female employers
have higher education degrees and 38%
have primary school degrees at highest.

12. On the other hand, female employers are slightly more educated than their male
counterparts. Share of higher education is around 10% lower whereas share of primary school is
around 9% higher among male employers. It is noteworthy that female employers are less
educated than female full-time employers but male employers are more educated than full-time
male employees. This finding for Turkey does not confirm Brush (2006), which states that both
male and female entrepreneurs are more educated than non-entrepreneurs.


5
  The share of female among all employers found in this paper is consistent with the one (7.4%) documented in Okten (2013). On
the other hand, the share of female among all OAW in this paper is slightly less than the one (17.2%) documented in Okten (2013).
Exclusion of agriculture from this study accounts for this difference.
6
  Primary school category includes: a) those completed 5-year primary school b) those who attended but did not complete
primary school c) those who did not attend school at all.


                                                                                                                               6
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


13. We next compare tenure7 and age of men and women by work type. Average tenure of female
employers is significantly less than that of their male counterparts. This finding is consistent with
those documented in Brush (1992), Carter et al. (1997), Boden and Nucci (2000), Kepler and
Shane (2007), Fairlie and Robb (2009), Aronson (1991), Lee and Rendall (2001). The tenure gap
between male and female in favor male is valid for OAW and full-time wage employees as well.
Female employers and OAW slightly more tenured than female full-time wage employees.

                          Table 1: Tenure and Age (years) by Work Type and Gender
                           Wage Employee (ft)                      Employer                            OAW
                           Men       Women                    Men        Women                  Men          Women
     Tenure                16.0         9.2                   21.7          12.3                22.4          11.7
     Age                   36.4        32.2                   41.8          36.9                42.2          39.1

14. In parallel to the pattern observed for tenure, female, on average, are younger than the male
within all 3 work types. On the other hand, difference between male and female average age is
less than the difference in average tenure of male an female within all work types. Difference in
relative tenure and age is particularly stark
among OAW. Although female on average
are 3.1 years younger than the male in this
group, they have 10.7 years less tenure.
This hints that either female start to work
at later ages and/or give a break at some
point in their career. Regarding marital
status, share of never-married among
female employers is higher than that
among female OAW but lower than that
among full-time female wage employees.
The opposite ranking is valid for the share
of married. Compared to men, share of
married among women is lower for all three groups of work type.

15. As for sector composition, most of female employers operate in one of 3 sectors: 29% in retail
and wholesale trade, 28% in manufacturing and 25% in other services sectors (Figure 5). Other
services sectors mainly consist of washing and cleaning of clothes and beauty treatment such as
hairdressing. Compared to their male counterparts, female employers are more concentrated in
washing, cleaning and beauty activities, slightly more in manufacturing, slightly less in trade
(sales) services and less in food and accommodation services, professional business services as
well as construction and mining. This pattern in Turkey is somewhat different than the findings
in CWBR (2008), which documents that female entrepreneurs at the global level are over-
represented in sales, retail, and services. The observed concentration of female employers in



7
    Tenure refers to total number years of current and previous work experience a person has.



                                                                                                                     7
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


Turkey in manufacturing sector is
believed to be due to high share of
textile and clothing sector in
overall manufacturing industry in
Turkey8.

16.      Compared      to     sector
composition of full-time female
wage        employees,       female
employers         are       equally
concentrated in manufacturing,
more concentrated in trade,
cleaning, washing and beauty
services. In contrast, they are less
concentrated in health, education
and other business services.
Finally, compared to female OAW, female employers operate less in manufacturing but slightly
more in education, food and accommodation and other services (washing, cleaning, hairdressing
etc.)

2.3 SURVIVAL ANALYSIS

17. Previous Section clearly documented that share of female among all employers is very low in
Turkey. One question that would be useful to investigate for the purpose of policy is that whether
low share of female among employers is the result of low entry or rather high exit of female? A
low entry-low exit combination may be indicative of high barriers whereas a high entry-high exit
combination indicates high rate of failure.

18. Table 2 compares entry and exit rates of male and female employers over the 2007-2010
period. Entry rate for female employers is defined as the number of women that become
employer in the current year divided by the total number of female employers in that year.
Accordingly, exit rate is defined as the number of female employers that stop being employer in
the current year divided by the total number of female employers in the year before. According
to the Table, both entry and exit rates of female employers is lower than those of male
employers. This finding supports Kalleberg and Leicht (1991) and Perry (2002) in that women’s
failure rates are not much higher than those of men, contrary to the popular opposite belief. This
finding implies an entry barrier problem in Turkey for female employers rather than higher failure
of them. Entry rate for both male and female employers is lower than their corresponding exit
rates, possibly reflecting the tough economic conditions during the period.




8
    Unfortunately, sector information in SILC is not detailed enough to compute sector statistics at finer levels.



                                                                                                                     8
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


                         Table 2: Entry and Exit Rates (%) of Employers
                           Gender           Entry Rate         Exit Rate
                            Men                 13                16
                           Women                8                 12

19. Average (mean) tenure of employers are compared in Table 3 by gender and employer status.
It is striking that tenure of female becoming employer is much lower than that of male becoming
employer (7.3 vs. 20.7 years). That is, women become employer much earlier than men in their
career. Second, duration of survival (average tenure of exitters – average tenure of entrants) is
much higher for female (6.5 vs. 2.3 years).

                   Table 3: Average Tenure of Entrant and Exitter Employers
                            Men                                 Women
                All       Become      Exit Being      All      Become       Exit Being
             Employer    Employer     Employer     Employer   Employer      Employer
               21.7        20.7          23.0        12.3        7.3           13.9

2.4 THE PATH TO BECOME AN EMPLOYER

20. The panel structure of the dataset allows us to analyze what employers were doing before
they become employers and where they end up in the next year. Table 4a demonstrates
transition of women among work categories by backward looking. That is, it gives origins of
female in a specific category in the current year. It tells what were 100 female in a specific
category in the current year were doing the year before. According to the Table, there is a very
high correlation between activities of individuals in a year and the previous year. Out of 100
female employers in a year; 90 of them were employers, 1.9 were wage employee, 2.4 were OAW
and 5.7 were inactive/unemployed in the previous year. As for 100 OAW in the current year, 62.8
of them were also OAW workers in the previous year, 28.4 of them were inactive/unemployed,
7.7 of them were wage employees and 1 of them was employer. The correlation between current
and previous year activitiy is stronger for employers than wage employees and OAW. In other
words, churning among female employers is less than the churning among other female work
categories.

                              Table 4a: Transition Matrix: Origins
                                                          t-1
                            Wage Emp.       Employer      OAW              Other         Total
             Wage Emp.        77.1             0.1          0.4            22.4          100.0
             Employer          1.9            90.0          2.4             5.7          100.0
      t
               OAW             7.7             1.0         62.8            28.4          100.0
               Other           2.7             0.0          0.5            96.9          100.0




                                                                                                 9
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


21. Table 4b demonstrates transition of women among work categories by forward looking. It
responds to the question: What 100 female in a specific category in the previous year are doing
now? Out of 100 female employers in the previous year; 86 continue to be employer, 4.2 switch
to wage employee, 4.5 switch to OAW and 5.3 become inactive/unemployed in the current year.
It is striking that only 0.6% of OAW and 0.1% of wage employees in a year becomes employer in
the next year. This supports previous findings in the literature that incentives for male and female
entrepreneurs are different (Berglann et al., 2009; Estrin and Mickiewicz, 2011). Female become
entrepreneur due to necessity rather than to earn more. Female who has a secure job does not
show interest in becoming employer, unlike the case for men.

                               Table 4b: Transition Matrix: Future
                                                                t-1
                                 Wage Employee       Employer         OAW            Other
              Wage Employee          81.7               4.2            3.4            3.6
                Employer              0.1              86.0            0.6            0.0
       t          OAW                 1.0               4.5           69.6            0.5
                  Other              17.3               5.3           26.4           95.8
                  Total              100.0            100.0           100.0          100.0


3. INCOME COMPARISON OF MALE AND FEMALE EMPLOYERS

22. This section compares income of male and female employers. It should be noted that income
analysis in this paper are far from being ideal tools to compare success of male and female
employers due to absence of information on many variables (e.g. access to finance) that have a
potential effect on employer success.

23. As an introduction to this section, size
of companies that men and female
working as either full-time wage employee
and employer are given in Figure 6.
Companies owned by women are usually
smaller than those owned by men. This is
consistent with findings of DuReitz and
Henrekson (2000), Coleman (2007) and
Okten (2013) for Turkey. 97% of all
female-owned companies employ less
than 11 employees. Ratio of small size
companies among all male-owned
companies is 88%. On the other hand,
share of women working as full-time wage employee in small companies is slightly less than the
share of men working in those companies.




                                                                                                 10
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


24. As for income, in all categories of comparison, women, on average, earn less than men (Table
6). The proportional difference between male and female earnings is highest among OAW,
followed by employers and lowest among full-time wage employees. While mean income of full-
time wage employee women is 83% of that of men, female employers on average earn 62% of
that of male employers and female OAW on average earn 45% of male OAW. Turkey is no
exception to the consensus in the literature that women entrepreneurs earn less than male
entrepreneurs (Klapper and Parker, 2010; Robb and Wolken, 2002; Chaganti and Parasuraman,
1996; Minniti, 2009).

25. Among working female, employers earn 60% more than full-time wage employees and more
than twice as much as OAW. Income gap between employers and OAW is smaller for men
because male OAW earn much higher than female OAW. Male OAW earn almost as much as male
full-time wage employees.

               Table 6: Average Income (Annual, 2007 TL) by Employment Type
               Work Type             Gender      Mean Income     Median Income
               Wage Employee          Men          11,309            9,212
               (full-time)           Women          9,327            7,513
                                      Men          24,988           15,354
               Employer
                                     Women         15,367            9,700
                                      Men          10,879            8,530
               OAW
                                     Women          4,845            2,559

26. Figure 7 depicts income distribution of entrepreneurs for a more complete income
comparison between male and female entrepreneurs. Male employers earn the highest,
followed by female employers and then male OAW. Female OAW ranks the last by a large margin.




                                                                                             11
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


27. An important question to address the role of gender in employer income is whether
differences in educational attainment of male and female employers play a role in difference in
average income of these two groups. Table 7 shows average income of employers by gender and
educational attainment. Among male employers two educational groups emerge: Being the more
earning group, higher education, regular high school and vocational high school graduates earn
around 50% more than the less earning group: middle and primary school graduates.

28. As for women, the picture is quite different. Although female employers with higher
education degrees earn the highest, female employers with a vocational school degree earn the
lowest, unlike the case for male employers. Besides, female employers with primary school
degrees earn considerably less than those with middle school degrees. As a result, income gap
between male and female employers is lowest among university graduates and highest among
primary school and particularly vocational high school graduates, all in favor of men.

               Table 7: Average Income (Annual, 2007 TL) of Employers by Education
                                     Primary         Middle           High         Vocational        Higher
    Measure            Gender                                                                                      Overall
                                     School9         School          School          H. S.            Educ.
                       Men           20,144          20,667          31,454         28,670           32,639        24,988
    Mean Income
                       Women          7,113          12,609          21,167          5,075           26,636        15,367
    Median             Men           13,832          13,900          20,000         15,238           24,060        15,354
    Income             Women          7,000          9,143           14,074          4,180           22,517        9,700

29. In order for a formal treatment of the income gap between male and female employers,
employer income is run on female dummy in 5 specifications of the form given in Appendix A.
Results of specification (A1) confirm the extent of the previously observed income gap between
male and female employers. Average female employer earns around 61% of average male
employer. While interpreting this result, it should be remembered that average female employer
has much lower tenure than the average male employer. Specification (A2) is run by adding
tenure and interacting tenure with female dummy. According to results of this Specification,
average income gap between a male and a female employer without any tenure is 5,069 TL. Each
year of tenure contributes 269 TL to the income of a male employer but only 98 TL to the income
of a female employer. Since tenure is observed to be an important factor in explaining the income
gap between male and female employers, it is kept in the following specifications.

30. Specification (A3) includes same variables as in Specification (A2), but it is run within
educational attainment groups. Therefore, it compares the income gap between male and
female employers that have the same education. In the same manner, Specification (A4)
measures the income gap between male and female employers operating in the same sector and
finally Specification (A5) compares the income gap between male and female employers that
have the same education and operating in the same sector.


9
  Primary school category includes those with primary school degrees, those did not complete primary school and illeterate.
Those without a primary school degree have a 2% share among male employers and less than 1% among female employers.


                                                                                                                        12
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


31. Figure 8 is depicted to illustrate the results of Specifications (A2)-(A5). Due to unequal
contribution of additional year of tenure to the income of male and female employers, the
income gap depends on the level of tenure of compared employers. Specification (A1) indicates
that income of average female employer is 61% of that of average male employer. Specification
(A2) compares income of male and female employers with same tenure. At 0 years of tenure,
female employers earn 74% of male employers. This proportion declines to 59% at 45 years of
tenure. Since proportions generated by Specification (A2) are higher than those generated by
Specification (A1) until around 35 years of tenure, it can be concluded that female having less
tenure than male counterparts have a significant role in average female employer’s earnings
being less than earnings of average male employer.

32. Results of Specification (A3) is not much different than those of Specification (A2). This is
because educational composition of
male and female employers are not
very different. On the one hand, share
of university graduates is 10% higher
among female employers. On the
other hand, share of vocational high
school graduates is 5% higher among
male employers. Given that male
employer who have vocational high
school graduates, on average, earn
multiple times of female employers of
same education and even more than
university graduate female employers, these two counter effects cancel out each other.

33. Proportions generated by Specification (A4) follows almost a stagnant path and are
increasingly higher than those generated by Specification (A2). Since, Specification (A4) compares
income of male and female employers operating in the same industry, it can be inferred that
female employers being concentrated in less profitable sectors contributes significantly to the
income gap between male and female employers. Finally, Specification (A5) generates the
highest proportions for low levels of tenure but proportions decrease rapidly as tenure increases.
Since the decrease rate is similar to the rates of decline in Specifications (A2) and (A3),
proportions generated by Specification (A5) stays well above those generated by Specifications
(A2) and (A3). Specification (A5) also indicates that female employers are concentrated in less
profitable sectors compared to their male counterparts. This supports Klapper and Parker (2010)
in that sectors women concentrated are characterized by lower average returns.




                                                                                               13
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


4. DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF SUCCESSFUL FEMALE EMPLOYERS

34. In this section, income of female employers of different characteristics are compared to
understand the distinguishing features of successful female employers. In order to reveal the role
of tenure, education, sector operated and previous work type in explaining the income
differential among female employers, a specification of the form given in Appendix B is run on
the dataset including only female employers.

35. Specification (B1) investigates the role of educational attainment on female employer
income. Results of this specification imply that female employers with university degrees earn
significantly more than other female employers of same tenure. Higher education is followed by
high school. Graduates of middle school earn significantly less than high school graduates. Middle
school graduates are followed by primary school graduates and vocational high school graduates
earn the lowest. In fact, university graduate female employers earn more than 5 times than those
with primary school or vocational high school degrees.

36. Specification (B2) attempts to reply the same question for sectors. Variation of female
employer income is very high across sectors. Female employers in health services earn the
highest. This group is followed by other business services (e.g. real estate and technical
consultancy services), trade services and communication services. Female employers operating
in other services (cleaning and washing of clothes and beauty services), accommodation and food
services and manufacturing earn the lowest. Average income of female employers in
manufacturing is around 10% of those in heath services.

37. In Specification (B3) both education and sectors are controlled. This results in a decrease in
all sector coefficients, which are measuring income premium of respective sectors over
manufacturing income. This implies that graduates of the lowest earning educational groups (i.e.
vocational h. s. and primary school) are concentrated in manufacturing (and to a lesser extent in
accommodation and food services since its coefficient does not decrease much). On the other
hand, positive premium of communication services and education services observed in
Specification (B2) almost disappear in Specification (B3). Therefore, it can be concluded that
these two sectors are not associated with higher incomes than that in manufacturing if female
employers of same education and tenure are compared.

38. Finally, Specification (B4) is run to measure the role of previous year work type on the current
year employer income of female. Results of this specification document that female employers
who were also employers in the previous year earn more than female employers who were OAW
or who were not working at all in the previous year.




                                                                                                 14
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


5. CONCLUSION AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

39. Using a novel dataset that allows to follow the same individual over respective years, this
paper attempted to understand the differences in basic characteristics of male and female
employers, differences in income of male and female employers and distinguishing features of
successful female employers in Turkey. Key findings and associated policy implications are as
follows:

40. Female employers are in minority in Turkey not only among all working women but also
among all employers in the economy. This is believed to be due to high entry barriers specifically
targeting women rather than higher failure rate of female employers than their male
counterparts. Although female employers earn less than their male counterparts and their firms
are generally smaller, proportional income difference between male and female employers is
lower than the one between male and female OAW. This implies that focusing on policies that
will help women become employers beyond OAW may yield better results in achieving gender
equity in economic participation.

41. Unlike the case for men, female do not become employers from wage employment. This can
be considered bad news as it implies that female become employer due to necessity instead of
an offensive entrepreneur mindset. Most of new female employers were previously OAW and
some of them were house workers. Moreover, a significant part of OAW are previously non-
working people. These support previous findings that women engage in entrepreneurial activity
mainly due to necessity.

42. Education matters again: Proportional income gap between male and female employers is
lowest among university graduates and highest among primary school and vocational high school
graduates. Female employers with university degrees earn more than 5 times than those with
primary school or vocational high school degrees do. It is also noteworthy that female employers
are less educated than female full-time employers but male employers are more educated than
full-time male employees. These findings also point the necessity motivated entrepreneurship
among women. Therefore, entrepreneurship policies should more target more educated and
wage employee women to create more successful female employers.

43. Average tenure of female employers is significantly less than that of their male counterparts.
Female having less tenure has a significant role in female employers’ earnings being lower than
earnings of male employers. This pose a problem for entrepreneurship because female with less
tenure can be expected to be lacking both entrepreneurship related skills and also financial
power required for a strong start-up. So, there should be significant benefits associated with the
increase in the availability of external financial sources for the use of female entrepreneurs10.
Financial supports and credits to women can be conditioned on participating training programs
for entrepreneurship to close the skill gap between male and female employers.



10
  See Klapper et al. (2006), Evans and Leighton (1989) and Hurst and Lusardi (2004) for the relation between entrepreneurial
behavior and financial capability of individuals.


                                                                                                                         15
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


44. Regression results reveal that, sectors in which female employers concentrated (retail and
wholesale trade, manufacturing, washing and cleaning of clothes and beauty services such as
hairdressing) are less profitable than others. In addition, female employers operating in health
services, real estate and technical consultancy services earn higher than female employers that
have the same education and tenure but operating in other sectors. Hence, providing support to
female start-ups in more profitable sectors over start-ups in other sectors can yield better
outcomes.




                                                                                             16
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


REFERENCES

Aronson, R. (1991). “Self-employment: A Labour Market Perspective,” Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.

Berglann, H., E. Moen, K. Roed and J. Skogstrom (2009). “Entrepreneurship: Origins and Returns, ” IZA
Discussion Paper 4250.

Boden, R., and A. Nucci (2000). “On the Survival Prospects of Men’s and Women’s New Business
Ventures,” Journal of Business Venturing, 15 (4): 347–62.

Brush, C. (1990). “Women and enterprise creation: Barriers and opportunities,” Paris: Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development.

Brush, C. (2006). “Women Entrepreneurs: A Research Overview,” In: M. Casson, B. Yeung, A. Basu, and N.
Wadeson, eds., Oxford Handbook of Entrepreneurship. Oxford UK: Oxford University Press.

Carter, N., M. Williams, and P. Reynolds (1997). “Discontinuance among New Firms in Retail: The Influence
of Initial Resources, Strategy, and Gender,” Journal of Business Venturing, 12 (2): 125 - 45.

Chaganti, R., and S. Parasuraman (1996). “A Study of the Impacts of Gender on Business Performance and
Management Patterns in Small Businesses,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 21 (2):73 – 5.

Coleman, S. (2007). “The role of human and financial capital in the profitability and growth of women-
owned small firms,” Journal of Small Business Management, 45 (3): 303-319.

CWBR (2008). “Key Facts About Women-Owned Businesses,” Washington DC: Center for Women’s
Business Research.

De Bruin, A., C. G. Brush, and F. Welter (2006). “Introduction to the special Issue: Towards building
cumulative knowledge on women’s entrepreneurship,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30 (5):
585-593.

DuReitz, A. and M. Henrekson (2000). “Testing the female underperformance hypothesis,” Small Business
Economics, 14: 1-10.

Estrin, S., and T. Mickiewicz (2011). “Do Institutions Have a Greater Effect on Female Entrepreneurs?,”
Small Business Economics, 37 (4): 397-415.

Evans, D., and L. Leighton (1989). “Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,” American Economic
Review, 79 (3): 519 - 535.

Fairlie, R., and A. Robb (2009). “Entrepreneurship, Self-employment and Business Data: An Introduction
to Several Large, Nationally-representative Datasets,” IZA Discussion Paper 4052.

Georgellis Y., and H. Wall (2005). “Gender differences in self-employment,” International Review of
Applied Economics, 19 (3): 321-342.




                                                                                                      17
Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


Hausmann, R., L. D. Tyson, and S. Zahidi (2012). “The Global Gender Gap Report,” World Economic Forum.
Geneva, Switzerland.

Hurst, E., and A. Lusardi (2004). “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth and Entrepreneurship,” Journal
of Political Economy, 112 (2): 319-347.

Kalleberg, A., and K. Leicht (1991). “Gender and Organizational Performance: Determinants of Small
Business Survival and Success,” Academy of Management Journal, 34 (1): 136–61.

Kim, G. (2007) “The analysis of self-employment levels over the life-cycle”, Quarterly Review of Economics
and Finance 47(3): 397.

Klapper, L., L. Laeven, and R. Rajan (2006). “Entry Regulation as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship,” Journal of
Financial Economics 82 (3): 591–629.

Klapper, L., and S. Parker (2010). “Gender and business environment for new firm creation” World Bank
Research Observer, 26 (2): 237-257.

Lee, M. A., and M. S. Rendall (2001). “Self-employment disadvantage in the working lives of blacks and
females,” Population Research and Policy Review, 20: 291–320.

Minniti, M., P. Arenius, and N. Langowitz (2005). “The 2004 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Special Topic
Report: Women in Entrepreneurship,” Center for Women Leadership, Babson College, MA.

Minniti, M. (2009). “Gender Issues in Entrepreneurship,” Foundations and Trends in Entrepreneurship, 5
(7-8): 497–621.

Minniti, M., and W. Naude (2010). “What do we know about the patterns and determinants of female
entrepreneurship across countries?,” European Journal of Development Research, 22 (3): 277-93.

Okten C. (2013). “Female Entrepreneurship in Turkey: Patterns, Characteristics and Trends”.

Perry, S. (2002). “A comparison of failed and non-failed small businesses in the United States,” Journal of
Developmental Entrepreneurship, 7: 415–428.

Reynolds, P., W. Bygrave, E. Autio, L. Cox, and M. Hay (2002). Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: 2002
Executive Report.

Robb, A., and J. Wolken (2002). “Firm, Owner, and Financing Characteristics: Differences between Female
and Male-owned Small Businesses,” FRBG Working paper.

Verheul, I., A. V. Stel, and R. Thurik (2006). “Explaining female and male entrepreneurship across 29
countries,” Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 18 (2): 151-183.




                                                                                                         18
        Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


        APPENDIX
        A - INCOME COMPARISON OF MALE AND FEMALE EMPLOYERS

        Employer income is run on female dummy in 5 specifications of the form:

        E    m     t
                   i   
                        p0 I
                             l
                             1F     n
                                    eti 
                                         cm2T o e  a
                                                   
                                                 i m
                                                 t   n
                                                     3Fl
                                                       e uee  rT
                                                            i *
                                                            t   m e    a
                                                                    i n
                                                                   et     
                                                                         iEul id
                                                                            e t 
                                                                                r e
                                                                                   uiS    i 
                                                                                         ce
                                                                                          t  t
                                                                                              c (A
                                                                                              i  t)     o   r
                                                                              i     i




        where i denotes individuals and t year. Female takes 1 if the individual is a female and 0 if
   
        otherwise. Educ and Sector are Education and Sector dummies.

                                                Table A: Regression Results




                          All coefficients significant at 0.1%.




                                                                                                  19
        Performance of Female Employers in Turkey


        B- DISTINGUISHING FEATURES OF SUCCESSFUL FEMALE EMPLOYERS
        In order to reveal the role of tenure, education, sector operated and previous work type in
        explaining the income differential among female employers, a specification of the form given
        below is run on the dataset including only female employers.

            E    m      t
                        i    p
                               I
                               0
                                l 1Tn e ci 
                                         t  
                                            noiE
                                               u mr
                                                  di 
                                                   t  u
                                                      e iS c et
                                                        e         it
                                                               i c  P                        i t
                                                                                              r
                                                                                              o     e
                                                                                                  i r   v   (B)
                                                      i               i                   i




                                                  Table B: Regression Results
   




                            **: Significant at 5% only; All others significant at 0.1%.




                                                                                                              20
