                                             102156 v1
                    WEST BANK AND GAZA




LOCAL GOVERNANCE AND SERVICES IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (P148896)


                    PROGRAM FOR RESULTS




                   TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT




                         APRIL 2015
1.     As part of the LGSIP Program preparation, the Bank team conducted a Technical
Assessment comprising of a (i) Village Council capacity assessment; (ii) joint service provision
assessment; (iii) expenditure assessment; and (iv) MoLG capacity assessment. The Technical
Assessment also reviewed the PA’s strategic framework and development objectives in the Local
Government Sector, and was informed by an analysis of the Inter-Governmental Fiscal Relations
(IGFR) conducted by the team as part of the programmatic Public Expenditure Review 2014.
Findings of the technical assessment have informed program design and are summarized in the
following. The full draft assessment reports are included in this Technical Assessment as
Appendices 1-4.

1.     Strategic framework for LG Sector development

2.      The PA strategic framework for the Local Government (LG) Sector in the WBG is found
in the following documents:

          PA’s National Development Plan 2014-2016 (NDP 2014); and
          MoLG Strategic documents:
              o Joint Services Councils Strategy 2014 to 2016
              o Local Government Cross Sectoral Plan 2014 to 2016
              o The Strategic Framework for the Ministry of Local Government 2015 to 2017.

3.      The NDP 2014 is the overall strategic document providing PA’s vision for LG
development. It identifies LGUs as a critical foundation of the Palestinian society given their
functions of local representation and for service delivery. The NDP builds on previous
development plans, including the Palestinian Reform and Development Plan 2008-2010, and the
NDP 2011-2013. The NDP 2014 includes operational and development expenditures divided into
four main sectors, and subsequent subsectors, with total expenditures of around US$12 billion over
three years (Table 1).

        Table 1. Sectors in the NDP 2014 to 2016 and expenditure frameworks,
        US$ million
        Sectors                              Operating Development Total
        1. Economic Development and
        Employment                                  229            287       516
        2. Good Governance and Institutional
        Building                                  3,905            392     4,297
        3. Social Protection and
        Development                               5,995            410     6,405
        4. Infrastructure                           258            417       675
        Total                                    10,388          1,506    11,894

4.      The PA’s strategic priorities and development objectives in the local government sector
are included under NDP Sector (2) “Good Governance and Institution Building (GGIB)”. It aims
to support building “[…] effective and efficient sub-national governments that are capable of high
quality and proficient public service delivery”. Further strategic objectives under this sector
include ensuring public participation, decentralized decision making, and public accountability.
The objective to develop more equitable and sustainable service infrastructure for water supply,
waste water and solid waste management are included in the NDP Sector (3) “Social Protection
and Development”. Although the NDP does not make specific reference to LGUs in this context,
it is important that LGUs have the legal mandate to provide those critical basic services.
5.      The PA’s Local Government program is further specified as one of the five sub-sectors
under the NDP Sector GGIB. A total budget of respectively US$138 million and US$140 million
is allocated for operating and capital expenditures to the Local Government program (see Table 2
below).

  Table 2: Sub sectors of the NDP’s Good Governance and Institutional Building Sector
  with sub objectives
  Sub-Sector                 Budget 2014-2016 million Sub-Sector Objectives
                             USD
                             Operating Development
  Administrative                   270             67 More effective, efficient and
  Development and Public                              transparent management and
  Financial Management                                allocation of public finances
  Local Government                 138           140 LGUs throughout governorates
                                                      are more capable of a better
                                                      public service delivery
  Security                       3,151             93 More effective delivery of and
                                                      equitable access to public services
  Justice                          127          84.5 Enhanced ability to provide
                                                      security and access to justice
  International Relations          218            7.5 More effective Palestinian
                                                      presence in Arab and international
                                                      forums as well as within
                                                      Palestinian communities in the
                                                      Diaspora
  Total GGIB                     3,905           392

 Source: NDP, 2014-16, p 50.

6.     The NDP lacks details on how these figures are allocated further although yearly figures
are provided. For the local government sector the yearly figures follow below.

   Table 3: Budget for operations (Ope) and developing (Dev) in the NDP for subsector
   Local Government. USD mill.
                           2014           2015           2016            2014-2016
   Operation/Development Ope       Dev    Ope Dev        Ope      Dev    Ope     Dev
   Local Government sub- 44.8      42.0   46.1 43.0      47.5     55.0   138.4 140.0
   sector
7.      A critical issue is the PA’s approach to service delivery. In particular, LGU’s role for
service delivery hasn’t been defined specifically in the NDP. However, some elements of a service
delivery strategy can be found in other strategy documents relating to local governments developed
by MoLG, in particular the recent Strategic Framework for MoLG 2015-2017, which includes five
strategic directions:

      (i) Establishment of infrastructure and institutional structures able to provide services and
          strengthen the citizens’ resilience in Area “C”.
     (ii) Developing local authorities’ financial, administrative, and planning capacity in order to
          be able to fulfill their duties and obligations within the overall orientation towards
          increasing decentralization.
  (iii) Continuous improvement of the ministry’s technical, human, and legal structure to be able
        to respond to new challenges in, and lead, the local governance sector.
     (iv) Establishment of an effective and flexible legal environment that enables enhancing
          partnerships in the provision of services and investments between local authorities and the
          private sector.
     (v) Building the financial and administrative capacity of local authorities to be able to
         contribute in reconstructing and providing basic services in Gaza.

2.        Strategic relevance and alignment of the proposed Program

8.     The PforR program has been designed within this context as a part of the PA Strategic
Framework to cater for a program for the development of services in villages, which fits into the
MoLGs Strategic Framework 2015-2017. The Program would support service delivery
improvements and capacity building in large VCs, and institutional strengthening of MoLGs and
JSCs. Joint service provision, through JSCs, has been outlined as a PA priority in the recent Joint
Services Councils Strategy.

9.     The program follows the PA’s approach to consolidation in the LGU sector, applying a
mix of strategies, including amalgamation, jointly provided services, clustering for joint planning
and service delivery and upgrading of a limited number of VCs to municipal status. All these
approaches aim to improve the capacity and financial sustainability of service provision in LGUs,
especially VCs.

10.     A critical element of the West Bank’s LG system is the existence of numerous marginalized
communities, which cannot be reached by standard approaches, i.e., individual or joint service
delivery. Those include communities located in Area C, surrounded by Area C, or cut-off by the
separation barrier. Given the particular challenge of those communities, particular attention will
be given to marginalized communities within the PA program, financed from Government own
funding and other DPs, but outside of the PforR operation.

11.    Since no villages exist in the Gaza Strip, the Program will not target Gaza in this first phase.
Gaza is comprised of 25 municipalities which receive support through the MDP, including a recent
Additional Financing to respond to the Gaza emergency following the war during July-August
2014.
12.    The proposed operation is highly relevant to West Bank and Gaza’s local government
sector and supports the two sector objectives in the NDP 2014-2016: LGUs throughout
governorates are more capable of a better public service delivery and more effective delivery of
and equitable access to public services. The Program also complements the weaker areas in the
PA strategy with a comprehensive approach to service delivery improvement in villages. The
program will support MoLG to further define a coherent sector strategy for improved local service
delivery and for enhancing MoLG’s ability to support the development and planning of service
provision in joint arrangements.

13.      The technical soundness of the program is assured by an extensive elaboration of lessons
learned from PA’s previous programs in the local government sector supported by the WB and
DPs. A key lesson is that a consolidated and systematic single approach is needed as hitherto many
initiatives have been fragmented and less programmatic, when dealing with the smaller LGUs. In
contrast to this support, the larger LGUs, i.e., municipalities, have been integrated gradually and
systematically into a joint approach and since 2010, within a single program, MDP, achieving
good results.

14.     The PA’s approach to consolidation of the local government sector had mixed results.
Lessons learned confirm that top down approaches to amalgamations and mechanic clustering of
LGUs for joint service provision has largely resulted in resistance from LGUs and cemented
fragmentation instead of supporting consolidation. Hence, the proposed program would focus on
voluntary cooperation with strong incentives to consolidate critical service delivery function while
allowing more time for consolidation in political representation and investment prioritization. The
proposed approach aims at reaching sustainable results, acknowledging that joint arrangements
will be crucial to improve service delivery outcomes and financial sustainability in the long term.

15.     The program builds on previous successful experience with community based planning. A
Community-Driven Development (CDD) approach has been tested effectively in the recently
completed Village and Neighborhood Development Project (VNDP) and other similar initiatives
supported by DPs. Experience from these programs demonstrate that increased accountability and
incentives for collaboration can create the demand for LGUs’ consolidation in an organic, demand-
driven manner. The program would replicate this experience at a larger scale by putting strong
emphasis on incentives for joint service provision and a clear minimum benchmark for viable local
authorities.

16.     VNDP also promoted a gender-integrated approach to community planning and
prioritization, such as minimum requirements for representation of women in project support
groups and a requirement that 70% of the implemented community projects would benefit women
and other marginalized groups, such as youth. Also the MDP has built in specific requirements for
gender-integration in investment planning and citizen engagement to be drawn from.

17.     As VNDP mainly financed small-scale community infrastructure and social services a
lesson is that most VCs cannot implement critical investments on an individual basis to improve
basic service delivery. Therefore, strong incentives are required for joint service delivery and
infrastructure improvements beyond the reach of individual VCs. The proposed Program
recognizes the need for strong incentives reflected in Sub-Component II providing significant
additional funding through a ‘top-up’ for joint investments.
18.      A critical issue in the Program is the approach to capacity building. Experience
demonstrates that capacity building can only be effective if provided in conjunction with
investment funding, and vice-versa, to allow learning-by-doing. Therefore, the program would
follow Government’s procedures and delegate to VCs and JSCs all critical responsibilities for the
selection of investments, project preparation, procurement, financial management, and contract
management. However, to ensure minimum capacity of LGUs to perform those critical functions,
including as independent viable entities in the future, VCs will have to meet a set of eligibility
criteria as mandatory conditions considered to be a proxy for minimum capacity.

19.    During program preparation several assessments have been implemented to assure that the
program has the adequate design to deal with the challenges revealed.

3.     Joint Service Provision as key pillar for consolidation and financial sustainability

20.     Establishing and developing Joint Service Councils has been crucial to improve service
delivery in WBG since the approval of the Local Government Act (1997), and an important
element of PA’s consolidation effort in recent years to leverage economies of scale and sustain the
sector’s many VCs. Joint service provision for basic infrastructure and services is therefore at the
core of the proposed Program. However, the current institutional framework and governance
structure for JSCs’ service provision face several limitations. Generally, the management and
decision making structures, accountability frameworks, financing arrangements, public
participation systems and communication are inadequate or unclear. Furthermore, no
comprehensive data was available at MoLG on the number of JSCs, members, services provided
and whether those JSCs are active or not.

21.     Therefore a Joint Services Provision Assessment was carried out as part of the program
preparation to get a full understanding of the framework for JSCs in the WBG. This included
establishing an adequate good governance (GG) framework, which all JSCs could be assessed
against; development of clear models for bylaws/ legal agreements for JSCs’ within the GG
framework and suggest appropriate JSCs, which could be supported by the program. The
Assessment was completed in March 2015. A brief summary of the assessment and main findings
follows below:

22.     As the MoLG’s existing information was incomplete and partly outdated, the first step of
the assessment was to identify all 92 existing JSCs – 82 in the West Bank and 10 in Gaza. Basic
membership, services, populations and other administrative data was collected through a
questionnaire for all 92 JSCs. A summary is presented below:

           Table 4. Number of JSCs in WBG with current status (December 2014)

         Location                       Active     Temporary       Inactive       Total

         West Bank                        50            13            19           82

         Gaza                              5                          5            10

         Total WBG                        55            13            24           92
         Note: Temporary JSCs will be merged with other JSCs within SW according to a
         decision from MoLG.

                 Table 5. List of active JSCs in WBG per activity (December 2014)

          Location                      Solid        Water,      Planning and        Total
                                        Waste        Waste       Development
                                                     Water

          West Bank                      14             6              30               50

          Gaza                           2              1              2                5

          Total WBG                   16 (11)           7            32 (2)         55 (13)

         Note: Temporary JSCs are in parenthesis.

23.     Further, a more detailed survey was carried out to assess the current performance of JSCs
and to rank the 55 active and 13 temporary JSCs. The assessment was done based on a GG
Framework for Joint Service Provision with 19 indicators six thematic areas: i) rule of law, ii)
effective and efficient service delivery, iii) transparency, iv) accountability, v) responsiveness and
vi) participation.

24.     42 JSCs in the West Bank and 5 JSCs in Gaza responded to the second questionnaire. The
assessment confirmed the anticipated challenges, including large performance variations within a
scoring range from 18 points to a maximum score of 58 points. The average score in the WB was
34 points and in Gaza 32 points. Of the ranked JSCs in the West Bank, 16 JSCs achieved more
than 40 points, i.e.38% and 15 JSCs scored below 30 points = 36%. The best sector scoring for
JSCs was found in the water sector, with 41 points on average. Solid Waste Management (SW)
and JSCs for “Planning and Development (P/D)” scored on average 32 points. A score of more
than 40 was assessed as the minimum for a JSC to be considered eligible for the proposed Program.
A list of JSCs that scored more than 40 points and which have qualified for the proposed program
is included in the following table:

                             Table 6: Qualified JSCs for the Program
                                                                                             Score
            Governorat
    No.                          Type           JSC Name                                    Ranking
                e
                                                                                             2014
                                                Joint Service Council for planning
                              Planning &
     2       Bethlehem                          and development, West Rural areas,
                             Development
                                                B1                                            42
                                                Joint Service Council for
                              Planning &
     9           Hebron                         Development and Planning of Al
                             Development
                                                Karmel Cluster                                48
                                                Joint Service Council for Solid Waste
     10          Hebron       Solid Waste
                                                Management , Hebron Governorate               42
                                            High Joint Service Council for Solid
    11       Hebron        Solid Waste      Waste Management, Hebron
                                            Bethlehem Governorate                     48
                                            Joint Local Council for Solid Waste
    14        Jenin        Solid Waste
                                            of Zahret El Finjan                       52
                          Water & Waste     Joint Service Council for Water and
    15        Jenin
                              Water         waste water management                    46
                          Water & Waste     West Joint Service Council for Water
    16        Jenin
                              Water         and waste Water                           54
            Jericho &                       Joint Local Council for Solid Waste
    29        Jordan       Solid Waste      Management- Jericho and Al Agwar
              Valley                        (Jordan Valley)                           54
                                            Joint Service Council for Planning
                            Planning &
    42       Nablus                         and Development/ North West of
                           Development
                                            Nablus                                    46
                            Planning &      Middle Joint Service Council for
    50       Qalqilia
                           Development      Planning and Development                  58
                                            Joint Service Council for Planning
           Ramallah &
    55                     Solid Waste      and development for Beit Leqya
            El Bireh
                                            cluster                                   41
                                            Joint Service Council for Solid Waste
    73       Salfeet       Solid Waste
                                            Management                                52
                            Planning &      Joint Service Council for Planning
    75        Tubas
                           Development      and Development of Tubas Area             44
                                            Joint Service Council for Water and
                          Water & Waste
    78        Tubas                         waste water management for Tubas
                              Water
                                            Area                                      44

25.    Following the ranking assessment, eight of the better performing JSCs were selected for a
subsequent detailed field assessment. This was done to review the information provided in
questionnaires and to obtain more detailed information about the GG structures of the selected
JSCs.

26.     The assessment concludes that the development of joint service cooperation has come a
long way in the WBG and a good understanding exists in JSCs and MoLG about its organisation,
management and services provided to citizens. On the other hand, GG structures can be developed
further in terms of better and clearer agreements between the members and more cost recovery for
sustainability of services. Accountability systems are often weak, caused by the indirect
accountability between the end users and the management/ board of the JSC.

27.    The assessment confirmed that revised JSC Regulation would be needed and strongly
advises to establish clear rules for the functioning of JSCs, including a standard by-law as the
foundation for a clear agreement between the members. MoLG is currently reviewing the Basic
Regulations for JSCs from 2006 and the assessment provided information to the ongoing review
by suggesting a structure of a new standard bylaw for JSCs. It is expected that the revised JSC
Regulation will be provided by MoLG in May 2015, including a standard bylaw which members
of JSCs should apply. This is critical for the operation and therefore incorporated as one of the
DLIs.

28.      The JSC assessment provides the critical information needed to select JSCs meeting
program eligibility criteria. The assessment also provides crucial information about the kind of
capacity building needed to strengthen JSCs by providing detailed information of all active JSCs,
in particular the eight JSCs that were subject to the more detailed field assessment. The assessment
also provided MoLG with a highly needed database with information about all JSCs in WBG,
which can be used for effective support to active JSCs, for consolidation, and for dissolving those
that are not active. Building on this ‘baseline’ assessment, MoLG will carry out on a bi -annual
basis, a JSCs assessment to determine the JSCs eligible for funding and support under the program.

4.     VC capacity assessment

29.     The West Bank has a scattered structure with many small VCs of which most lack capacity
and basic staff. Experience from previous programs in WBG and in other countries with similar
structures show that LGUs without basic core staff, e.g., technician/planner/engineer, accountant
and an administrator/director will not be able to sustain services. Global experience demonstrates
that a certain minimum population size of 3,000-5,000 is crucial for having the necessary
foundation for service delivery and a local revenue base.

30.     To prepare the program, key information on VCs was therefore required to (i) define the
program VC target group; and (ii) set program’s investment grant eligibility criteria, including
basic data on the total number of VCs, population size, poverty level, access and quality of
services, population living in Area C, and share of marginalized communities; but also information
on the institutional capacity, staffing levels, and financial capacity, including existing DP support.
To collect the basic information, the MoLG conducted an in-house data collection exercise through
its directorate offices. The World Bank, jointly with KfW provided the MoLG with technical
assistance to support carrying out a VCs Assessment for: (i) compiling, reviewing and analyzing
existing data; and (ii) identifying critical data gaps that would need to be addressed further during
program preparation. The exercise confirmed that over 85 % of VCs have a population size below
4,000 inhabitants, and that 76% of the VCs fulfilled one of the VCs’ requirements by the MoLG,
namely submission of its budget to the MoLG. Only 39% of the VCs, however, recorded lower or
equal amounts of arrears from the previous year. No reliable data was available in terms of
availability of access to core staff (accountant/engineer/administrator). Other critical information
such as the existence of a simplified development and investment plan was not available either.

31.      The exercise enabled identifying two separate groups of VCs to be considered for the
program’s sub-component I: Large VCs (population above 4,000) that meet the other eligibility
criteria would receive a grant allocation transferred directly from the MoLG to their accounts for
execution by the individual VC. Small eligible VCs (population below 4,000) would be allocated
grants but the funds would not be transferred directly from the MoLG to the VC and the individual
projects in small VCs would need to be executed through a qualified JSC. Both groups of VCs
will be assessed for their eligibility to respective grant allocation based on the eligibility criteria
described in Annex 1. Based on the results of the VCs Assessment, the baseline eligibility
assessment will be done by the MoLG as a part of program preparation.
32.     The technical assessment also relied on the IGFR policy note to design the fiscal
arrangement in the program and the transfer mechanism to VCs and JSCs. The study reviewed the
existing inter-governmental fiscal arrangements between the PA and LGUs to identify the main
issues and provides recommendations for the PA to adopt policies and practices to improve the
financial health of LGUs. The initial findings from this exercise indicated that a vast majority of
VCs can barely provide solid waste management service – only one of the 27 expenditure
assignments for LGUs – due to the shortage of own-source revenues as well as central transfers.
VCs rely largely on local fees and user charges, due to severely limited tax revenue assignments
(personal tax and ceiling tax only). VCs’ per capita own-source revenues was only half of those
for municipalities in 2010 and 2011. VCs also do not have any predictable grants and transfers
available from the PA to supplement such grave shortage of own-source revenues. Only two types
of transfers are currently implemented from the PA to VCs: namely (i) sharing of the transportation
fee (which is however intercepted by the MoF to account for arrears); and (ii) emergency
allocations. However, these transfers are neither predictable nor significant enough to finance
VCs’ service delivery functions. The study also highlighted VCs’ low budget planning and
execution capability through revealing the large disparity between planned and executed budgets.

5.        MoLG Capacity Assessment

33.     The technical assessment also included a review of MoLG’s capacity. The assessment had
the objective to assess MoLG’s capacity to perform its mandated tasks, in particular supporting
VCs to deliver local services. Findings of the assessment would guide developing capacity
building and technical assistance activities under the proposed LGSIP to support the MoLG in
carrying out its regular sector oversight and supervision function. The assessment was carried out
to ensure that the MoLG has the capacity to provide overall support and guidance to LGUs targeted
under the program to help them provide sustainable services to citizens, based on a predictable
financing mechanism and in line with GG principles

34.     MoLG’s mandate has been confirmed in its Mission Statement, which aims at “working on
building the capacities of LGUs and enhancing their resources to enable them to achieve the
welfare of their citizens/constituencies within the framework of good local governance”.1 Overall,
the assessment reviewed the degree to which MoLG is implementing its mandate, but focused
particularly on those directorates and units that are expected to play a critical role under the
proposed LGSIP.

35.       For the proposed LGSIP, the following functions of MoLG are particularly critical:

    (i)   Perform a sound and transparent selection2 of VCs and JSCs that would qualify for the
          annual investment grant cycle, and submitting the selection to the LGSIP Program
          Committee for approval through the Program Manager (MDLF).3


1
  Ministry of Local Government Public Relations and Media Unit, 2013.
2
  According to the VC Annual Eligibility Assessments to be carried out on an annual basis, and the JSCs eligibility
assessment to be carried out in 2016 and in 2018 following the one already carried out in 2014 - 2015 during
Program preparation.
3
  Based on the assessment of the MoLG the MDLF confirms the final financial allocations to eligible LGUs and
submits the lists for the endorsement of the LGSIP Program Committee.
     (ii)   Following the Program Committee’s approval, announcing to eligible VCs and JSCs the
            selection, eligibility criteria, financial allocations, and initial capacity building activities;

 (iii)      Oversight; in terms of receiving and approving Annual Budgets from VCs and JSCs, in
            accordance with the Annual Budget Cycle, starting on November 1 every calendar year;

 (iv)       MoLG screening of minimum participatory annual capital investment planning
            requirements for VCs, and provision of capacity building to VCs in participatory annual
            capital investment planning;

     (v)    MoLG support to the VCs that are eligible for implementing individual investments under
            Sub-Component I in all aspects of investment program cycle, including the review and
            approval of bidding documents, review of Operations and Maintenance (O&M) plans,
            providing periodic sight supervision, reviewing site reports, reviewing and approving
            contractors invoices (for the case of small VCs executing via JSCs), while making sure
            investment planning, execution, and operation are carried out in accordance with technical
            requirements/ specifications (including procurement and financial management), in
            accordance with Annual Capital Investment Plans, and in accordance with sound
            environmental and social considerations.

 (vi)       Identification of indicative capacity building needs for VCs and JSCs not yet eligible under
            the Program, and execution of capacity building activities to support VCs and JSCs to meet
            minimum eligibility criteria for investment funding under the LGSIP;

(vii)       Supporting physical planning activities in VCs, as needed;

(viii)      Supporting the improvement of VCs service delivery financial and technical capacity,
            through (i) the development and implementation of strategies, legal reform, and guidelines,
            including, but not limited to, a transparent system for the allocation of transportation tax to
            VCs, guidelines for developing VCs own source revenue, review of VCs’ and JSCs’
            revenues and expenditure assignments to establish a sustainable intergovernmental fiscal
            framework, guidelines for service tariff structures, the application of GG Framework for
            joint service provision, and developing a revised policy directive for the consolidation of
            small, non-viable LGUs; and (ii) consequently, providing needed training to VCs and JSCs
            by the different MoLG departments.

 36.     Overall, the assessment confirmed that MoLG has sufficient technical capacity and the
 PA’s formal mandate4 to provide guidance to and support VCs meeting LGSIP results. MoLG’s
 strength include its capacity to branch out with 201 MoLG staff in 11 West Bank Governorate
 Directorates, equivalent to about 56% of total MoLG staff with an average of 18 staff per
 directorate.5 The capacity assessment confirmed that, in principle, MoLG does not need to hire
 additional civil servants to support Program implementation, but may need to relocate staff from
 MoLG headquarters in Ramallah to selected directorates offices to optimize use of the more than
 130 MoLG planners and civil engineers. The MoLG may also need to acquire the services of short-
 term and long-term consultants to support LGSIP oversight activities and policy formulation to

 4
     Basic Law of the Palestinian Authority and Local Authorities Law No. 1 of 1997
 5
     MoLG Human Resource Development Strategy, 2014.
avoid any gaps. Capacity building and training would also be required, focusing on areas with
limited MoLG capacity, e.g., in management of consultancy and training contracts under Sub-
Component III. The assessment also noted sub-optimal coordination and knowledge sharing
between MoLG Directorates. There is a need to ensure sufficient level of technical coordination
between the number of MoLG Directorate and involved technical units to ensure LGSIP results
are met.

37.     The capacity assessment noted clear shortcomings that would require provision of technical
assistance to the MoLG as part of the program, including some that could be provided under Sub-
Component III. For instance, field visits to sampled directorates confirmed that key central-level
GDs are mirrored in terms of staff and functions. This, in theory, would help decentralize and
streamline the MoLG oversight and facilitate interaction with LGUs. In practice, however, the
assessment confirmed redundancy in the application of oversight mandated practices at the MoLG
directorate and central level. Redundancies should be reduced under the proposed Program MoLG.
Specific guidance to relevant MoLG staff would be detailed in the Program Operations Manual.

38.     Findings of the assessment also confirmed that those MoLG General Directorates which
traditionally received systematic and focused donor funded technical assistance and capacity
building are more advanced in terms of preparing their own strategies, as well as technical
knowhow and staffing capacities compared to other MoLG departments. Therefore, the Program
pre-appraisal launched an exercise, to be confirmed by appraisal, to map out on-going and future
capacity building and technical assistance provided to the MoLG with the MoLG Human Resource
Development Strategy and Departmental Training Plan for the years 2014 – 2017. Based on this
exercise, it has been agreed that the MoLG would prepare a consolidated capacity building plan
for the first year of LGSIP implementation, focusing on MoLG’s mandated program oversight
tasks, including specifying the sources of funding under the Government Program, and funding
gaps which need to be covered under LGSIP. As such, the first annual capacity building plan, and
hereto each successive annually updated capacity building plan, would optimally attempt to cover
on a gradual, prioritized manner, a range of strategies, guidelines, and training (for MoLG and for
LGUs) in support of the MoLG’s Strategic Framework for MoLG 2015 to 2017.

39.     The assessment also confirmed that capacity building would be required for higher level
oversight institutions to enable them to carry out the independent verification of results met by the
MoLG and the MDLF, such as the State Audit Bureau, because the MoLG’s GD of Guidance and
Monitoring, traditionally tasked with carrying out independent technical, financial and
administrative audit on MoLG and LGUs affairs, is not eligible to carry out independent
verification tasks under the proposed LGSIP, due to conflict of interest, since it is a GD within the
MoLG. The State Audit would also benefit from capacity building support to carry out “value for
money” audits in VCs and JSCs.

6.     Expenditure Framework Assessment

40.     Review of the existing system of financing infrastructure service delivery in village
councils: Capital expenditure requirements of Village Councils are financed mainly through
Budget allocations from the Central Government as well as through shared taxes. The recurring
expenditures are financed through a combination of subsidies from the Central Government as
well as through own revenues, mostly from user fees for revenue generating services. Analysis of
the budgets of the previous years (see figure below) shows that budget allocations for development
and operating expenditures by VC has been declining and is fluctuating over the years, indicating
that there is a significant paucity of resources available to VCs for infrastructure development,
operation and maintenance. The ability to finance large operational expenditures has not improved
much in recent years. Operational average expenditures per capita (in NIS) for VCs barely moved
from 2011 to 2012 –with around 54 NIS and increased some to 64.6 NIS in 2013 Compared to
this, operational average expenditures per capita for municipalities steadily decreased from 195
NIS in 2010 to 166 NIS in 2012. Similarly analysis of development budget expenditures show that
capital expenditures per capita has also reduced over the years and currently stand at approximately
41 NHS. Enterprise budget expenditures per capita have remained fairly stable for the past three
years.
 Figure: Village Councils Development Budget per capita averages: Approved 2011-2013;
     Three-fourths of Approved 2011-2013; and Actual 2011-2013 (first 9 months) in NIS
 240.0


 190.0


 140.0


  90.0


  40.0
                     2011                             2012                             2013

             Development Revenue Appoved                     Development Revenue Approved (3/4)
             Development Revenue Actual                      Development Expenditure Appoved
             Development Expenditure Approved (3/4)          Development Expenditure Actual


41.     Analysis of VC budgets have shown that VCs quite consistently show on average deficits
in the operating and development budgets. This leads to the conclusion that the operating tax and
non-tax revenues of LGUs are insufficient to cover the capital and necessary operating costs. Also
analysis of the enterprise budgets have shown that the source of the surpluses in the enterprise
budget fund is quite fictitious given that many LGUs in charge of electricity and water distribution
do not fully pay their providers and have been incurring in large accumulated payment arrears.

42.      Resourcing of VC budgets: Analysis of the relative shares of the different types of revenues
in the VC budget have shown that the largest share –between 35 and 45 percent – is for “revenues
from the PA” which includes revenue sharing and transfers: the transportation fees, government
donations as grants in aid, and contingency budget allocations. The second relatively larger—up
to 30 percent depending on the year-- is “services revenues” from user charges such as garbage
collection fees—by far the most important item here--, parking lot fees, car inspection fees, etc.
The third category is “revenues by the Village Council” which includes the taxes collected by the
Village Council (the personal tax, the ceiling tax and the education tax) and other fees collected
by the Village Council (such as agriculture products and cattle inspection fees, building license
fees, and signboard fees). Surprisingly the VCs also report loans (from the PA and other
institutions) as operating revenues; supposedly these are short-term cash bridging loans but they
are wrongly reported as revenues since they will have to be repaid. Last, the not insignificant
“miscellaneous revenues” category varies considerably across VCs and covers any kind of
revenues that do not fit in the previous categories, such as interest from bank deposits or the sale
of property. The analyses of the operating and development revenues and expenditures show that
there is a clear gap. However, at present there are no regular grants or transfers available from the
PA to supplement the shortage of LGUs’ own-source revenues. Transfers from the central level
to LGUs include (i) the transportation fee; (ii) property tax; (iii) professional license fee; (iv)
emergency allocations; and (v) capital transfers through the Municipal Development and Lending
Fund (MDLF). However, only the transportation fee and emergency allocations are available to
VC, whereas municipalities also benefit from the other sources.

    Table 7: Revenue shares: by type of budgets and its share in overall revenue, Approved
                    and Actual 2011-2013 for Palestine Village Councils

                                                          Village Councils
                                         Actual Actual Actual Approved Approved Approved
                                          2011  2012   2013      2011       2012  2013
    Operating Budget Revenue             16.6% 24.1% 21.4%      15.9%      20.5% 22.6%
    Enterprise Fund Revenue              60.0% 62.5% 71.0%      63.0%      62.6% 63.3%
    Development Budget
    Revenue                              23.4%     13.4%       7.7%        21.1%         16.9%          14.1%

43.     The transfer for the transportation fee resembles a form of revenue sharing with a
distribution formula to allocate the revenues, which are unconditional in their use. So in that sense
this type of funding can be regarded as a means to reduce vertical imbalances. This formula is
changed yearly by the MoLG. Of the many factors entering the formula, population, has typically
been the most important one, with 55 to 75 percent distributed according to it. The specific criteria
and decision making process to arrive at the formula remain quite opaque and the MoLG only
releases the formula ex-post after it has been applied. Besides population, other factors that have
been used include: Financial and Administrative reform;6 support of VCs, support of the merging
of VCs and joint service councils (JSCs), marginalized areas and Bedouins, support of Jerusalem,
etc. This approach leaves LGUs with no means to anticipate and plan accordingly for the revenues
they may expect from this transfer. The operation of this transfer gets complicated by the fact that
revenues are first collected by the MoT, deposited in the Treasury, with MoF letting MoLG the
existing pool of funds for allocations, MoLG deciding on the formula, and finally the MoF
typically intercepting the funds to be appropriated to the different LGUs because of the LGUs’
arrears for water and electricity.7 Emergency transfers to LGUs are allocated ad-hoc by the Cabinet
of Ministers and no information on the allocation criteria and decision making process are made
available on a routine basis.

44.     In summary, the current system of transfers in the Palestinian Territories fails to perform
in terms of the three objectives typically pursued by transfer systems —vertical balance, horizontal
balance and attainment of sectoral objectives. The existing transfers, for the most part, lack
predictability and are too small in size to close the existing vertical gaps. They also lack in
incorporating explicit objective equalization criteria and the instrument of conditionality is in its
infancy.


6
  This item is intended to support LGU’s that adopt Financial and Administrative reforms. Examples are LGU’s who
lay off unproductive employees and need to pay compensation or LGUs that intend to install prepaid meters for
electricity.
7
  The property tax interception process only started to get published in quarterly reports at MoF’s website in 2013.
However, the published reports do not include the intercepted amounts but rather the arrears to be paid to MoF.This
information can be obtained at the link:
http://www.pmof.ps/documents/10180/363023/property.tax.Q1.2014.arb.pdf/d541fa4e-e3cb-4219-9a99-
05d602ae4409
45.     Budget execution systems: This area has seen recent reform efforts including the
development of a unified chart of accounts and standard budget guidelines. All VCs are now
required to report electronically their annual budgets to the MoLG. Analysis of VC budgets show
that there is a consistent variance between planned and actual budgets resulting in a significant
financing gap for delivery of local services. The systematic mismatch of planned budget and
executed budget tends to nullify the usefulness of budget planning and the prioritization of
expenditures. Budget execution on a sequestering basis – depending on cash availability—may
negatively affect the efficiency and fairness of actual expenditure allocations. The mismatch
problem is more acute with VCs.

46.     One last aspect of budgetary performance is the ex-post audit and evaluation. Even though
there is some financial audit performed -- the General Control Office (State Audit Office) reviews
annually a sample of VCs —there has been little or no performance evaluation of LGUs’ budgets
to understand to what extent local programs are achieving their intended goals and at what cost.
The MoLG has recently issued instructions for all VCs to get themselves audited annually using
the services of independent external auditors. This is an excellent step to strengthen local
government accountability.

47.     Analysis of local government fiscal data and public financial management systems have
shown that, while VCs have a rudimentary fiscal and financial management framework in place,
there are several gaps and weaknesses that need to be addressed. There is a consistent gap in the
resources available to VCs to address their capital and operating expenditure requirements. Even
where such funds are available (such as the transportation fee), their allocation and distribution is
not transparent nor predictable. The absence of a stable and predictable intergovernmental fiscal
transfer system to VCs has resulted in a consistent gap between the planned and actual budgets of
VCs, which in turn has affected their capability to address local service delivery and infrastructure
development priorities. The recent initiatives by the MoLG to improve the performance and
accountability of local government PFM systems by insisting on electronic submission of annual
budgets as well as the annual financial audit of LGUs need to be followed up and implemented
rigorously. The Program design for the proposed LGSIP has taken into account these issues and
the Program design includes several features to address these key issues.

48.     The Program Expenditure Framework relies on the country systems and is expected to
strengthen the transparency and predictability of financing of VCs along with strengthening
accountability and institutional performance of VCs. Recognizing the need for enabling VCs to
meet their development requirements in accordance with locally driven priorities, the Program is
setting up an intergovernmental fiscal transfer system that will provide resources to VCs on a
predictable and transparent manner. As such, the Program will allocate annual capital grants to
eligible VCs which will enable them to finance their annual capital investment plans
(ACIPs).Consistent with the intention of the PA to strengthen the capacities of large VCs and help
them make the transition to become municipalities in the medium term future, the Program will
provide capital grants directly to large VCs who will be responsible for the custody, utilization and
reporting of the funds.

49.    The Annual Capital Grants for VCs will be programmed into the PA budget under the
budget head for the MoLG. Within the Budget Head, the budgetary allocations for the three
elements of the Program (via capital grant allocations to VCs, allocations for joint projects to the
MDLF and the allocation for capacity building to the MoLG) will be shown under specific budget
line items for each. Since the timely allocation and disbursement of the Capital Grants to VCs is
critical for the achievement of the Program Results, and previous experience has shown that there
are delays in the allocation and disbursement of budget funds, the Program has agreed with the
Ministry of Finance (MoF) and the MoLG that the annual Capital grant allocations will be
disbursed within a prescribed time period after the approval of the annual budget. In addition, the
Program will be incentivizing the timely allocation and disbursement of the annual capital grants
through a DLI.

50.     Complementing the Program design of setting up of a system of annual capital grants to
VCs, the Program will also be supporting the Government to reform the existing system for the
allocation and disbursement of the Transportation fee. The Program will support the Government’s
intention to make the MoLG’s inter se allocation of the transportation fee among the VCs to be
more transparent and formula based. Considering the potential of the transportation fee to be a
stable and predictable source of revenue for VCs, the Program will incentivize the MoLG to move
forward quickly on the reform of the transportation fee through a specific DLI.

51.    The Program will enable the PA to put in place a stable and predictable channel of financing
VCs. The technical assessment undertaken as part of the Program shows that the Program will
supplement the existing per capita capital investment allocation of 25 NHS with an additional 25
NHS thereby providing additional resources to the VCs to finance their ACIPs. In addition to the
cofinancing brought in by development partners into the Program, the parallel financing provided
by development partners such as KfW will also flow to VCs that will supplement the resources
available for undertaking infrastructure development and service provision. The reform of the
Transportation fee planned to be undertaken as part of the Program, will put in place the
foundations for a sustainable source of financing for VCs to undertake their capital and operating
investments.

52.     The Program will rely on the existing Public Financial Management Systems of the PA for
the disbursement, reporting and oversight of the Program funds. The Program funds will be part
of the National Budget and will be disbursed following the budgetary allocation and disbursement
procedures. The eligibility conditions that VCs are required to comply with for obtaining the
capital grants incentivizes VCs to comply with standard good governance practices. The Program
will strengthen the MoLG’s initiatives for the timely and electronic submission of annual budgets
and for the annual external audit of VCs by incorporating them into the Program design and
Program Action Plans. The Prior Actions for the Program will put in place the necessary steps for
enabling efficient budget execution by VCs through the finalization of the Procurement
Instructions by the MoLG.

7.     Results framework and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity

53.      The MDLF will be responsible for monitoring the achievements of the PDO and result
areas as provided in Annex 2. MDLF already uses a Results-Based M&E (RBM) system, which
attempts to measure the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact, and sustainability of
initiatives implemented by the institution. MDLF has demonstrated its strong M&E capacity
through its implementation of MDP and other programs. MDLF will continue to use a web-based
Program Management Information System (PGMIS) as well as the Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) to automate data aggregation, storage, and presentation as part of a
results-based M&E system. In addition to data collection exercises carried out directly by MDLF
for project reports, periodic independent evaluations and assessments will also be outsourced in
order to measure achievement of the PDO.

8.     Proposed program’s economic justification

54.     Identification and prioritization of investments funded under the Program for eligible VCs
will be made on a demand-driven basis based on participatory planning processes. Therefore, the
economic and financial benefits of the investments cannot be measured ex-ante. Once prioritized
in Annual Capital Investment Plans, investments will be evaluated based on MDLF guidelines
developed for MDP II (“guidelines for the economic and financial analysis of sub-projects”),
including smaller investments for public parks, playgrounds, rehabilitation of sanitary units and
larger investments within solid waste management equipment (vehicles, containers); water supply
(meters, network extension and rehabilitation); and local and inter-village roads (extensions,
rehabilitation). The Financial Rate of Return (FRR) will be calculated for revenue generating sub-
projects. Cost efficiency (CE) measured by net present value (NPV) per beneficiary will be
calculated for the remaining sub-projects.
